Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, Mr. Minister, my delegation thanks you for
convening this debate on the challenges, lessons
learned and the way ahead of the Security Council in
tackling humanitarian crises. We are of the view that
the Security Council has the responsibility to learn
from past experience in order to contribute to the
maintenance of peace.

In recent years, there has unfortunately been a
sudden surge in peacekeeping operations and an
increase in the complexity of their mandates, in which
there is now an attempt to incorporate innovative
elements as a way to help create safer and more stable
environments. Such new elements are part of a new
generation of peace operations aimed at averting the
return of violence through a preventive strategy
intended to deter ex-combatants and to convince them
that it is right that they should be integrated into a
democratic society.

Such an approach requires that all participants in
the process be able to agree on a concrete plan that
provides them with ways to cooperate. Inevitably, there
are many and varied actors involved in the process of
peacebuilding; this adds yet another element of
complexity that we must not neglect.

Undoubtedly, national societies bear primary
responsibility in the search for peace. Nonetheless, for
States marked by the extreme poverty of their
population and by a lack of sufficient institutional
capacity to break out of the vicious circle of violence,
international assistance proves not only necessary but
also decisive. In such contexts, we consider that the
Security Council has a key role to play in the design
and development of a peace process. In our view, the
Council has an important function in coordinating the
efforts of the various actors and in avoiding

unnecessary duplication, all with a view to optimizing
the efficiency of the peace initiatives.

The international community's interest in
addressing the root causes of conflict is reflected in
current field activities of the United Nations, in
numerous peacekeeping operations, on issues related to
the rule of law, security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).

We consider that the strengthening of the
institutions of the rule of law is an outstanding way to
bring justice to societies in which impunity prevailed.
We consider that reform of police institutions and of
the structures responsible for law and order is essential
to ensure that the fight against illegality and
arbitrariness is conducted strictly within the framework
of international standards and with full respect for
human rights. We believe also that a comprehensive
process of DDR in societies characterized by
intolerance helps build trust and promotes the creation
of mechanisms that help restore the social fabric.

All those concepts are aimed at broadening the
traditional approach to peacebuilding. It is no longer
simply a matter of responding to the outbreak of armed
conflict, but rather of improving a society's own
capacity to reconcile and of strengthening its ability to
deal with its conflicts without violence. The joint and
coordinated implementation of programmes in all these
areas reduces - and can further reduce - the
incidence of scattered and parallel efforts and can
contribute to laying the foundations of stability.
We believe that the Secretariat could assemble a
compendium of best practices to facilitate the future
work of the Security Council. Along those lines, the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, at its
session held in January and February, encouraged the
Secretariat to develop coherent strategies and early
integrated mission planning based on lessons learned.
Lessons from missions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Liberia, Timor-Leste, Kosovo, Sierra
Leone, Cote d'Ivoire and Haiti could be of the utmost
importance. The analyses submitted by technical
missions to organize the launching of a peace operation
could include early assessments of the status of the
local judicial, correctional and police systems, so as to
provide troop-contributing countries with a more
comprehensive picture regarding the issues that require
urgent attention.

From this perspective, the potential of the
regional training centres for Blue Helmets should be
better used both to spread new ideas and concepts on
multidimensional operations and to integrate the
specific views and knowledge of different cultural and
geographical areas.

We believe that the unified standards on DDR
now being developed will be extremely useful in
preparing activities in this regard. We also believe that
the inclusion in DDR of all women and children
associated with armed forces and groups, taking into
account their specific needs, should be part of those
unified guidelines. We should provide for the early and
foreseeable funding of all the components of the
process as a means of ensuring a horizon of certainty
for all the actors involved.

As we have indicated on other occasions, our
delegation firmly supports the Secretary-General's
proposal to create a Peacebuilding Commission that
would be charge of analysing in detail all these
sensitive and important issues.

In conclusion, may I point out that it is the
responsibility of States to be coherent and determined
when adopting peacebuilding measures. Therefore,
Security Council decisions on this issue must be
supported and facilitated both within the United
Nations - for example, in the respective committees
of the General Assembly - and in the agencies that
are part of the system. In this last regard, we believe
that the contribution of international financial
institutions must be encouraged, since that could be
crucial to the success of the peace processes -
although in many cases the strict conditions that they
impose cause reconstruction and development efforts
to fail.

