Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): The
Security Council's first open meeting on the Afghanistan
conflict comes at a critical moment for that nation. The
people of Afghanistan have been subjected to yet another
round of fighting and human suffering. The latest crisis
began with the Taliban's 28 July offensive against
opposition forces of the United Front, and followed by
mere days the signing of the "six plus two" group
Tashkent declaration, which urged that the conflict in
Afghanistan be settled by peaceful political negotiation.

The humanitarian impact of this offensive has been
appalling. In the last month, hundreds of Afghans have
become casualties, and tens of thousands have been
driven from their homes. We are gravely concerned about
continuing reports from Afghanistan that the Taliban have
adopted what amounts to a scorched earth policy in those
areas where recent fighting has taken place. There are
reliable reports that the Taliban have intentionally burned
houses; there are also claims that the Taliban have burned
villages, destroyed crops and forcibly separated adult
males from families trying to flee the violence.

This most recent Taliban offensive - and the
subsequent Taliban retreat - has again demonstrated the
futility of any side's attempt to impose a military solution
in Afghanistan. Only by the formation of a broad-based
government that represents the interests of all Afghans
can we achieve a lasting resolution of the conflict. We
support the continuing efforts of United Nations Special
Envoy Lakhdar Brahimi and the group of "six plus two"
to help shape this outcome through a ceasefire, the
exchange of prisoners and the resumption of negotiations.

 

On behalf of my delegation I certainly wish to join
Ambassador Fowler's wishes for a speedy recovery to one
who is really one of the world's treasures: United Nations
Special Envoy Brahimi.

To end the cycle of violence, support to the warring
factions by some neighbouring countries must stop. The
Secretary-General has noted that, in addition to liberal
quantities of arms, ammunition and other war-making
materials that have been supplied to the warring factions by
their respective supporters, there are now thousands of non-
Afghans engaged in the fighting. It is essential that the
political process move forward, and we urge the factions to
return to the negotiating table.

External interference in Afghanistan is also eroding the
human rights of the Afghan people. Mr. Kamal Hossain,
United Nations Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in Afghanistan, has noted that the Afghan people are
becoming hostages in their own land or refugees while
externally armed forces seek to rule Afghanistan without
the effective participation or consent of its people. Other
human rights abuses, including the Taliban's deplorable
practices towards women and girls, must also end. The
denial of basic human rights in Afghanistan is simply
unacceptable. If the leaders of the Taliban, or any faction
in Afghanistan, want international recognition, they must
respect the rights of their people.

Equally vital to restoring Afghanistan's place in the
international community is ending its support for terrorism.
We are deeply concerned by the continuing use of Afghan
territory, particularly that under Taliban control, for the
sheltering and training of terrorists and the planning of
terrorist acts. Last month, by executive order, my
Government imposed economic sanctions on the Taliban
until they extradite or expel Osama bin Laden to a place
where he can be brought to justice. The Security Council
has on many occasions expressed its grave concern over the
continued Afghan conflict, including the Taliban's
harbouring of international terrorists. Last December, in
resolution 1214 (1998), the Council expressed its readiness
to consider the imposition of measures with the aim of
achieving full implementation of its resolutions. If, in
defiance of Security Council resolutions, the Taliban fail to
end their protection of terrorists, the international
community should bring increasing and certain pressure to
bear on them.

The United States condemns all acts of terrorism
regardless of motive or target, and we deplore the recent
truck-bomb attack on Mullah Omar's compound and offer
our condolences to the victims. The perpetrators of this
cowardly act must be brought to justice.

Our goal for Afghanistan remains a broad-based,
multi-ethnic, representative government that accepts
international norms of behaviour on issues such as
terrorism, narcotics and human rights, including the rights
of women, girls and minorities. We believe that only this
kind of government can bring to Afghanistan the peace it
so dearly needs.

We welcome this opportunity to discuss the
measures that we can take collectively to end this ongoing
tragedy and appreciate the scheduling of this important
meeting.

