Mr. Bessho (Japan): Ithank Mr. O'Brien, Mr. Zerihoun
and Ms. Askira for their important briefings.

Years of violence by Boko Haram have profoundly
undermined peace, security and livelihoods in the
Lake Chad basin region. The ongoing hit-and-run
attacks by Boko Haram have displaced millions of
people, disrupting agricultural activities and access
to basic services. As indicated by our briefers today,
the humanitarian crisis in the region has unfortunately
become even worse since the previous briefing in July
2016 (see S/PV.7748).

Japan has focused its financial assistance to the
Lake Chad basin region on humanitarian assistance and
the strengthening of social stability. On the bilateral
front, we announced approximately $3 million in food
assistance to the Niger in December 2016. In the light
of the large gender impact of the Boko Haram crisis,
we have also been supporting the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women's Gender-Responsive Humanitarian Action
and Assistance of Women and Girls Affected by Boko
Haram Terrorism in Diffa, the Niger, since last year. We
hope to do more. But obviously, the scope and intricacy
of the challenges facing the region require more than
humanitarian assistance. The continuous efforts of
the Multinational Joint Task Force and other military
operations by countries in the region have significantly
contained Boko Haram and dislodged them from
their former strongholds. As tragically illustrated
by the attacks on soldiers in Diffa on 31 December,
the region must, however, remain vigilant against
insurgents, who are still capable of attacking villages
and military installations.

Along with the progress in military operations, the
long-term socioeconomic development challenges also
require persistent attention. As noted by the President
of Nigeria during the Dakar International Forum
on Peace and Security in Africa, which was held in
December last year, reducing youth unemployment
promotes stabilization and discourages recruitment
by Boko Haram. We must not allow Boko Haram to
continue to poison young people, who are among the
most precious assets of Africa. The Council needs to
mobilize comprehensive responses to the complex
issues affecting the Lake Chad basin region and work
towards sustaining peace. It is equally vital that the
countries in the region demonstrate ownership of
the socioeconomic development activities in their
communities over the long term.

Japan supports the proposed Security Council
mission to the region aimed at assessing the situation in
the Lake Chad basin region and hopes that it will result
in useful discussions with the regional stakeholders
and demonstrate the keen awareness of the Council of
the crisis.

