Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Kubis for his briefing.

First, we must express our support for the
Government of Iraq in its ongoing efforts to defeat
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIS). To that
end, as the fight to rid Iraqi territory of ISIS fighters
continues, we commend the Iraqi Security Forces for
taking measures to protect civilians while fighting
ISIS in Mosul. The United States is fully committed
to the protection of civilians in its counter-ISIS efforts
and looks to all parties fighting ISIS to make the
same commitment.

Today, I would like to touch on three main subjects:
the humanitarian crisis, building stability for the future,
and accountability for ISIS.

The United States remains deeply concerned
at the grave humanitarian conditions in Iraq. Daily
displacement rates are increasing, and more Iraqis are
vulnerable now than at any time before in the recent
conflict. The humanitarian situation is expected to
deteriorate until families are able to re-establish their
livelihoods. We urge donors to contribute to the 2017
United Nations humanitarian response plan, which is
currently just 28 per cent funded. Funding the Plan is
critical to assisting those in need.

We applaud the efforts of the Iraq Government,
United Nations agencies and other humanitarian
agencies aimed at assisting internally displaced persons
(IDPs) by increasing humanitarian-relief capacity. We
urge Government authorities, including those in the
Iraqi Kurdistan region, to ensure ready access to IDP
camps as the international community continues to
build capacity. The United States encourages the United
Nations to work closely with both the Government of
Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government to continue
efforts towards the voluntary return and reintegration
of those displaced. We likewise appreciate the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) aimed at supporting the Government
of Iraq's dialogue with minority populations across
the country.

Turning to the future, the United States remains
committed to a united, federal and democratic Iraq,
as defined in the Iraqi Constitution. The stakes for
achieving lasting stability in Iraq will remain high,
and success will depend not just on the outcome of
the military campaign, but also on the steps Iraq and
the international community take in the coming days,
months and years. Iraqi-led, United Nations-supported
stabilization efforts are as critical as ever to promoting
local reconciliation and preventing the resurgence
of ISIS in liberated areas. We welcome UNAMI's
continued work towards these goals and we commend
Mr. Kubis' efforts on behalf of the Iraqi people.

Good governance is also central to enduring
reconciliation. As such, we urge the Government of
Iraq to continue its progress in implementing political,
economic and social reforms. These reforms are key to
bringing an end to corruption and protecting the civil
rights and religious freedom of all Iraqis.

Finally, we support the United Kingdom's proposal
for the creation of an international investigative body
that will assist the Government of Iraq to investigate,
document and gather evidence of atrocities perpetrated
by ISIS and other extremist groups. We must hold
these perpetrators accountable. Comprehensive efforts
towards accountability and reconciliation will prove
critical to Iraq's achieving its full potential, which we
all recognized as great, with long-term peace, stability
and prosperity for all Iraqis.

