Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
for his briefing. We welcome the presence here today
of Mr. Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and we also listened
carefully to Ms. Citaku's statement.

The current security situation in Kosovo is generally
stable, but is still confronting complex dynamics. China
notes that the Kosovo authorities have recently imposed
tariffs on imported goods from Serbia and decided to
transform their security forces, measures that in our
view are not conducive to enhancing mutual trust and
dialogue. We call on the parties concerned to abide by
resolution 1244 (1999), refrain from any rhetoric or
action that could complicate or escalate the situation
and work to create conditions conducive to a proper
settlement of the Kosovo issue.

Resolution 1244 (1999) provides an important
legal basis for resolving the Kosovo issue. All
parties should, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, reach
a mutually acceptable solution through dialogue and
negotiation, within the framework of relevant Security
Council resolutions.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia, understands its legitimate concerns
with regard to the Kosovo issue and commends Serbia's
efforts to find a political solution to the Kosovo issue.
China hopes that Belgrade and Pristina will stay
committed to promoting the normalization of bilateral
relations through dialogue and consultations, make
constructive efforts to implement existing agreements,
gradually enhance mutual trust and create the conditions
conducive to a comprehensive and lasting solution.

Achieving reconciliation and common development
is in the fundamental interest of all peoples in Kosovo.
It also contributes to peace, stability and prosperity in
the Balkans region. We hope that all parties concerned
will put the well-being of their people first, protect
the legitimate rights and interests of all communities,
and promote the economic and social development of
all ethnic groups. We believe that the Security Council
should remain seized of the Kosovo issue and that the
international community should play a constructive
role in promoting a proper solution to the Kosovo issue.

China supports the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
implementing its mandate. We hope that UNMIK will
maintain coordination with the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force to jointly
improve the situation on the ground and promote a
proper settlement of the Kosovo issue.

