Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Israeli occupation of the Arab territories
and its severe consequences have negatively affected
the security and stability of the region. The situation is
extremely dangerous, given the deliberate international
failure to compel Israel to put an end to its occupation
of Arab occupied territories and to its severe violations
of international instruments.

In spite of hundreds of United Nations resolutions
calling on Israel to end its occupation of all occupied
Arab territories within the borders of 4 June 1967,
Israel, regrettably, has not responded or ended its
occupation. On the contrary, the situation has further
deteriorated due to Israel's ongoing occupation and its
hostile and repressive practices against the Palestinian
people, as well as its settlement activities in violation of
international humanitarian law, international law and
human rights law. Those crimes constitute war crimes
and crimes against humanity.

It has become clear that the impunity extended by
certain members of the Security Council to Israel has
encouraged it to continue its practices, aggressions and
Violations. The situation is extremely alarming and
threatens to explode and further undermine the fragile
attempts to achieve peace in the region. Nevertheless,
there are still those in the Council who deny the
Palestinians even their most basic rights, including the
right to establish their own State in their homeland. Some
even insist on not addressing the current developments
in Palestine in their real context and instead attempt
to view the situation in terms of reciprocal violence
that should be stopped. In so doing, they ignore the
crux of the conflict, which is the occupation and its
consequences, including settlement activity, forced
displacement and other Israeli practices. The Security
Council must put an end to the Israeli violations in
order to protect the Palestinian people, in accordance
with its duties under the Charter of the United Nations.

In addition to the barbaric Israeli policy that I
have just mentioned, Israel has occupied the Syrian
Golan since 1967 and imposed a bitter reality on the
Syrian citizens suffering under occupation, which,
in accordance with international law, should be
immediately ceased. The United Nations must assume
its responsibility to address that reality as seriously
as it deserves to be dealt with and to work for the
implementation of its relevant resolutions, in particular
resolution 497 (1981). Israel should be obliged to
put an end to its systematic and severe violations
of human rights, settlement policy, confiscation of
land, intimidation, suppression and oppression, racial
discrimination and social isolation, as well as the
plundering of the natural resources of the Golan, such
as water, oil and natural gas, in addition to its policy of
indiscriminate arrest of Syrian citizens.

In that regard, Syria reiterates its urgent call on the
Secretary-General and the Security Council to make
the necessary humanitarian efforts to require Israel
to immediately release all Syrian prisoners without
conditions. Foremost among those prisoners is the
Mandela of Syria, the freedom fighter Sedqi Al-Maqet,
who - despite having already spent 27 years in Israeli
prisons - was re-arrested by occupation forces last
February for no crime other than working to show
the links between the Israeli occupation forces and
the armed terrorist groups and the Israeli occupation
forces' unlimited support for those groups in the
disengagement zone in the Syrian Golan. Like Sedqi
Al-Maqet, Bashira Mahmoud is a prisoner accused of
no crime other than being Syrian and rejecting Israeli
citizenship, like all the other sons of the occupied
Syrian Golan.

During the current crisis in Syria, Israel has
opened a new chapter in its book of violations
through its unbridled support for terrorists in the
disengagement zone in the Syrian Golan by providing
them with firepower and by treating the injured in
Israeli hospitals. Israel thereby violates the Agreement
on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces of
1974 and exposes the safety and lives of the personnel
of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
to danger.
In conclusion, I condemn in the strongest terms
any attempt to defend Israel, cover up its crimes or
introduce new issues before the Security Council that
are unrelated to the situation in the Middle East and
the crux of that issue, which is putting an end to the
Israeli occupation of all occupied Arab territories
and granting Palestine its inalienable right to self-
determination and the establishment of its own State on
its homeland. Every time Israel commits an aggression
against the Palestinian people, certain delegations make
misleading and incendiary statements about Syria with
a View to distracting attention from the crimes of Israel
and to diminishing the international pressure on it. For
that reason and although there is a great deal that Syria
could refute, I will not respond to the empty claims
made by the delegations of States that support, harbour
and arm terrorists, spread extremism and sabotage in
Syria and do their utmost to undermine the attempts to
reach a peaceful settlement to the crisis in Syria.

