I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing. I would like to emphasize the following points. First, all parties should encourage the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to maintain good communication and cooperation with the Syrian Government. According to the latest report of the OPCW, between 22 September and 3 October the Syrian Government held the twenty-third round of technical consultations with the Technical Secretariat, during which all issues regarding the initial declaration were discussed. Before that, the Syrian Government also provided supplementary materials on some unresolved matters. Syria, in its monthly report to the Executive Council, indicated its willingness to keep in touch with and maintain cooperation with the Technical Secretariat. The Syrian side has reiterated that Syria would work with the Technical Secretariat to resolve outstanding matters through a professional and transparent approach. Those developments and Syria's constructive approach all deserve to be recognized. China calls upon the international community to objectively view Syria's efforts and hopes that the Technical Secretariat will respond to Syria's request in a professional and transparent way. Secondly, discussions on the Syrian chemical-weapons issue must respect facts and science and should not be based on the presumption of guilt. China supports the OPCW in conducting comprehensive, objective and just investigations into the relevant incidents, as mandated by the CWC, so as to arrive at conclusions that can stand the test of science and history, based on solid evidence. For some time now, a number of independent experts have questioned the OPCW's report on the alleged use of chemical weapons. These questions are purely technical, and I hope that the OPCW will devote attention to them and provide professional, science-based and convincing answers. In the face of so many doubtful points, China is against jumping to any conclusions, or even taking hasty actions. Such an approach would not only be detrimental to the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) but would also damage the trust between the Syrian parties and affect the political settlement of the Syrian issue. Thirdly, discussions on the Syrian chemical-weapons issue should be open, transparent and inclusive so as to avoid any politicization. Last month, due to objections by some members, the Council failed to invite the former OPCW Director General, Mr. Bustani, to deliver a briefing (see S/PV.8764). That is really disappointing. At that time, some members argued that Mr. Bustani had left the OPCW years ago, that he was not familiar with the Syrian chemical-weapons dossier and that, if anyone were to be invited, it should be the current Director General, Mr. Arias. But what we find hard to understand is that those same members are now against inviting Mr. Arias to attend the Council's video-teleconference this month as a briefer. We call upon the relevant members to keep their positions consistent, refrain from double standards or imposing their position on others and to take an open and inclusive attitude to the diverging views arising in the Council's deliberations. The Investigation and Identification Team has been mired in controversy since its establishment. The so-called decision requiring the Syrian Government to resolve all outstanding matters and issues within a time limit has not received unanimous support. All parties need to take a responsible approach and step up dialogue and consultation to seek consensus, instead of creating greater division or even using the OPCW as a political tool to suppress or target a country's Government. China urges the Director General of the OPCW and the Technical Secretariat to facilitate greater dialogue and consultation among States parties and maintain the tradition of consensus-based decision-making. A single vote, when the parties remain divided, will intensify the confrontation between the States parties, dampen the atmosphere of cooperation and undermine the authority and long-term interests of the OPCW. In addition, just now in his statement, the representative of the United States launched groundless accusations against China, which is completely unacceptable. The United States representative used the term "responsible nations" several times in his statement. That is a great term. We would hope that, before using that term, the United States would reflect on what it has been doing and saying for some time now on the international stage and on whether it is a responsible nation. I think the world sees that clearly and will judge for itself. Before its representative uses the term "responsible nations" anew, the United States should stop interfering in Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity, stop politicizing the chemical weapons issue in Syria and stop stoking confrontation and conflict in the Middle East. Lastly, I would like to reiterate that China will continue to play a constructive role on the Syrian chemical weapons dossier.
