Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We wish to thank Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary- General for Yemen, and Ramesh Rajasingham, Acting Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings this morning. South Africa remains steadfast in supporting the work of the Special Envoy in his tireless efforts aimed at finding a peaceful solution to the situation in Yemen. We would like to express our concern about the persistent and dire humanitarian situation and our dismay at the recent escalation in hostilities, which is hampering progress towards a political solution. We remain concerned at the latest clashes, which come after a months-long lull and relative calm, particularly because the parties had displayed such sturdy interest in de-escalation. It would be important for all parties to observe a nationwide cessation of hostilities and return to the negotiation process in an effort to work towards a comprehensive and sustainable political solution for Yemen. We are particularly concerned about the impact this crisis has had on the civilian population, specifically as war casualties spike in such places as the Al-Hazm, Ma'rib and Al-Jawf governorates. The war in Yemen is having a disproportionate impact on Yemeni women and girls, who are exposed to increased risk of violence, exploitation and abuse. More than 3.25 million women in Yemen are facing increased health and protection risks. South Africa commends the efforts of the Special Envoy and UN-Women to promote women's inclusion in the peace process through initiatives such as the Yemeni Women's Pact for Peace and Security. We reiterate our call for the full implementation of the Riyadh agreement and the December 2018 Stockholm Agreement. We call on all the parties to the conflict to allow free, regular and unimpeded passage of food and other humanitarian aid and not to take actions that would deprive civilians of their rights to food and basic health services. In this regard, we remind the parties to the conflict that all necessary measures should be taken to respect the Geneva Conventions. We also stress that the only sustainable solution to the conflict in Yemen is a negotiated, Yemeni-led political settlement that is inclusive and fair and puts the interests and well-being of all the citizens of Yemen first. As I conclude, I should like to join other delegations in taking this opportunity, on behalf of the South African delegation, to congratulate Karen on her new appointment and to wish her well on her upcoming duties in Washington. We will miss her friendship and activism, not just in the Security Council but on a broad array of issues around the United Nations as a whole.
