Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe): Mr. President, I wish
to thank you for this opportunity to express my delegation's

satisfaction with the manner in which you have steered the

 

work of the Council since the beginning of this month.
We look forward to your continued able stewardship in
the days that remain.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
most revealing report on the situation in Liberia.

As a country that has followed developments in
Liberia with concern and a keen interest, Zimbabwe, like
other nations of the world, shared the optimism which we
all had at the end of last year and the beginning of this
year. Regrettably, and deeply so, as we meet today we are
witnessing dangerous developments which not only erode
all the past gains, our gains, but also threaten to stifle the
fragile peace process in Liberia. Signs abound that the
faction leaders in Liberia have, once again, yielded to
narrow personal and factional interests at the expense and
to the detriment of the achievable goals of national unity
and peace.

The bold strides taken by Liberia's faction leaders at
the signing of the Abuja Agreement, in Nigeria, and in
the early implementation of that Agreement are ample
evidence to us that peace is indeed achievable in that
country, and that the peace-loving people of that country
cannot wait any longer. We therefore call upon all the
faction leaders to discard all vain pursuit of self-
aggrandizement, rise to the occasion and to the
expectations of the people of Liberia and the international
community at large, and preoccupy themselves fully and
solely with the search for peace and national unity. The
leadership in Liberia should desist from creating a culture
of hopelessness and purposelessness in their country,
which could plunge their people irretrievably into a
self-perpetuating cycle of hatred, violence and disorder.

Zimbabwe fully supports the Mechanism for
Returning Liberia to the Abuja Agreement, which was
adopted by Foreign Ministers of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on
7 May 1996 at Accra. In this regard, we call upon the
Liberian factions to move with haste and restore the
cease-fire; to withdraw from Monrovia and allow the
unimpeded deployment of the ECOWAS Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) there; to remove arms from Monrovia
and restore the capital to its status as a safe haven; to
guarantee freedom of movement for civilians; to return
weapons taken from ECOMOG and vehicles and
equipment looted from the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL), United Nations agencies
and non- governmental organizations; and to reactivate the
cease-fire violations Committee.

Much as we are aware that the responsibility for
peace in Liberia lies ultimately with the people of Liberia

 

themselves, we are also deeply conscious of the
irreplaceable role of the United Nations in the quest for
international peace and security. We most sincerely applaud
the peoples and Governments of West Africa which have,
for a prolonged period of six years now, sacrificed
themselves and their meagre resources in coming to the aid
of their neighbours in Liberia.

Surely the international community has no grounds to
claim that it has done its best or exhausted all possible
options on Liberia, for massive deployments in trouble
spots in other regions of the world bear ample testimony to
both the capacity and the capability of the international
community to act resolutely in the interest of world peace
and security. The minimalist approach of the United
Nations on Liberia so far is very disquieting. We are further
amazed at suggestions to the effect that UNOMIL's
continued involvement might be contingent upon
ECOMOG's continued presence in Liberia.

We wish to reiterate that when regions or regional
organizations come up with peace initiatives to arrest
dangerous threats to peace and security they should of
necessity receive the active, all-round support of the
international community through the United Nations. In our
View, that is what Chapter VIII of the Charter is all about.
Rather than playing the role of substitute for the uniquely
mandated role of the United Nations, these regional efforts
should be Viewed and treated as facilitators in the United
Nations own efforts in pursuit of its Charter-enshrined
responsibility to maintain international peace and security.
The United Nations has not taken full advantage of historic
milestones in the peace process, such as the signing of the
Abuja Agreement. One is certainly tempted to conclude that
Liberia's woes are to some extent thriving on the
international community's omissions and default.

The situation that prevails in Liberia right now
requires that ECOMOG Virtually double its force strength
in order for it to deploy nation-wide, as the representative
of Ghana has stated, and to man all borders - air, land and
sea. The scope of the Liberian problem clearly goes beyond
the national and regional dimensions. It is therefore
incumbent upon the international community to give the
necessary financial and logistical support to facilitate
adequate and effective deployment. We therefore call upon
the international community to come to the rescue of the
people of Liberia in this, their hour of need.

We appreciate the continued efforts of the Secretary-
General through his Special Envoy and his Special
Representative, as well as those of the Secretary-General of
the Organization of African Unity. We hail and support
their continued use of UNOMIL's good offices, in close
consultation with ECOWAS, to promote confidence-

 

building measures and facilitate the resumption of the
peace process.

We are deeply concerned that the recent outbreak of
hostilities has disrupted not only the flow of relief
supplies to civilians, but also the relatively advanced
efforts to restore some sections of the country to self-
sufficiency. We therefore welcome the three-month
contingency plan adopted by the Liberian authorities,
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations as a basis for an appeal to support the
delivery of relief services. In this regard, we also call
upon the international community to continue giving
humanitarian assistance to the people of Liberia, including
the refugees and those who are internally displaced.

Finally, my delegation strongly supports the
extension of the mandate of UNOMIL for at least the
next three months, as recommended by the Secretary-
General.

