Mr. Pradhan (Bhutan): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. Allow me also to express our admiration for the
work done by your predecessor, the representative of
Norway, Peter Kolby, during his presidency last month.
We are here because we are alarmed by the
escalating and unending violence between Israel and
the Palestinians. We are alarmed by the fact that,
despite all the authority and responsibility given by the
Charter to the Security Council, this body has not been
able to bring about a cessation of the terrible violence
that has persisted over months, years and decades, let
alone to find a solution to this longstanding problem in
the Middle East. We are alarmed by the fact that the
big Powers - the permanent members of the Security
Council - to which the international community looks
up for guidance and action, have not been able to move
the parties in the Middle East to give up violence and
find a solution to their problems through dialogue.

The problem between the people of Palestine and
the State of Israel has been caught up in a vicious circle
of violence, death and destruction. The doctrine of "an
eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth" will only fuel
that vicious circle. Hatred and violence beget hatred
and violence. The circle must be broken. The Security
Council must work towards breaking the circle, and it
must not lose an opportunity to do so when it sees one.

My delegation welcomed the proposal of the
Crown Prince of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We saw
in it the ingredients of breaking the Vicious circle. My
delegation urges the Security Council to start with the
initiative launched by the Crown Prince. In addition,
the people in the region, whether Arabs or Israelis,
have to change their outlook with respect to each other.
No matter what, they are neighbours, and peace and
cooperation are surely better than death, violence and
destruction.

In a globalizing and interdependent world - a
world that is moving towards freer movement, free
markets and greater interaction - no people or nation
can exist in isolation or be an island unto itself. That
realization is vital for the long-term peace and stability
of the region.

Finally, the Bhutanese delegation calls upon the
Security Council to further intensify its efforts to bring
about an immediate cessation of the violence prevailing
in the Middle East.

