Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): As we
talk here, bombs continue to fall in Aleppo. Children
continue to die. Women continue to die. The elderly
continue to die. Civilian protection, which we always
claim to be a State's primary responsibility, does not
seem that be much in practice today when we consider
the intensification of events taking place in Aleppo.

What is happening is none other than a massacre.
That is what occurs when bombs are dropped on the
civilian population, medical facilities and schools.
Nothing justifies a massacre - absolutely nothing. We
thought that we might have been able to relax somewhat
on the weekend after we bade farewell to our respective
delegations, but last night we were summoned to this
meeting. And now we ask, what will the Council do for
Syria? What will be the result of our deliberations in
the face of this horrendous situation?

Regrettably, I have come to the conclusion that,
whatever we say in our respective speeches here
to voice our disdain and reiterate our positions on
the situation - I could reiterate our call to uphold
humanitarian law, protect civilians amid the horror of
war and for each sector to shoulder its responsibility - if
the ghastly bombing of eastern Aleppo and its civilian
population continues, the people there will not end
up in the hands of the terrorists, they will simply be
exterminated. I could also reiterate our support for
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. When my colleagues in Geneva
and I talk about Staffan, we always refer to him as our
constant hero. We are fascinated by his constancy and
unfathomable optimism.
(spoke in English)

He is our constant hero, but he is not a superhero.
If Staffan could make progress on his own and - we
say this very frankly - if two members of the Security
Council - I am referring to the United States and
Russia - could resume talks and manage in some way
to restore the process, my delegation and others could
support it.

Once again, we urge the Russian Federation and
the United States to attempt to meet as they have done
many times in the past to resume the process. Without
them, bombs will continue to be dropped, people will
continue to die and the war itself will continue - we
know that wars can be interminable - and the horror
will continue. We believe that both the Russian
Federation and the United States have acted in good
faith as they worked together. We believe that many
things have occurred to along the way to pull them
apart. Nonetheless, following the example of our
constant hero, we ask that they display a similar level of
constancy and continue to work together because they
will certainly find support among the vast majority of
the members of the Council to help to gradually restore
peace in Syria and give its people a semblance of a
normal life.

