Mr. Mukerji (India): We thank the Secretary-
General for his report on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2015/684), Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Nicholas Haysom his briefing and Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his statement.
India is proud to call itself Afghanistan's first
strategic partner. We stand ready to do whatever is
possible, within our capacities and our means, to work
with the Afghan Government and its people to realize
our common vision. We share the Afghan people's
vision of a strong, independent, united and prosperous
State.

We are happy to note that Afghanistan's historic
political transition remains on course. The patience,
forbearance, courage and democratic aspiration of
the people of Afghanistan have strengthened that
process. We are also happy to note that, in accordance
with President Ghani's instruction to his Cabinet on
23 April, all ministries and executive branch bodies
presented their 100-day strategies during the reporting
period, with the exception of the Ministry of Defence.

Unfortunately, there is much that needs to be done
on the security front. The Secretary-General's report
substantiates our view that it is terrorism, and not
tribal differences or ethnic rivalries, that is the main
source of insecurity and instability in Afghanistan. The
report mentions that the reporting period witnessed
a significant increase in reports of intra-insurgent
violence between the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and its affiliates with the Taliban. In
addition, the Secretary-General's report states that
the majority of alleged ISIL-affiliated fighters appear
to be drawn from disaffected former members of the
Afghan Taliban, Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan or groups
previously associated with Al-Qaida, such as the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan. That is indeed alarming, and
the Council must act against that threat with a sense of
urgency.

The current increase in violence is taking place at a
time when Afghanistan is in the midst ofa sensitive and
historic political transition under the leadership of His
Excellency President Ashraf Ghani and His Excellency
Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah. Given the critical
phase that the political transition has entered and the
deteriorating security situation, we feel there is a
strong case for the international community to take a
fresh look at the manner in which the drawdown of the
international military presence in Afghanistan is taking
place. We would also urge the Council to look into ways
to curb terrorist organizations and block the transfer of
finances from the illegal narcotics trade.

President Ghani has taken brave steps aimed
at launching a reconciliation process with a view
to bringing peace to his country. However, those
efforts have been repeatedly rebuffed. The Secretary-
General's report mentions that the deadly attacks in
Kabul, which coincided with the emergence of a new
Taliban leadership in early August, led President
Ghani to call for urgent action by Pakistan against the
Taliban, in particular action to prevent the use of its
territory to prepare Taliban operations. India continues
to support a truly Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
reconciliation process within the framework of the
Afghan Constitution and the internationally accepted
red lines.

In view of the fragile security environment, it is
important for Afghanistan to have a supportive and stable
political environment for growth and development.
Afghanistan is faced with huge developmental
challenges. The eradication of poverty is a key priority
for the Afghan Government. World leaders will adopt
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development a few
days from now, thereby beginning a new chapter in
our collective fight for a sustainable world without
poverty and hunger. It would be useful for the Council
to see how the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) can act to help Afghanistan
achieve the objectives set out in the 2030 Agenda.

In our View, UNAMA must continue to play a leading
role in shaping and coordinating the international
community's efforts to assist Afghanistan's political
and economic reconstruction process. UNAMA must
also focus on the important role it plays in ensuring
the delivery of valuable humanitarian and development
assistance to Afghanistan.

