Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month and to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing this morning.

The Council is one of the central pillars of
international peace and security. That is why its
credibility is of the utmost importance. Today we are
discussing two issues that have a major impact on
international peace and security. However, the Council
has fallen short of both the trust bestowed upon it by
the Member States and the aspirations of most peoples.

The Palestinian question is the central question for
Arabs and Muslims. It is the main political issue on the
international stage. However, there is a lack of political
will needed to push the peace process forward towards
ajust and lasting solution.

Regardless of the various points of view on this
issue, the ball is indeed in the Israelis' court. We do
not find those who believe that the Palestinian people
have not done enough reasonable. The Palestinian
people have been denied a great number of their rights,
but they nonetheless continue to call for peace and
negotiate on a tiny part of their historical land. They
are calling today for non-member State observer status
in the United Nations. We believe that their call should
be heeded, as it would contribute to a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the crisis.

The numerous Israeli policies - regarding Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, illegal settlements and the construction of
the illegal separation apartheid wall, among other
matters 4 all show a lack of good faith, irrespective of
the security justifications endlessly invoked by Israelis
to reject comprehensive peace based on international
law. We believe that, with its mosques and churches,
Jerusalem should remain Arab, Islamic and Christian.
There is no Palestinian State without Jerusalem, and no
Jerusalem without the Al-Aqsa Mosque.

We believe that pressure should not be put on the
Palestinians, who have already made great concessions,
but rather on the Israelis to reach a comprehensive
solution for the Palestinian question based on
previously agreed upon principles, including the two-
State solution.

Israel should lift the embargo placed on Gaza and
put an end to the illegal Judaization of Jerusalem and
the attempts to obliterate its Islamic and Arab character.

In line with all the resolutions adopted by the
Council to stop the Judaization ofJerusalem, we reaffirm
our view that the solution to the crisis in the Middle
East hinges on Israeli withdrawal from all occupied
Palestinian territories, the occupied Syrian Golan and
the remaining occupied Lebanese territories, including
ending its violations of Lebanon's sovereignty.

With regard to the Syrian issue, the Security
Council has been unable to bring an end to this
tragedy. The Syrian regime has drawn on weapons
from across the whole spectrum of its vast arsenals,
killing tens of thousands of people. It is appalling that
the Syrian regime is using cluster weapons, which are
internationally prohibited, against its own people. What
other kind of weapons could that regime use against
the citizens of Syria, their villages and cities? The
insistence by the Syrian regime to crush the revolt by
committing massacre and using force is in vain. It will
only enflame the sectarian war in Syria. That is what we
have been warning against since the very beginning of
the crisis. We have now started to see the impact of the
crisis on the security of the entire region.

As to the humanitarian situation, the number of
internally displaced persons and refugees has risen to
over 1 million. That has led to calls for the creation
of buffer zones and safe havens to protect Syrians, or
for Arab or international forces to intervene to restore
peace in Syria. We therefore call on the Security
Council to provide support to the Syrian people and
to use all possible means, including Chapter VII, to
protect the Syrian people. In that connection, we stress
the need to maintain Syria's sovereignty, independence,
national unity and territorial integrity.

We have supported in good faith all diplomatic
efforts to achieve a comprehensive solution to the Syrian
question, in which the whole spectrum of the Syrian
people would participate. But at the same time, we call
for pressure to be brought to bear on the Syrian regime,
so as to translate its words into action. We therefore
support the efforts of the Special Representative,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi.

