Mr. Lowcock: Today I want, first, to express my alarm about the dire and deteriorating humanitarian situation affecting women and children, in particular in the north-west of Syria owing to the intense bombing, shelling and other fighting that we are all seeing; secondly, to update the Security Council with regard to the humanitarian response in the north-east following the adoption of resolution 2504 (2020); thirdly, to update the Council on the situation in Rukban; and, fourthly, to draw attention to the impact of economic challenges on the humanitarian suffering in Syria. First, hostilities have escalated in recent days in the Idlib area, particularly around Maarat Al-Numan, Saraqib and western Aleppo. The fighting in those areas appears to be more intense than anything that we have seen in the past year. As the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, has said, civilians continue to be subject to intense bombing and shelling. On 11 January, at least 20 civilians were reportedly killed in air strikes in Idlib. On 21 January, eight civilians were reportedly killed in Kafr Taal, in western Aleppo, after an air strike struck near their home. Overall, in the week from 15 to 23 January, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) documented incidents in which at least 81 civilians, most of them women and children, were killed as a result of air and ground-based strikes. That total is in addition to the more than 1,500civilian deaths that OHCHR has verified since the escalation began in late April. The most alarming reports have come from southern Idlib, where hundreds of air strikes by the Government of Syria and its allies have been concentrated. Meanwhile, non-State armed groups continue to shell Aleppo city, killing or injuring dozens of civilians. Routes to the north and west of Saraqib, including around Ariha and other locations along the M4 highway, are clogged with vehicles as people seek to flee the bombing and the front lines in search of safety. Hundreds of thousands of civilians are at risk and are therefore running away. Most of the affected people - more than 99 per cent - have been moving from southern Idlib to other locations in non-Government-controlled areas. Our assessment is that at least 20,000 people have moved in the past two days. Some 115,000 left in the last week. Nearly 390,000 have fled in the past two months. Many families are moving multiple times. They arrive in a place thought to be safe, only for the bombs to follow, so they are then forced to move again. That cycle is all too familiar in north-west Syria. On 12 January, Turkey and the Russian Federation announced a ceasefire, but it did not hold. The Government of Syria opened three crossing points to facilitate the movement of civilians into Government-controlled areas. Initial reports from the Russian Federation suggest that 400 civilians crossed through those crossing points. The violence in north-west Syria is deplorable. As High Commissioner Bachelet warned, "fw]lomen, men and children simply carrying out everyday activities at home, the workplace, in markets and at schools are being killed and maimed in senseless violence." It is imperative that all parties agree to an immediate cessation of hostilities in and around the Idlib de-escalation zone. Amid the ongoing fighting, humanitarian organizations have provided food assistance for more than 1.4 million civilians and health supplies to treat almost 200,000 people in recent weeks. That has all come in through the cross-border operation, as reauthorized under resolution 2504 (2020). That remains the only way to assist the more than 2.8 million people in need in north-west Syria. Efforts by humanitarian organizations within Syria to provide cross-line assistance, including those by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent - with which I discussed the issues last week and whose work I continue to support - have not yet been facilitated by the parties in control. The cross-border humanitarian operations have staved off a massive humanitarian catastrophe in the north-west, but let us make no mistake about it: civilians are still suffering terribly. Under current conditions, humanitarian responders do not have the capacity to meet the level of need that we are seeing. We are receiving reports of tensions mounting because of the inadequate humanitarian response. Families recently displaced and currently sheltering on roadsides, under thin sheets of plastic, in makeshift shelters or in unfinished buildings have been making desperate appeals for more support. I talked to Syrians in Idlib again last week. Other United Nations staff continuously have similar conversations. People feel increasingly under siege as the bombardment follows them from place to place. They are traumatized, and they feel totally abandoned by the world. They do not understand why the Council is unable to stop the carnage among a civilian population trapped in a war zone. Their message to those present is essentially the same one I relayed when I briefed the Council on 30 July: "[w]e are afraid. Please help us. Make it stop." (S/PV.8589, p. 5). The most urgent need is to protect the civilian population and scale up the humanitarian response. In order for that to be possible, I call on all parties to facilitate safe and unhindered access for humanitarian workers and supplies to address civilians' essential needs. Humanitarian organizations are also trying to help civilians get out of harm's way. On 25 January, non-governmental organizations helped relocate 1,800 civilians who had asked for help to move to areas under less imminent threat. Following negotiations with the United Nations, the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic has provided assistance with a "humanitarian pause" along specific routes to facilitate the safe passage of civilians and humanitarian staff. Such life-saving operations are necessary and of some value, but, fundamentally, they underscore the basic requirement, which is for the fighting to stop. Secondly, the humanitarian situation in the north- east remains difficult. Some 70,000 people are still displaced following the military operations that we saw in October. An additional 90,000 people are living incamps for internally displaced persons, including more than 66,000 in the Al-Hol camp. Those vulnerable populations are among the 1.8 million people in the north-east who need humanitarian assistance. An average of 850,000 people in need received assistance on a monthly basis in 2019 from within Syria, and that number increased significantly during the course of the year. Nonetheless, with the removal of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point, the World Health Organization forecasts a reduction in the medical services available and a growing shortfall of medical supplies. Some 400,000 medical items planned for delivery are stuck on trucks in Iraq and unable to cross. The Secretary-General has asked members of the Council for their support in reaching agreement for those items to be brought in. But as of today they remain in Iraq. The United Nations continues to advocate with all stakeholders, including the Government of Syria, to ensure reliable and adequate supply lines and humanitarian capacity in the north-east. In that regard, an agreement among the relevant parties to reopen the M4 highway remains crucial. No United Nations convoys containing medical supplies have gone from Damascus to the north-east this month. There were three airlifts in December; there have been none so far in January. In the so-called Operation Peace Spring area, a cross-line assessment mission to Ras Al-Ayn originally planned for earlier this month has not yet materialized due to conditions imposed by all parties regarding the composition of the mission. Experienced United Nations humanitarian staff are not surprised by any of that. The difficulty of crossing lines with essential aid, or moving goods and staff through contested areas, is something that we have become all too familiar with over the course of the nine years of the conflict. As requested in resolution 2504 (2020), the Secretary-General will report to the Council by the end of February on the feasibility of using alternative modalities for the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah in order to ensure that humanitarian assistance, including medical and surgical supplies, reaches people in need throughout Syria through the most direct routes and in accordance with the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. Thirdly, turning to Rukban, based on available estimates, nearly 20,000 people, some 50 per cent of the population, left the Rukban camp in recent months. Reports indicate that several thousand more people still in Rukban wish to leave. Efforts by the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to facilitate voluntary departures have not been successful. In the meantime, the United Nations continues to advocate for the relevant parties to find durable solutions for all Rukban residents. Fourthly, the economic situation in Syria poses increasing hardship on civilians across the country. In January, the Syrian pound continued to depreciate on the informal market. In some areas, it traded at more than 1,100 Syrian pounds to the United States dollar. That is half the value of six months ago. Syrians going out to buy food are finding fewer items in their markets, including those looking for basics such as rice, oil and sugar. Most available items cost more than ever - the price of bread, for example, has increased by more than 50 per cent in some areas in recent months. Analysis suggests that food security in Syria worsened over the past year. Aid agencies try to ensure that the most vulnerable populations have adequate nutrition. The World Food Programme supports 4.5 million people across Syria on a monthly basis with general food assistance, and I am grateful for the voluntary contributions from donors that make that possible. But any further deterioration in the Syrian economy will leave even more people vulnerable and in need of assistance in the year ahead, so continued support from donors is vital. Let me return, finally, to my initial point about north-west Syria. The parties to the conflict and those with influence must stop the fighting. Unless the current hostilities stop, we will see an even greater humanitarian catastrophe. I hope that the Council will take every step to avert that.
