Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I am
very pleased to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).

I thank you, Madam, for your invitation to
participate in this debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

This meeting is of particular importance as it
takes place as the crimes and executions carried out
by Israel, the occupying Power, and extremist settlers
continue apace. The perpatrators know no political,
legal or moral limits. There have been over 160
Palestinian victims since October, a third of whom
have been women and children. Over 700 people have
been injured by live ammunition or rubber bullets, and
thousands of Palestinians have been detained under
very harsh conditions. These actions constitute human
rights violations and violations of international law and
international instruments.

The OIC reaffirms that these facts cannot be
considered without taking into account the actions
of Israel, the occupying Power. In Jerusalem, Israel
carries out actions ofa racist nature that seek to modify
the geography and demography of the city and to
obliterate the Arab characteristics of the city, as well as
its religious and historic features. They also constitute
an attempt to isolate the city from its Palestinian
environment. There have been repeated attacks against
holy Christian and Muslim sites. We reiterate that these
actions are a blatant violation of international law and
international legitimacy that will only stoke extremist
violence and hatred and spark a religious conflict that
will threaten international peace and security.

These substantial violations of international
law, which have exceeded all limits, require a new
response from the international community. Israel
cannot continue to act as if it were above the law. It
cannot continue to commit such crimes without fear
of response or penalty. In that context, we urge the
Council to assume its responsibilities for protecting the
Palestinian people and to force Israel to put an end to its
attacks, cease hostilities, halt the building of settlements
and the Judaization of Jerusalem, end its attacks on
Muslim and Christian holy sites, and to stop the daily
and bloody attacks against the Palestinian people. This
is an absolute priority if we are to safeguard the two-
State vision.
Resolving the current crisis will require political
will on the part ofthe Council in the form ofa resolution
calling for an end to the Israeli occupation within a
set time frame, in line with international benchmarks
and pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, so that security and stability may reign in the
region, so that we may reach a just and lasting peace,
and in order to allow the Palestinian people to exercise
their inalienable rights to self-determination and the
establishment of a Palestinian State based on the 1967
borders.

The international community must not let the
progress of the past 20 years go up in smoke due to the
arrogance and intransigence of Israel. We reiterate the
importance of convening an international conference
with the participation of all active and influential
stakeholders with a View to reviving the peace process
and bestowing a framework to efforts aimed at ending
the Israeli occupation and making the two-State
solution a reality.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate our support for the Palestinian people and
their struggle for their fundamental national rights,
including the rights to return, self-determination
and a sovereign, independent State in the occupied
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. Let us not forget also the right
of Palestinian refugees to an equitable solution in line
with the relevant United Nations resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

