Mr. Theron (Namibia): Let me start, Sir, by
saying how happy my delegation is to see you
presiding over the work of the Security Council. We
also want to thank you for arranging this important
meeting today. I would also like to take this
opportunity to commend Ambassador Cunningham for
the excellent manner in which he conducted the work
of the Council in May. I would further like to thank
Mr. Guehenno for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General and Mr. Otunnu for his important
briefing this morning. My delegation welcomes His
Excellency Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, the Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
today's meeting.
The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council in document S/2001/572 takes cognizance of
and plans for progress in the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, although
cautiously and while recognizing that the progress is
still limited. However, my delegation welcomes the
proposed steps and confirms the positive developments
since the last Council meeting.

In that regard, while noting the present limit of
5,537 for the personnel of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), my delegation trusts that that
number will soon be appropriately increased, taking
into consideration the many functions to be performed
by MONUC.

My delegation furthermore welcomes the
progress reported with regard to the inter-Congolese
dialogue. We commend the work done by the neutral
facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire, and in particular his
announcement that a preparatory meeting to the
dialogue will take place on 16 July. We note that his
associates will visit all ll provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in preparing for the dialogue
process. It is furthermore our view that the preparatory
meeting and the dialogue can take place on Congolese
territory, and that they should be without outside
interference.

We note that the humanitarian situation remains
precarious and that serious human rights violations are
continuing, in particular in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We support
immediate measures aimed at stopping that tragedy. We
also hope that, along with their associates, the
murderers of the six personnel of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) will soon be
apprehended and brought to justice. We commend
Mr. Olara Otunnu for his efforts to highlight and
improve the plight of children in armed conflict, and
we welcome the positive results achieved thus far.

We continue to insist that the Council should
ensure that Kisangani be completely demilitarized in
accordance with resolution 1304 (2000). The reasons
advanced for its continued occupation by military
forces of the Rassemblement congolais pour la
democratie (RCD) are unfounded, since MONUC
troops are perfectly capable of providing security for
the city. Moreover, the expansion of MONUC's
presence, as proposed in the report of the Secretary-
General, will adequately take care of any security
concerns. We agree with the Secretary-General's
assessment of the role that Kisangani could play in the
economic and political regeneration of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The economic revival of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is of extreme importance to alleviate the
suffering of the Congolese people and to improve the
disastrous economic situation in their country. We
welcome initiatives already undertaken to achieve that
goal, and in particular we note the announcement just
made by the representative of Sweden. But we also
want to stress that massive bilateral and multilateral
efforts will be required, considering the size and the
population of the country. The international community
should therefore continue to assist Congo's economic
revival efforts.

In that regard, we recognize that the opening of
the riverine network is an important step, and we share
the View that it will have benefits not only for trade and
freedom of movement but also for confidence-building
and for the strengthening of national unity. We
therefore deplore the recent threat by the RCD that the
Uruguayan riverine unit will not be allowed to reach
Kisangani. My delegation wishes also to reiterate the
importance of the co-location of the Joint Military
Commission (JMC) with MONUC in Kinshasa to allow
the two bodies to coordinate military planning for the
next stages of their operations.

As we have stated consistently, Namibia remains
committed to the Lusaka peace process and to the full
implementation of the Kampala and Harare
disengagement plans and sub-plans. Hence, my
delegation recognizes the importance of a detailed plan
and modalities for assistance to be provided by the
United Nations. In that regard, I wish to confirm here
that on 3 May Namibia submitted to the JMC the
required information on its forces, and that our
withdrawal plans are on course, as required by relevant
Security Council resolutions. My delegation can also
confirm that, as mentioned this morning by Mr.
Guehenno, it is the intention of the Namibian
Government to have all Namibian forces withdrawn
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo by the end
of August.

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes all efforts
towards furthering the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We therefore support the
extension of the mandate of MONUC for 12 months,
until 15 June 2002. Furthermore, we join the Secretary-
General in expressing appreciation to Mr. Kamel
Morjane, to the MONUC Force Commander and to the
men and women of MONUC for their efforts to help
restore peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We wish Mr. Morjane a speedy recovery.

