Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): Allow me at the
outset to welcome Chief Minister Mari Alkatiri of East
Timor, and his delegation. I thank him for the
comprehensive statement he delivered this morning.

We thank you, Mr. President, for your presence
and for convening this open meeting to debate such an
important issue and for affording us the opportunity to
participate.

I wish to take this opportunity to once again
express our profound appreciation to the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, for their relentless effort and
dedication to ensure a smooth, historic transition in
East Timor. The progress achieved in the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
has paved the way for the crucial developments that
will lead to the independence of East Timor.

The elections for the Constituent Assembly on 30
August 2001, the drafting of the first Constitution of
East Timor and the formation of an all-East Timorese
Council of Ministers are indeed irreversible steps
towards the long-awaited independence of East Timor.
The orderly conduct of and high turnout for the
elections are a further testimony to the political
maturity that the people of East Timor have
demonstrated throughout their quest for self-
determination and the establishment of their own State.

We would like to commend the Secretary-
General's report on UNTAET for its clarity and
comprehensiveness in planning for an international
presence in East Timor after independence. UNTAET's
mandate from the Security Council to establish a
national civil administration, assist in the development
of civil and social services and support capacity-
building for self-government in East Timor is not yet
complete. We therefore support the Secretary-General's
recommendation for the establishment of a successor
mission to UNTAET with the main task of ensuring
security in East Timor and the viability and stability of
its government structures as a step towards the
completion of the mandate entrusted to UNTAET by
the Security Council.

The presence of the United Nations after
independence in East Timor must be commensurate
with the task before it. It is therefore imperative that all
plans for the downsizing of UNTAET and its successor
mission in East Timor in its military, police and
civilian components take into account the prevailing
security conditions and the needs of the new East
Timorese administration. The main criterion that must
guide a Security Council decision on downsizing or
withdrawing the United Nations presence in East Timor
or in any other peacekeeping operation is the
successful completion of its mandate.

A crucial aspect of ensuring the success of the
UNTAET mandate in East Timor is the availability of
financial resources. The presence of the United Nations
in East Timor after its independence must continue to
be adequately funded from assessed contributions in
order to ensure its sustainability. As the Secretary-
General says in his report, voluntary or bilaterally
funded arrangements are not reliable because "such
resources may arrive late, or not at all, as donor
priorities change and new demands arise". (S/2001/983, para. 74)

The people of East Timor have made many
sacrifices in a clear demonstration of their commitment
to a legitimate aspiration to an independent East Timor.
The international community has also shown its
continued commitment to the cause of East Timor.

The Security Council must now ensure that all
these sacrifices and investments are not undermined.
The Security Council and the international community
as a whole must now act decisively and demonstrate
that they will not abandon the people of East Timor at
such a crucial juncture.

We also call on the international community to
continue supporting East Timor after its independence
as it builds its own sustainable system of governance.
The provision of technical, financial and other forms of
assistance will be crucial for East Timor to soon join
the community of nations.

The international community must now make
available the necessary resources for the timely
completion of the UNTAET mandate and lay the
foundations for a future independent State of East
Timor. Resources from assessed contributions must be
made available at adequate levels, and UNTAET and
its successor mission must be allowed to use the
resources in a more flexible manner as they prioritize
and discharge the complex mandate in East Timor.

For its part, Mozambique will continue to make
its modest contribution to UNTAET and to the people
of East Timor. We look forward to celebrating on 20
May 2002 the independence of this sister nation.

In conclusion, I once again express our profound
gratitude and appreciation to Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello and, through him, to the men and women of
UNTAET for their commendable job in East Timor.

