Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting. Let me also
welcome the Special Envoys, Mr. Jan Eliasson, whom I

choose to remember in his capacity as President of the
General Assembly, and, of course, Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, who will forever be associated with the
Organization of African Unity, now known as the
African Union (AU).

I must say at the outset that, having been to
Darfur, I admire the fact that these two Special Envoys
were able to go there over and over again to try to
assist the people of Darfur. In fact, I would like to say
that those who always wonder what is wrong in Darfur
and what can be done probably should spend time
studying the two statements delivered to us today.
Although we left Darfur a while ago, I am still
concerned that the people in Darfur are crying for
Darfur. I sometimes wonder whether we can address
their cries. We all say that the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) should
be at full strength, but we should also be aware that,
even if UNAMID was deployed at full capacity, it
cannot be a substitute for dialogue and political
negotiations. Without the political process, one would
need 200,000 soldiers and perhaps 100 helicopters in
the air at all times. Certainly, we should call for
helicopters, which are so sorely needed in Darfur; but
without the political process, one would need to keep
those helicopters in the air for 24 hours a day to give
any kind of assurance to the people of Darfur, who are
exposed, not only to the elements of nature, but to the
violence that can come from every imaginable
direction and from every imaginable source. We in
South Africa remain very committed to trying to find a
durable solution to the situation in Darfur, one of
whose very important pillars is the political process.
We pay tribute to what Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Salim
have done in trying to re-energize the peace process.

I was very struck by my visit to Sudan. Before I
went there, I thought there were basically two
movements, one called the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) and one called the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA), and those were really the two
movements, with, of course, splinter factions from
those two. But among everyone that I talked to in
Sudan, no one ever believed that JEM. was really
serious about Darfur. First Vice-President Salva Kiir
said that JEM. has always had the goal of regime
change. They are more worried about changing the
Government in Khartoum.

It is not been surprising that JEM, which was of
course roundly condemned by all of us for their attack
on Omdurman, is viewed by all those who know about
them as not having their hearts in Darfur. Darfur is a
good halfway station for them, because Darfur comes
with publicity and the world's attention.

That raises the question that I would like to ask
both Special Envoys, through you, Mr. President. The
Envoys were very diplomatic, saying that we should
put pressure on them. But what about taking serious
measures against these people? What about putting
pressure on them? Of course, it is easy to put pressure
on the Government, because they are there, but these
guys are operating out of the back of their pickup
trucks. What about finding ways to also put pressure on
them? Some of them live in Europe, so we can get to
them if we want to. I am not saying we should not put
pressure on the Government. But I am trying to ask:
what is the way in which we could also apply pressure
to these people?

Based on the statements we have just heard, I
want to say a small prayer for the chief mediator who
will be appointed, because expecting the mediator that
the Secretary-General will appoint to go into this
situation and to do better than these very seasoned
international civil servants in front of us is asking too
much. We must provide tools that the international
community is going to use to assist the mediator in
doing his work. Otherwise, the only difference between
this person who will be appointed and Mr. Salim and
Mr. Eliasson will be that he or she will be based in
Khartoum and will be there all the time. But if we are
going to deal with some of these people, who are so
well-described here, maybe we need to say something
about how that should happen.

At the same time, with regard to the political
process - and I realize that this is not the meeting for
that, but I have said it before and I will say it again - I
was very surprised at how inadequately resourced the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) is. I told the story about going into
a camp in Darfur and listening to the people saying
"we need protection" and then going to UNAMID and
realizing that we do not have the resources to assist
them at this stage. That is why we hope the deployment
can speed up as soon as possible.

I am tempted to comment on Mr. Eliasson's four-
part harmony, coming from Africa, where we sing
without instruments. To really have a good four-part
harmony, you must all sing from the same sheet music
or remember the same song. Right now, the four that he
mentioned that make up that four-part harmony do not
even have the same sheet music among themselves so
how can they sing together in four-part harmony?

I agree on the arms embargo and the proliferation
of arms in Darfur, but that will also only be addressed
if we have all the pieces in place, if we have UNAMID
at full strength and if we have a political process under
way. That may do it, but right now, when the people of
Darfur ask us the difficult question "Can you help
us?", at this moment we should be humble enough to
say that we are not yet well enough equipped to help
them. We truly want to, but we just are not there yet.

