The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Spain.

We thank Mr. Guehenno, Mr. Ngongi and
Mr. Solana for their briefings. We believe that the
peace process is at a crucial stage, and we welcome the
fact that the timetable deadlines for the entry into force
of the Government and the establishment of transitional
institutions have been met.

The swearing-in of the four Vice-Presidents
means that the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
entered a new phase and, therefore, we urge the
Transitional Government to work resolutely for
national reconciliation.

Spain welcomes the efforts made by the outgoing
Government of Joseph Kabila to achieve a compromise
formula to appoint the new leader of the national armed
forces. We believe that the current attitudes of the
Governments of Uganda and Rwanda with regard to
deterring their groups in the country from further
violence is the right path in order to make progress in
the peace process. In that connection, we value greatly
the visit of the High Representative, Mr. Javier Solana,
to the region.

At the same time, the situation in the eastern part
is still cause for concern. Following the commendable
activities of the Uruguayan contingent, we welcome the
fact that the deployment of the Artemis Operation has
been concluded, that the process of demilitarizing
Bunia has begun, and that the objectives entrusted to
the European Union (EU) to stabilize the political and
humanitarian situation are being achieved despite
conditions that are dangerous to the troops involved.

The steps taken for the operation to be taken over
by the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) have
also been positive. That takeover will have to be
carried out seamlessly in order to avoid a security
vacuum. On the other hand, we must make all efforts to
strengthen the political settlement to the conflict in
Ituri and to support the expeditious establishment of
the interim administration in Ituri.

I shall now resume my function as President of
the Council.

I call on the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

