Ms. Ratsifandrihamanana (spoke in French): At
the outset, we thank you, Sir, for having invited us to
this meeting to review the report of the Security
Council's mission to Africa, which we warmly
welcome. We also commend all the Security Council
members that led and participated in the mission.

The Chairman of the Commission of the African
Union, Mr. Alpha Oumar Konare, has instructed me to
convey his heartfelt appreciation for the fruitful
cooperation he enjoyed with the Security Council
recently and during its visit to Addis Ababa. We also
welcome the important recommendations set forth in
the report and in the joint communique issued
following the Security Council's meeting with the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union.

The mission to Africa attests above all to the
Security Council's readiness to meet its obligations.
Recalling that 29 out of 49 missions of this kind have
been conducted in Africa since 1960, we are convinced
that they will help to reassure our peoples and
Governments of the essential role of the Security
Council and its commitment as guarantor of
international peace and security.

The initiative also attests to the Security
Council's concern to listen to Africa, be attentive to
realities on the ground, and act as a united team, giving
priority to dialogue. That will help to increase the
esteem and trust of the entire international community
for the Security Council.

The mission was also an undoubted milestone in
the efforts to secure lasting peace and security in the
countries involved. The concerted actions of the United
Nations and the African Union in those countries have
been characterized by innovative approaches,
unprecedented creativity, flexibility in action and,
above all, the mobilization of the international
community. They will help to lay a new foundation for
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union.

As for cooperation, it was enhanced yet again by
the presence of the United Nations, in the person of
Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro, at the
ninth African Union summit in Accra. The major
decisions taken there reflect the convergence of visions
and approaches of the two organizations with respect to
maintaining international peace and security,
particularly in Africa.

The decisions of the conference of heads of State
and Government clearly reflect the recommendations
of the mission and highlight the cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and the
African Union, which were strengthened yet again by
the Council's informal meeting of 13 July with the
Chairman of the Commission, followed by his meeting
with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.

I would recall, inter alia, that the Chairman of the
Commission urged the Security Council promptly to
adopt a resolution authorizing the deployment of the
hybrid operation in Darfur and funding it through
United Nations assessed contributions. He also
recognized the leadership of the United Nations in the
field of international peace and security. The African
Union, however, must shoulder its own responsibilities
in maintaining peace in Africa. The Chairman
highlighted the need to preserve the growing trust of
the Government of the Sudan, which does not mean
pandering or issuing blank checks.

The Commission Chairman recognized the
importance of unified command and control in the
hybrid operation. The operation must, however, retain
its African nature and, to that end, additional efforts are
necessary to raise awareness among African troop-
contributing countries. He called on both organizations
to work together to consolidate political dialogue and
to support the efforts of the special envoys of the
United Nations and the African Union in Darfur. In that
respect, it is critical to coordinate and harmonize all
initiatives under United Nations and African Union
auspices. The Chairman of the Commission
commended the convening in September of a joint
session between the United Nations and the African
Union.

With respect to Somalia, the Chairman of the
Commission focused on the need to complete the
deployment of the African Union Military Observer
Mission in Somalia pending the rapid deployment of a
United Nations operation to assume its functions.

All of this offers lessons for improving the
effectiveness of conflict management in Africa. We
fully endorse the recommendations contained in the
Security Council's report and underscore the need to
implement commitments already made in various
international instruments, and specifically the 10-year
programme for United Nations capacity-building of the
African Union. We also stress the urgent need to
support the African Union in establishing its peace and
security architecture, including a continent-wide early
warning system, a group of eminent persons and the
yet-to-be-established African force, which must
enhance the rapid regional response to conflict.

We also highlight the need to coordinate
initiatives so as to avoid duplication. The partnership
between the two organizations must be coherent, which
requires the harmonization of decision-making
procedures, joint strategic analysis and systematic
information-sharing.
Lastly, we especially welcome the decision to
hold a joint annual meeting of the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council. We also
endorse the search for lasting solutions to the issue of
funding peacekeeping operations in Africa assigned to
the African Union acting on behalf of the international
community.

In conclusion, we reiterate our congratulations to
the Security Council's members on their successful
mission of Africa. The momentum and the Council's
appreciable commitment reassure and encourage us to
consolidate the United Nations/African Union
partnership in the quest for lasting peace in Africa.
Finally, we believe that joint missions of the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council might be considered. The African
Union mission in New York would be pleased to be
associated with such missions.

