Mr. Cherif(Chad) (spoke in French): IthankNigeria
for having organized today's meeting on consolidating
Security Council engagement on security sector reform
through the further implementation of resolution
2151 (2014). I also thank Mr. Titov, Ms. Bangura and
Ms. Nakamitsu for their briefings.

Creating professional security institutions that are
competent, uphold the rule of law and serve the people
is a difficult and long-term undertaking that requires
resources and conducive political and social conditions.
Unfortunately, such factors are often lacking in
countries experiencing or emerging from conflict. The
engagement of the United Nations and other players
is necessary to that end. Chad voted in favour of of
resolution 2151 (2014). Concerned exlusively with
security sector reform, it was the first resolution of its
type. It reflects the key importance of security sector
reform, which has become a cornerstone of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. I should like to make a few observations in
that respect.

Security sector reform after conflict is critical to
building peace and stability, as well as to promoting
the rule of law and good governance, extending State
authority and preventing relapse into conflict. The
regular reports of the Secretary-General on this issue
reveal that United Nations activities in support of
national security sector reform initiatives encounter
certain difficulties related to understanding the
national political context, taking support for security
sector reform into account from the very onset of the
peace process, the engagement of national authorities,
including transitional authorities, and security
conditions in the country concerned.

My country also notes other challenges, such as
institutional weaknesses in the host country and a lack
or shortfall of financing and other resources. In order
to overcome some of those problems, we suggest that
the Security Council undertake consultations with the
host country in the course of negotiating the mandate
of a peacekeeping operation, with a view to identifying
national priorities for the reform of the security sector.
As set out in resolution 2151 (2014), national ownership
and a country's own determination of its priorities
on the basis of its needs and particular situation are
essential. In that regard, it is up to them to determine
and prioritize the make-up of the security sector,
including, among others, the defence sector and the
police, penal, legal, border and immigration services.

Outside stakeholders, such as countries providing
assistance and regional and international organizations,
including the United Nations, should take into account
the concerns ofthe host country. In the absence ofa peace
agreement during a transition period where national
security institutions are practically non-existent, the
support of the United Nations in security sector reform
is crucial in helping national authorities to develop a
national programme in that regard, all the while taking
their priorities into account.

Moreover, given that the African continent is where
most security sector reform processes are under way,
it is essential to step up the interaction between the
Security Council and the African Union in connection
with providing support for such efforts. In that regard,
we should recall that the African Union has in place
a Policy Framework on Security Sector Reform, the
development of which took place against the backdrop
of broad consultation with many actors concerned,
including the United Nations, the member States
of the African Union, African civil society and the
various regional economic communities. The purpose
of the Framework is to help guide member States of
the African Union in transforming their security
sectors, with a view to making them more effective and
efficient in ensuring control in a democratic manner,
while taking into account the needs of the people in the
area ofjustice.

In addition to security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) are also
important. Following disarmament, those who have
been demobilized should be provided economic
opportunities in order to reintegrate into society. We
underscore the fact that Chad, which has experienced
a long period of conflict, has undertaken quite
compelling efforts in that regard, including putting
in place a DDR programme and establishing good-
neighbourly relations with surrounding countries. Our
efforts have resulted in an improvement of the country's
security institutions, which today are contributing to
preserving peace and maintaining security beyond our
national borders. Chad is prepared to share its modest
experience in that regard.

Given the security situation in the Sahel and in
various North African countries where terrorist groups
and transnational criminal networks are exploiting
porous borders to carry out their illegal activities,
thereby jeopardizing international peace and security,
Chad would like to emphasize the importance of
stepping up border security. We call upon the relevant
entitites of the United Nations and on Member States
to support the efforts of the countries of the region in
that regard.

In conclusion, I wish to underscore the importance
of security sector reform. The efforts of the United
Nations to support national initiatives on security
sector reform are essential, but they must take into
account national ownership and the priorities of the
countries concerned, in line with their needs and
their specific situations, so as to generate greater
synergy. Chad urges the United Nations to strengthen
its cooperation with the African Union in the area
of support for security sector reform in order to help
African States to benefit from the process, including
through the Policy Framework, without losing sight of
the need to link DDR programmes with strengthened
border security, in particular in countries of the Sahel
experiencing manifold security issues, especially the
terrorism threat.

