Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): Before delivering my statement, I would like to express my full support for, and solidarity with, the Permanent Mission of Tunisia and our dear colleague Ambassador Moncef Baati. Let me start by joining my colleagues in thanking today's briefers. I also would like to express Estonia's support for the outstanding work that they are all doing. I am especially glad that we had a chance to hear from the civil society representative about the situation and challenges on the ground. I thank all our briefers for their collaboration. Estonia strongly condemns all forms of terrorism and considers it a significant threat to international peace and security. I fully share the assessment made by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2020/95) and agree that, despite the progress made in fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the transnational threat of terrorism remains acute and ISIL and its affiliates remain at the centre of it. We share the concern raised in the report concerning the Sahel region, which has experienced a devastating surge in terrorist attacks on civilians and military targets in recent months. As we have learned from the past and as the Secretary General's report points out, terrorists are quick to adapt to changing situations and exploit vulnerabilities. Therefore, we must continue our efforts to tackle the threat, and the United Nations system has a central role to play in that regard. I would like to focus on three elements that Estonia considers vital in the fight against terrorism: the priority of cooperation, the value of a two-sided approach and the importance of accountability and justice. The importance of cooperation cannot be stressed enough. Terrorism is a global phenomenon, and no State can address it alone. The experiences of the European Union, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and other regional organizations in counter-terrorism cooperation confirm that notion. Member States bear the primary responsibility to stand up to terrorism. However, at the same time, Estonia encourages and supports the engagement of other stakeholders, including the private sector, civil society and academic and religious organizations. Secondly, in countering terrorism Estonia supports a two-sided approach. Security operations must go hand in hand with addressing the root causes of radicalization and terrorism. One without the other is not enough and will not reduce threats and instability. Although Estonia has been untouched by terrorism directly, we know that no State is immune to the threat. We take seriously our responsibility to stand side by side with the global community in the fight against ISIL and its affiliates. Estonia contributes both in terms of sharing the responsibility to take military action and contributing in the humanitarian area. Currently, Estonia contributes to counter-terrorism operations in different regions, and our troops are currently stationed in Iraq, Afghanistan and Mali. We also do our share to address the root causes of instability by reducing poverty and the marginalization of certain groups and promoting gender equality. For example, our aid activities are focusing on Syrian refugees living in Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey. We are teaching them information technology skills and entrepreneurship and offering psychological support.Thirdly, restoring justice and _- ensuring accountability remain an essential part of countering terrorism. It is our duty to deny impunity for terrorists. Combating impunity for the most serious crimes under international law enables reconciliation in society and helps to prevent the resurgence of terrorism. At the same time, accountability measures must comply with international law and fair trial standards, including by ensuring the highest standards of witness and victim protection. Member States operating in conflict and post- conflict environments often face significant challenges in obtaining evidence to bring ISIL to justice. In that light, Estonia fully supports the establishment and the work of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD). We owe it to the victims to ensure that crimes will not go unpunished. We further welcome progress made by UNITAD to collect, preserve and store evidence of acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide. In conclusion, let me reiterate that all measures against terrorism must be taken in compliance with international law, including humanitarian law and human rights law. Let me also reiterate the fundamental role of the United Nations, including the role of the Security Council, in the fight against terrorism. Estonia will continue to engage resolutely in multilateral efforts to combat that global threat.
