Mr. Prodi (Italy) (spoke in Italian; English text provided by the delegation): I wish to begin by
thanking President Mbeki for this initiative.
Strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, particularly the African
Union (AU), is a critical issue that I care about deeply.
This initiative therefore has our full support.

We have already travelled a long way down the
road of cooperation between international and regional
organizations. There are positive examples throughout
the world. In Europe, the United Nations, the European
Union (EU) and NATO have played, and continue to
play, a vital role in stabilizing the Balkans. In the
Mediterranean, we have a successful joint United
Nations-EU mission in Lebanon. In Africa there are
numerous partnerships between the United Nations and
the African Union, such as in Darfur. In Asia, the
comprehensive approach to Afghanistan is grounded in
the need for complementarity between the United
Nations and other regional organizations.

We have all come to agree on one basic principle,
namely, that the closer the cooperation between the
international and the regional levels, the more effective
the actions of the international community in crisis
situations.

I would now like to consider the African Union,
which is the most interesting political reality of the
African continent. As I said last year in my addresses
to the Addis Ababa Summit in January and to the
Security Council meeting on Africa in September, we
have to keep working and to step up our efforts. As I
see it, the African Union can make ever-greater
progress if its follows the best practices of comparable
political and institutional realities. I should like now to
refer to a few working points.

I believe that the African Union, with the
assistance of all of us, should continue down the path
on which it has embarked to create permanent
structures that will enable it to manage crises in
political, military and civil terms. I repeat, in political,
military and civil terms.

Of course, there is a problem of resources not
unlike the one we face in Europe, where we have
increased the European Union budget for civilian
missions, strengthened our missions' command
capacity and set up a mobilization and rapid reaction
system for crisis situations. More is still needed, but
10 years ago that would all have been unthinkable.
That represents important progress which deserves to
be studied carefully by Africa.

Simply averring the will to handle one's own
continental crises is not enough. The African Union has
to follow through on that will resolutely. That is the
only way for asserted ownership to become actual
ownership. A continent that rightly aspires to play a
global role should aspire to equip itself with the
instruments needed to set its house in order. I am
greatly encouraged by what I see - an Africa that is
not just seeking assistance, but is, rather, playing a
front-line role in international efforts to bring peace to
the continent.

We see this also in the great efforts, which we
fully support, of all the African subregional
organizations. Together with the African Union, they
have helped to identify a political solution in Kenya
and are working to find a rapid solution to the
profound crisis in Zimbabwe, which we are following
with great concern and which I hope will be resolved
as soon as possible, because that country needs a
working democracy.

In building a more solid African institutional
framework, the structures for coordinating all the
regional organizations must also be strengthened. The
European Union and the African Union launched a
joint strategy in Lisbon last December. It was a historic
outcome in which I believe, and I worked on it both in
Brussels and in Rome. Now we must make it
operational and concrete because it is a new and
essential instrument.

I fully endorse the statement that the Slovenian
presidency will deliver shortly on behalf of the
European Union. Allow me to offer a few closing
remarks about what Italy can do to continue lending a
hand.

When I was the President of the European
Commission, it was my responsibility to launch the
European Peace Facility for Africa. As Italy's Prime
Minister, I decided last year to introduce an Italian
instrument to support the African Union and its
peacekeeping efforts, particularly in the Horn of
Africa. I signed the agreement with the President of the
Commission, Mr. Konare, which promotes African
ownership in full complementarity with its European
counterpart facility. The Facility has already enabled
the achievement of significant results, such as in
Somalia, where we are using it to train the Somali
security forces and to rebuild the public administration.

The United Nations centres in Italy - such as the
Staff College in Turin and the Logistics Base in
Brindisi - will remain available to Africa as tools for
education, training and capacity-building, in the spirit
of the suggestions made by the Secretary-General in
his report.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
readiness to strengthen cooperation - in ways to be
jointly identified - between the United Nations and
the African Union, including in the area of financing. I
am fully aware that this is a key point to which African
leaders attach great importance, as we have heard in
earlier statements. The Secretary-General's report
makes a number of proposals that we endorse. We will
not fail to offer our ideas and resources in the pursuit
of that process.

