Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I take this opportunity to thank the Ukrainian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today's briefing on the Central African Republic and
to commend the delegation on its conduct of what is
a rather packed programme for such a short month.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Herve Ladsous; Ambassador Omar Hilale, Chair of
the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission; and you, Mr. President, for
the clarity and quality of the briefings, which give us
insight into the issues presented by the situation in the
Central African Republic, which continue despite the
great progress that has been made towards stabilization
in various areas.

In the light of today's briefings, it is clear that
the situation is still fragile and precarious, thanks to
the persistent threats posed by armed groups, which
are now fighting among themselves for control of the
country's mining areas and thus keeping the level of
violence high. The unspoken aim of some of their
criminal activities, particularly among themselves, is
to make the current political process fail and plunge
the country back into crisis.

There are still many challenges to overcome, and it
is time to move from words to deeds. The President of
the Central African Republic has repeatedly outlined
the priorities that must be met in order to restore the
country, and they are cited in the Mutual Engagement
Framework between the Central African Republic and
the international community, whose signing at the
Brussels conference on 17 November was extremely
important for my country's future. The fact is that the
reconstruction and development of the Central African
Republic are conditional on a restoration of peace,
country-wide security and national reconciliation. To
that end, the President has engaged in an inclusive
dialogue with the various armed groups, aimed at
convincing them of the importance of signing on to
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme as a prerequisite for progress
and with the goal of getting them to commit firmly and
concretely to its success.

I have raised the issue of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation because
previous speakers have sufficiently emphasized other
aspects of the situation and because it is urgent that
we begin that process. Implementing the Government's
goals and priorities will require the support and
guidance of the international community, which,
through the Security Council, has a key role to play,
as laid down in the Mutual Engagement Framework,
which clearly defines the stakeholders' responsibilities.
We all believe that implementing the new mechanism
is indispensable if the Central African Republic
is to achieve lasting peace and rapid, sustainable
development. The international community and our
bilateral and multilateral partners must act if we are to
ensure that our hard-won progress is not compromised.
The commitments made in Brussels will enable the
Government to effectively implement its priorities,
which depend to a large extent on mobilizing the
promised funds.

Lastly, I would like to reiterate my gratitude
to all the members of the Council - and especially
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African The President: I now invilc Council members to
Republic, for his personal involvement 7 for their informal consultations to continue our discussion on

tireless efforts to enable my country to emerge from the subject.

this long crisis. The meeting rose at 11 a.m.
