Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like, first of all, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your country's successful presidency of the Security
Council during the month of December, and especially
on the pertinence of the thematic choice for the debate,
namely, threats to international peace and security:
terrorism and cross-border crime.

The Kingdom of Morocco takes this opportunity
to reiterate its firm condemnation of terrorism in all
its forms, stressing that nothing can justify a terrorist
act. Therefore, following the Taliban terrorist attack
perpetrated at a school in Peshawar, His Majesty King
Mohammed VI sent a message of condolence and
sympathy to the President of Pakistan, His Excellency
Mr. Mamnoon Hussain, and through him, to the people
of Pakistan, in which he condemned these despicable
acts in the strongest terms, stressing that terrorism is
banned by the precepts of our tolerant Islamic religion
and rejected by heavenly religions, the principles of
humanity and democratic values that hallow the right
to life as the supreme principle of human rights.

We also condemn in the strongest terms the
abduction in northern Nigeria of women and children
as well as the killing of several dozens of them by the
terrorist group Boko Haram. We reiterate our solidarity
with the Government and the people of Nigeria.

My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
2195 (2014), which will help to consolidate the relevant
instruments and resolutions in the fight against
terrorism, as well as those relating to cross-border
crime.

The last decade has seen a resurgence of terrorist
acts coupled with a increase in the power of cross-
border crime, threatening the stability, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. Networks of terrorists and
criminals who cooperate and are active in trafficking
of all kinds - weapons, human beings, drugs and
so on - spare no effort to weave links for criminal
purposes. Our continent, Africa, is no exception,
unfortunately, and the Sahelo-Maghreb region has not
escaped this scourge.

The fact is that as this danger is studied and
analysed, the link between drug trafficking, cross-
border crime, armed groups, separatist movements,
tiny terrorist groups and the financing of terrorism
is increasingly confirmed. Drug-traffickers and arms
dealers have joined the ranks of Al-Qaida and Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM). These criminal
networks are intertwined and support each other, but
they are also globalizing, thereby increasing their
abilities to destabilize, massacre and commit atrocities.
They threaten peace and security not only in the African
region, and especially in the Sahel-Maghreb region, but
also at the international level.

The Kingdom ofMorocco was among the first States
to alert the international community to these dangerous
connections between traffickers, armed groups and
terrorists in the Sahel, calling for vigilance and joint
efforts at the subregional, regional and international
levels. Our concerns grew from the discovery of
the connections between terrorism, trafficking in
drugs, weapons and human beings, and the taking of
hostages - innocent tourists, aid workers and even
United Nations officials. My country then called for
concerted preventative action by the States of the Sahel
and Maghreb region to curb the already-visible adverse
effects of such activities.

Events in northern Mali and the serious infringement
of its territorial integrity, the expansion of the terrorist
group Boko Haram, whose influence is spreading in the
Sahel-Saharan region, and the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters and criminals have only confirmed our fears
and shown that the threat of instability is not merely
hypothetical but immediate and real, with adverse
consequences for our entire region. Morocco's concerns
therefore led to our call for concerted action by the
States of the Sahel-Sahara and Maghreb region to fight
such transnational crime and terrorism together.

To tackle the phenomena of terrorism and cross-
border crime, my country has developed its own
national strategy based around security governance,
the implementation of a legal framework, the fight
against social insecurity and the reform of the
religious sector. Moreover, we have contributed to
international efforts - within the United Nations,
as part of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
through fruitful and active cooperation with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force - as
well as at the regional and subregional levels, through
cooperation and exchange of expertise in various
fields with allied African countries, and through
South-South and triangular cooperation. We have also
contributed to international initiatives and discussions
in the fight against terrorism, including the Global
Counterterrorism Forum.

Terrorism and cross-border crime feed on a
complex set of interdependent political, economic and
social challenges that must be met by strengthening
good governance, sustainable development, promoting
and upholding respect for human rights, and investment
in human capital through appropriate education and
training to immunize individuals against crime,
extremism and terrorism. That is why my country
believes that the implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel requires both the
ownership of each Member State of the region and the
support of the international community.

It is also essential to strengthen border security
in the Sahel-Maghreb region to cut off transnational
threats and prevent the free movement of terrorists and
traffickers in arms, human beings and drugs so as to
stop this surge of terrorism in the region. It is with this
objective that the Kingdom of Morocco hosted several
meetings and conferences, including the ministerial
conference on cooperation on border control in the
Sahel and Maghreb, held in Rabat in November 2013,
which culminated in the Rabat Declaration, calling for
concrete steps to improve border security. On 28 and
29 October 2014, Morocco organized, again in Rabat,
the Regional Conference of the Geneva Declaration on
Armed Violence and Development in the Middle East
and North Africa region, under the theme "Ending
armed violence for peace and development", with the
aim of emphasizing the crucial need for subregional
cooperation.

In the context of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum Foreign Terrorist Fighters initiative, The
HaguefMarrakech Memorandum on Good Practices
for a More Effective Response to the Foreign Terrorist
Fighters Phenomenon was adopted, as my colleague the
Dutch Ambassador just mentioned. Morocco co-chairs
the Working Group on Foreign Terrorist Fighters with
the Netherlands and held a meeting on this subject on
15 and 16 Marrakech, which adopted a vigorous and
ambitious plan of action to counter foreign terrorism.

In conclusion, because terrorism and cross-
border crime are blind to religion, to nationality and
to borders, the international community must equip
itself with a comprehensive strategy for mobilization
and cooperation at all levels. The fight against these
twenty-first century scourges must be the ever-vigilant
daily task of all of us until they are totally eradicated.

