Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Let me wish you a
very warm welcome, Mr. President, to New York and
to the Security Council. I thank also the Secretary-
General for his very useful and thoughtful introduction
to the debate.

Since the representative of Belgium will be
speaking on behalf of the European Union later in this
debate, I will keep my remarks extremely short, not
least because of the length of the list of speakers we
have today.

The first-ever United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, held in July, signaled a step change in the
international community's effort to combat the
uncontrolled spread and misuse of small arms. It must
be regarded as the start of a long-term process with
practical follow-up.

I should like to pay tribute, as others have done,
to the efforts of Ambassador Reyes in seeing the
Conference through to a successful conclusion. For our
part, we were very pleased to have been able to make
available Sir Michael Weston to act as a facilitator for
part of the negotiations.

The success of the Conference will be measured
by the extent of its impact on the levels of illicit trade
in small arms and the destabilizing accumulations of
those weapons. The impact of the whole complex of
small arms questions on issues such as disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement and reintegration (DDRR)
and on children - both of which the Secretary-General
has mentioned - is, frankly, obvious.

It is clear to us, therefore, that the Conference
must be regarded as the start of a process. It is equally
clear that the Security Council can make a real
contribution to that process, because so many of the
issues have an impact on our work.

I was particularly attracted by the idea of
mainstreaming small arms in our work, as mentioned
by Ambassador Patricia Durrant of Jamaica. It seems to
me that the more we can do by practical measures to
make sure that the small arms dimension becomes an
automatic part of our work, the better off we will be.
Perhaps it is a typically British sentiment, but I cannot
help feeling that the more we can concentrate on doing
things that will actually make a difference, the more
they will be worth, as opposed to long and theoretical
reports.

For this reason, we, as the United Kingdom,
strongly support the Programme of Action which has
resulted from the July Conference. We have established
a comprehensive small arms and light weapons
reduction programme, allocating a minimum of
19 million pounds - or around US$ 30 million - over
the next three years to address proliferation and the
misuse of small arms and light weapons and to support
the follow-up to the Conference.

We will do our part. It is vitally important that the
United Nations system and the international
community as a whole should play its part too.

