At the outset, I would like to thank the Estonian presidency for having convened today's Security Council open video-teleconference (VTC) meeting on the theme "Ensuring transparency, efficiency and effectiveness in the work of the Security Council". I also want to thank Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions; Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director of Security Council Report; and Mr. Edward Luck, Arnold A. Saltzman Professor at Columbia University, for their insightful briefings. I would also like to take this opportunity to commend the Permanent Representative of Kuwait, as the former Chair of the Informal Working Group, for his successful leadership and dedicated efforts in supporting and enhancing the work of the Security Council. The Charter of the United Nations entrusted the Security Council with the lofty responsibility of maintaining international peace and security. Given the rising polarization and ongoing conflicts around the globe, exacerbated by the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the Security Council must enhance its credibility and reassert its authority by strengthening the transparency and effectiveness of its important work to end conflicts and address threats to international peace and security. We acknowledge the progress made and the latest developments in the implementation of presidential note S/2017/507 by the President of the Security Council in the framework of improving the working methods of the Security Council through the work of the Informal Working Group. However, much remains to be done. To that end, I would like to share the following points. First, we welcome the Council's progress in making its discussions and decisions available to the wider membership of the United Nations and to the public, including through the webcast of open meetings, the issuance of press elements when closed consultations are held and the timely publication of important Security Council documents on the official website of the Security Council. Nevertheless, there is still a need to further enhance dialogue and interaction with non-Council members to engage in the work of the Council and its subsidiary bodies when appropriate. This implies further improving coordination and communication with countries concerned and making sure they are aware of the issues being discussed and the timing of those discussions. Ensuring that concerned countries are properly informed and have an understanding of the proceedings allows those countries to respond and reflect accordingly and provide additional information or perspectives that can help better reflect the realities on the ground. Secondly, to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the work of the Security Council, there is a need to strengthen follow-up and monitoring mechanisms on the implementation of the Security Council's decisions, recommendations and resolutions. Thirdly, Afghanistan suggests and fully supports the idea that the Chairs of all subsidiary bodies continue to travel periodically to regions applicable to their work to expand their vision and seek the views of concerned States from the ground. That could also serve to explain and promote the objectives of the subsidiary body's mandate. Fourthly, the Security Council must look to improve the role and effectiveness of the Council's sanctions regimes. Sanctions are one of the most effective tools that the Council can use to diminish the operational capabilities of terrorist groups and of supporting individuals and organizations. Effective sanctions regimes can also help to isolate reconcilable groups and push them towards the negotiation table. For these to work effectively, their general scope and listing and delisting procedures must also effectively engage the countries concerned in consistent communications with the Council, including in processes such as the extension of the mandate of the monitoring team. In that regard, Afghanistan fully supports and underscores the need for sanctions committees to seek the views of Member States that are particularly affected or concerned by sanctions and to foster early and periodic engagement and dialogue between them and the relevant sanctions monitoring teams, groups and panels throughout their mandate. Improving the working methods of the Security Council is an evolving and ongoing task that cannot be accomplished all at once. It requires continued work on adapting and reviewing the notes of Presidents based on the work of the Informal Working Group. In that respect, we further value the efforts of the members of the Council in quickly adapting the body's working procedures to address the new scenario created by the challenge of the pandemic. The Council and its members have shown their commitment to their important task of sustaining international peace and security, even in the face of an unprecedented situation, and this must be commended. We are committed to working with the Security Council to build a more effective, transparent and accountable body. We believe that with a continuous improvement in its working methods and ceaseless innovations in its practice, the Security Council will be able to better fulfil the task entrusted to it by the States Members of the United Nations.
