Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, for his very refreshing briefing. Let me
also take this opportunity to join other colleagues in
commending him and his staff for their commitment,
their daily work and the assistance that they provide to
all those poor people in dire humanitarian situations.

Last year alone, there were 68.5 million people
forcibly displaced. That number speaks for itself and
I cannot agree more with what the High Commissioner
said about the flow of refugees being just a symptom of
the ongoing conflict, widespread and systematic human
rights violations and abuses, the mismanagement of
economic corruption and so on. Two facts are that all
these refugees come fromjust five or six countries that
are on the Council's agenda. Mr. Grandi mentioned
Syria, Myanmar and Libya. I can also add Afghanistan,
South Sudan, Somalia and, last but not least, a country
that is our close European neighbour, that is, Ukraine.
We are facing a number of challenges. As he said, we
need to focus not on curing symptoms - that is not
enough - but on addressing the root causes of these
flows of refugees and internally displaced persons.
In order to do that in the most effective way, we need
to apply a holistic approach. In 2005 all our leaders
acknowledged the link between security, developments
and human rights. If we, as the Council, want to address
these problems, we need to look at all three angles.

Let me touch on three issues that are of great
importance to Poland - humanitarian law, the situation
of children and the situation of persons with disabilities.

First, the promotion of and compliance with
international humanitarian law, refugee law and human
rights law are essential for ensuring the protection
of the lives, health and dignity of people caught up
in conflict. This year, as we mark the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions and the
twentieth anniversary of the protection-of-civilians
agenda, we need to accelerate efforts and call on States
and non-State actors to universally and unequivocally
respect, implement and ensure respect for international
human rights law. In addition, the Security Council
and all States Members of the United Nations should
ensure the protection of humanitarian activities and
the lives of humanitarian and medical personnel. I
also commend the efforts made in this regard by our
German and French colleagues.

Children constitute about half of the refugee
population. I am the father of a 7-year-old boy, and it is
hard to imagine him needing to flee our home without
food or the possibility of going to school. Children
are particularly vulnerable and should be provided
with appropriate assistance and protection, health
care, education and psychosocial support. Women and
children also face an overwhelming threat of trafficking
and sexual Violence.

People with disabilities encounter barriers to
accessing life-saving humanitarian assistance and
health care and are at a higher risk of violence,
exploitation and exclusion from available services.
Let me recall what the Secretary-General, Antonio
Guterres, said at a time when he still held the post of
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees:

"Too often invisible, too often forgotten, and too
often overlooked, refugees with disabilities are
among the most isolated, socially excluded and
marginalized of all displaced populations".

Forced displacement, be it disaster- or conflict-
related, entails an enormous amount of human suffering.
Addressing the rights and needs of all the various at-
risk groups should be at the core of the international
response to refugees.

In conclusion, I thank High Commissioner Grandi
once again for his briefing. We support the activities of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees aimed at safeguarding the rights and well-
being of refugees around the world. We would like to
encourage the High Commissioner to brief the Council
more often, particularly when early action is needed.
Poland will continue its work in the Security Council to
secure peace and prevent conflicts.

Finally, I would like to ask the High Commissioner
how he sees the process of strengthening the nexus not
only between security and development but also, and
we cannot overlook this, the third pillar - security,
development and human rights - in addressing the
various humanitarian situations around the world.

