Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2375 (2017). We would like to
express our great appreciation for the leadership of the
United States, which has made it possible for us to adopt
the resolution today. We also thank other members of
the Council for their support.

By swiftly adopting resolution 2375 (2017) today,
after North Korea's ballistic missile launch on 29 August
that flew over Japan, as well as its sixth nuclear test
on 3 September, the Security Council has sent a clear
signal to North Korea and the international community
as a whole that North Korea's continuation of its nuclear
and missile development can never be accepted.

We recently adopted resolution 2371 (2017)
unanimously, on 5 August, in response to the two
ballistic missile launches of intercontinental range in
July. The resolution was intended to be very impactful,
with the expected effect of reducing the revenue of
the North Korean regime by approximately $1 billion
a year.

The resolution we have adopted today will
strengthen sanctions against North Korea to an
unprecedented level, further reducing the resources
that the North Korean regime uses to continue its illicit
programmes. The ban on textile exports from North
Korea is expected to reduce its revenue by around
$800 million. The resolution also requires countries
not to provide work authorizations for North Korean
workers, who have been an important source of revenue
for the North Korean regime. In addition, the oil supply
that flows into North Korea is expected to be cut by
approximately 30 per cent. This is intended to have
a great impact on North Korea's continuation of its
weapon of mass destruction programmes.

Today's resolution is an urgent call on the North
Korean regime to change its behaviour. The Security
Council will not back off in the face of North Korea's
persistent provocations, which challenge its repeated
resolutions. It is the collective will of the international
community that we continue to put maximum pressure
on North Korea so that it shows seriousness and takes
concrete action towards the goal of denuclearization.

We should bear in mind that the Security Council has
repeatedly expressed its determination to take further
significant measures in the event of a further launch
or nuclear test by North Korea. This is again clearly
stated in paragraph 31 of the resolution. A peaceful,
diplomatic solution, which we all want, is in the hands
of the North Korean regime. IfNorth Korea wants peace
and security, it needs to take concrete measures for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, comply fully
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
joint statement of the Six-Party Talks, and thus come
back to the dialogue table.

In the meantime, all Members of the United Nations
must show their renewed commitment to rigorously and
thoroughly implementing the existing Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 2371 (2017) and 2375
(2017). Japan will continue to work very closely with
the Security Council member and all other Member
States to reach a solution to the problems related to
North Korea.

