Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to welcome the
participation of Mrs. Bangura, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone, at today's meeting. I would
like to thank Mr. Von der Schulenburg for his very
useful briefing.

The recent outbreak of violence between the
supporters of the political parties in March reminded us
that the situation in Sierra Leone is still fragile.
However, the reconciliation efforts of the All People's
Congress and the Sierra Leone People's Party led to the
issuance of a joint communique on 2 April in order to
prevent the escalation of violence. We are gratified that
there is growing confidence that the culture of conflict
prevention is taking root in the country. We sincerely
hope that the trend towards reconciliation will persist.

We are also pleased to note that the Executive
Representative played a critical role as a mediator in
the course of the outbreak and supported the efforts of
the parties to conclude the joint communique. This
development clearly demonstrates that an appropriate
United Nations presence on the ground with strong
leadership will make a difference in the post-conflict
peacebuilding situation.

We firmly believe that political stability and
durable peace are achievable together with social and
economic development. The peacebuilding perspective
in pursuing development is of utmost importance for
the political stability of many countries, including
Sierra Leone.

To prevent a relapse into conflict, people must
feel and see visible changes in their everyday lives. We
therefore commend the leadership of President Koroma
for formulating the development strategy known as the
Agenda for Change. We sincerely hope that the priority
areas set forth in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/267) will be implemented effectively.

In particular, I would like to stress the great
importance of the problem of youth unemployment. It
is a serious concern because if it remains unaddressed
it could be a potential threat to development and
peacebuilding efforts. It is important to focus on the
creation of employment opportunities, using all
available policy measures, including bilateral and
multilateral actions. Conditions must be created for the
appointment of a Youth Commissioner to enable the
young generation to have hope for the future. It is also
important that the development strategy be carried out
effectively, through good governance and the
institutionalization of the rule of law.

Japan's new partnership with Sierra Leone
focuses on assistance in increasing food sufficiency
through agricultural, rural and infrastructural
development in and around the capital. These efforts
are fully aligned with President Koroma's initiative.
The global financial crisis most seriously affects
vulnerable countries, particularly those in post-conflict
peacebuilding situations. We should continue to
support sustainable development and peace
consolidation in Sierra Leone in every way possible.

In these efforts, the Peacebuilding Commission
has an indispensable role to play. We applaud and are
gratified by the fact that the Canadian Government has
accepted to chair the country-specific configuration for
Sierra Leone. We are grateful to the Chairman,
Ambassador McNee, for his personal engagement and
his first report to the Council today.

For the integrated peacebuilding strategy and
Joint Vision to bear fruit, the Peacebuilding
Commission's monitoring and advisory role will be
essential. We are pleased that the integrated strategy
includes energy, specifically the supply of electricity,
as one of its five priorities. That is an innovation in the
peacebuilding strategy, which traditionally focuses on
security and the rule of law, inter alia. But people need
electricity to feel that peace has arrived. We hope that
UNIPSIL will continue to cooperate closely with the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The special session of the Peacebuilding
Commission on Sierra Leone on 10 June will be a good
opportunity to review progress and to identify future
challenges. We encourage the Government of Sierra
Leone and the international community to make the
best use of this catalytic role to mobilize necessary
political and financial resources, not only from
traditional conventional donors but also from new
partners.

The Security Council, together with the
Peacebuilding Commission, has the important
responsibility to support the efforts of the Government
and the people of Sierra Leone to make the transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding a success story.

In conclusion, peace consolidation in Sierra
Leone will contribute to the stability not only of Sierra
Leone as a country and a people, but also of the entire
subregion. We strongly believe that regional
cooperation, with assistance from the United Nation
and the regional organization, the Economic
Community of West African States, is the key to
successful peacebuilding. In this effort, the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone plays a vital role. We very much hope that the
Secretariat will make an extra effort to speedily fill the
key vacant positions in the mission.

Regional cooperation is vitally important in areas
such as the fight against drug trafficking, the trade in
light weapons and organized crime. We hope to see
further developments in regional cooperation. Japan is
committed to playing a constructive role for the
stability and prosperity of the countries of the region.

