Mr. de La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda for their reports,
for the briefings on their work and also on the
difficulties they have encountered in fulfilling their
mandates. I would like to reassure them of the full
support that they enjoy from France.

Both Tribunals have achieved remarkable
progress to ensure the respect of the completion
strategy for their work, which was set out by this
Council. I would like to commend the combined efforts
of the Judges and the Prosecutors. We encourage both
Tribunals to continue in this way. Greater efficiency in
the conduct of trials would favour the respect of the
completion strategy. This strategy must ensure, above
all, that finally, after so many years, justice is rendered
to the victims, and, on this basis, the societies
concerned can move on.

The objective of efficiency and of speeding up
the trials should serve the purpose of justice and should
take account of the fact that these were mass crimes.
The requirements for justice and the need to protect the
interest of the victims and to respect the rights to a
proper defence must be respected. The two ad hoc
Tribunals are pioneers, and their legacy must in no way
be the subject of controversy.

One way of completing their mandate was to
make it possible to transfer low-level accused persons
to national justice systems. We welcome, therefore, the
fact that the special tribunal for the war crimes in
Sarajevo was able to complete its first trial
satisfactorily one month ago. Such transfers can only
contribute to the local development of the rule of law,
provided that it is accompanied by the necessary
guarantees that ensure fair trials and the non-
application of the death penalty. And they certainly
deserve the support of the international community. We
welcome with satisfaction the initiatives of the two
Tribunals in this area.

The Presidents and Prosecutors have pointed out
a number of difficulties that could increase as the end
of their work approaches. The loss of qualified staff is
one problem, and this should be looked at, because it
could slow down the pace of work. A possible
uncertainty with regard to the resources available could
also make things difficult, and I note also that the
management of the detention unit and the attitude of
some detainees are serious concerns for the ICTY. We
note the efforts that have been made to overcome these
concerns.

However, the main challenge to both Tribunals
and to the Council that established them is the fact that
some of the principal perpetrators are still at large.
Their number is decreasing, of course, since
Mr. Dragan Zelenovic has finally been transferred to
the Tribunal in The Hague by Bosnia and Herzegovina
after having been handed over by Russia. Yet Ratko
Mladic and Radovan Karadzic, who, alongside
Mr. Slobodan Milosevic 4 who unfortunately died
before the end of his trial - personify the hateful
policy of ethnic cleansing, remain at large. That is true
also of Mr. Felicien Kabuga, 10 years after the
genocide.

However, the arrest and transfer for judgement in
The Hague and Arusha of those accused by the ICTY
and the ICTR represent an international obligation for
the countries of the regions concerned. My country
reiterates that cooperation with the ICTY by the Balkan
States is also a prerequisite for integration into the
European family. Therefore, like the Prosecutor, we are
disappointed that the plan of action established by
Belgrade has yet to achieve the desired goals. It is
critical that Serbia and the Republika Srpska of Bosnia
and Herzegovina cooperate fully with the Tribunal.

With respect to the ICTR, I wish to thank its
Prosecutor for providing more detailed information to
the Security Council on the cooperation that the
Tribunal is receiving with regard to the accused who
remain at large and to ongoing investigations.

While the dates that we have given the Tribunals
by which their work should be complete are
approaching, it seems to me that the Council should
consider the purpose of those dates. Through our
resolutions, we have requested the Tribunals

"to take all possible measures... to complete all
trial activities at first instance by the end of 2008,
and to complete all work in 2010" (resolution 1503 (2003), para. 7).

We established a goal at that time, but no cut-off dates.
The briefings that we have just heard clearly indicate
that some critical factors in adhering to that timetable
do not depend on the Tribunals. Some people, however,
seem to consider the timetable to require the Tribunals,
regardless of what may occur, to shut down in 2010,
whether or not they have tried the principal fugitives.
That is, indeed, what the fugitives are hoping.

The very high cost of the Tribunals is often
referred to. That is a valid concern, but what would be
the purpose of all the United Nations Member States
investing so much over so many years if, at the end of
the day, the main suspects accused of crimes of
genocide were to escape international justice? What
would the legacy of such justice be? What credibility
would it enjoy among the victims and their
communities? Would the Tribunals have completed the
missions entrusted to them? What impact would it have
on international efforts to counteract impunity?

The Council, which established the Tribunals,
must ask those questions. To France, it is clear that the
missions of the ad hoc Tribunals cannot be considered
complete so long as the principal fugitive accused -
Mr. Karadzic, Mr. Mladic and Mr. Kabuga in
particular - have not been judged by those Tribunals.
We must not yield on that demand.

