Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, for her briefing today and for her commitment to
fulfilling her mandate. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Borges, Permanent Representative of
Timor-Leste, for her contribution.

I believe that we all agree and are pleased to see
that Timor-Leste has continued to enjoy an
environment of security and stability, including during
the current transfer responsibilities, under which the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste is gradually taking on
the duties that to date have been carried out by the
police component of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

With the reconfiguration of UNMIT's mandate
and the current gradual drawdown of the Mission's
police, expected to conclude in 2012, it is important to
point out that this time frame must remain flexible,
depending on the capacities of the national police and
the security situation on the ground. The commitment
shown by the country's primary political actors and the
efforts of the Governments of Indonesia and of Timor-
Leste to strengthen a relationship of cooperation have
contributed significantly to the stability in the country.

The coming two years will be key for Timor-
Leste. Without disregarding the security aspect, the
reconfiguration of UNMIT must involve greater
support for developing national capacities, poverty-
reduction policies, economic growth and rural
development. The strategic plan for the use of natural
resources and attracting foreign investment will also
play a key role in the socio-economic stability of the
country.

All these efforts, with the assistance of the
international community, must focus on job creation,
particularly for young people, who will ultimately steer
the country's development. Similarly, it is important to
consolidate the institutional capacities of the country's
electoral bodies in order to ensure that the national
elections to be held in 2012 will be carried out with the
necessary transparency and credibility.

Another component essential to solidifying
stability in the country is the promotion of national
reconciliation and lasting peace. We reiterate that this
is necessary in order to resolve the crimes committed
during the crises of 1999 and 2006, in accordance with
resolutions 1704 (2006), 1745 (2007) and 1802 (2008).
Let us remember that the position of the United
Nations is that amnesty and impunity are not an option
for war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide.
We applaud the measures the Government of Timor-
Leste has adopted to strengthen the judicial system,
guarantee full accountability, put an end to impunity
and compensate the victims of serious violations of
human rights in the country. In that context, we
welcome the draft bill now being discussed in
Parliament on the establishment of an institution to
take over from and implement the recommendations of
the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation and the Commission of Truth and
Friendship.
Finally, we would like to recognize the work of
the countries contributing to UNMIT and to stress the
need to continue to plan for the transition in 2012,
based on the country's national priorities and taking
into account the gradual involvement of the
Peacebuilding Commission in support of international
aid to the country and its national programmes.

