Mr. Mitri: The Council has before it the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) dated 21 February 2013
(S/2013/ 104). As the report provides details on the work
of UNSMIL over the past six months, I will therefore
focus my remarks on the most recent and critical
developments.

On 17 February, the Libyan people took to
the streets across the country to mark the second
anniversary of their revolution. On 15 February, and
again on 17 February, thousands gathered in Benghazi's
Freedom Square, calling for an end to the political and
socioeconomic marginalization of the east and for
greater stability.

Despite widespread concern, the events of 15 and
17 February did not destabilize the country. The largely
peaceful and celebratory demonstrations manifested a
sense of pride in the promises augured by the revolution.
Libya's political leadership is to be commended for
its efforts to defuse tensions and provide efficient
security measures. Both President El-Magariaf and
Prime Minister Ali Zeidan reached out across the
political spectrum in the east. The anniversary was
an opportunity for the Libyan political leadership to
reiterate its commitment to transitional justice, national
reconciliation through dialogue, the reactivation of the
economy and improvements in local governance, a key
demand in the east.

In my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6912),
I spoke of mounting public pressure on the General
National Congress to expeditiously form a constitutional
drafting assembly, and of the debate within the
Congress about whether to appoint or elect members
to such an assembly. As outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General, on 6 February the General National
Congress voted to leave in place amendment 3 to the
Constitutional Declaration, which required members
of the constitution drafting assembly to be elected by
popular vote. The decision resolved a debate that had
come to increasingly dominate the constitution-making
process. However, a subsequent decision of the
Supreme Court invalidated amendment 3 on technical
and procedural grounds.

Therefore, an amendment of the Constitutional
Declaration by the General National Congress is
required, and is about to be made, in order to move
forward in organizing the election of the constitutional
drafting assembly. In anticipation, the High National
Election Commission, with the assistance of the United
Nations, intensified its effort to digitize the hard-
copy voter register and undertake other institutional
developments. It is hoped that the requisite legislation
for the election of the 60-member assembly will be
adopted without delay.

Over the past few weeks, a political crisis has
emerged from the controversy over a proposed law on
political isolation, proponents of which argue that it is
a necessary tool to protect the revolution and ensure
that those who corrupted public life in the past are
excluded from holding public office. While there is
strong support for such a law in some quarters, the
debate over its adoption has been politically divisive. In
its current form, the draft law contains an extensive list
of criteria, many of which are based on affiliation, and
would apply to a wide range of public office-holders at
the national and local levels, including elected officials
and the judiciary. The draft law is also silent on how it
is to be implemented.

The legitimacy of adopting measures to exclude
individuals who have committed serious human rights
violations from holding public office constitutes a valid
transitional justice measure. However, in meetings
with political leaders and Congress members, we have
consistently urged caution on the adoption of such a
law, and highlighted international standards that ought
to apply to any vetting mechanism. UNSMIL reiterated
this message in a memorandum submitted to President
El-Magariaf for further distribution to General National
Congress members.

On 5 March, a special session of the General
National Congress to discuss the draft law ended in
disarray after protestors threatened to use force unless
Congress members voted to adopt the draft law. I strongly
deplored such armed intimidation of the General
National Congress and the attempted assassination of
President El-Magariaf that followed. Following last
week's siege and violence, Mr. El-Magariaf made it
clear that the General National Congress would not
reconvene under pressure or the threat of arms.

During the same week, the Al-Assima television
station was stormed by armed men. Its director and five
of its staff were kidnapped and later released. There
were also attacks against other media organizations
and journalists, as well as against a Coptic Church
in Benghazi and other places of worship. I strongly
deplored all of those acts of violence. Prime Minister
Zeidan has declared unequivocally that the Government
will take measures to ensure that armed intimidation of
the General National Congress and the use of force to
achieve political objectives are not repeated. He called
on the Libyan people to stand with the Government
when it uses force against those who break the law.

When I last briefed the Council, I noted that the
continued mistreatment and detention without due
process of several thousand people remain a source of
deep concern. I am pleased to note that the Government
has taken measures to accelerate the screening
of detainees and their transfer to State-controlled
detention facilities.

For its part, UNSMIL continues to highlight the
plight of detainees, particularly those held in secret
detention facilities, including farms and private homes
in the Tripoli area and in other towns and cities across
the country. We are equally concerned by allegations of
a number of deaths in custody. The Minister of Justice
has been responsive to our requests and to the advocacy
efforts of various human rights organizations. The
Minister of the Interior has announced his plans to
confront illegal brigades and rogue elements suspected
of involvement in kidnapping, detention and torture.

It is also worth acknowledging that the Libyan
Government facilitated a visit by UNSMIL
representatives to former Prime Minister Al-Baghdadi
al-Mahmoudi, following media reports suggesting he
had sustained life-threatening injuries as a result of
torture at a detention facility in Tripoli. Appearing
to be in decent physical and mental condition,
Mr. Al-Mahmoudi unequivocally denied having been
mistreated.

With regard to former intelligence chief
Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi, the International Criminal
Court issued a decision ordering the Libyan authorities
to have him surrendered to The Hague. The authorities
have since appealed the order and signaled their
intention to file a challenge to the admissibility of that
case.

The Secretary-General's report proposes the
renewal of UNSMIL's mandate as an integrated special
political mission for another 12 months to continue its
assistance to the State of Libya in defining national
priorities related to its democratic transition and efforts
to build a modern, accountable State based on the rule
of law and respect for human rights. The proposed
mandate areas are fully consistent with the request of
the Libyan authorities.
When I last briefed the Council, I noted that
an international ministerial conference on support
to Libya would be convened in Paris, following the
senior officials' meeting held in London in December
2012. The Paris conference, held on 12 February, was
the first international high-level event convened on
Libya since the revolution, and was an occasion for
Libya's international partners to endorse the detailed
priorities articulated by the Libyan Government in the
form of a security, justice and rule of law development
plan. The onus is now on the Libyan Government to
take relevant policy decisions and create appropriate
coordination structures that would contribute towards
the implementation of its action plans.

Despite the fact that the Libyan people have come a
long way since the liberation of the country 17 months
ago, the security problems remain formidable, and are
arguably the predominant concern for most Libyans.
Significant progress in improving the country's
precarious security situation remains hampered by
weak State institutions and security coordination
mechanisms, as well as by continuing mistrust of the
State's security forces on the part of many ofthose who
fought during the revolution, most of whom remain
armed. The country remains awash in unsecured
weapons and munitions that continue to pose a regional
security risk, given Libya's porous borders.

Notwithstanding those difficulties, Prime Minister
Zeidan's Government is resolved to move forward and
to do so expeditiously in order to enhance security
and address the various problems pertaining to the
proliferation of weapons and the continued presence
of armed groups outside the legitimate control of the
State. UNSMIL will continue to provide assistance in
that regard.

Given the legacy bequeathed to the Libyan people
by the former regime, the process of democratic
transition will surely face an array of obstacles
requiring long-term responses. The past few weeks
have seen increased political polarization in the debate
over the draft political isolation law and attempts to
openly undermine the authority of the democratically
elected bodies and legitimate institutions of the State.
I have consistently impressed upon Libya's political
leadership that safeguarding Libya's democratic
transition will require an inclusive dialogue leading to
genuine national reconciliation.

The Council is about to hear from Libya's first
democratically elected Prime Minister. It has indeed
been a privilege for me and my colleagues to work
with Prime Minister Zeidan and his Government. We
appreciate their determination and strong commitment
to building a modern, democratic and accountable
State based on the rule of law and respect for human
rights. UNSMIL is grateful to the Prime Minister and
all of his Ministers and his Government for fostering a
relationship of confidence and close collaboration that
enables us in UNSMIL to execute our mandate in the
service of the Libyan people.

