Mr. Carrera (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): For
the past 18 months, our delegation has lamented the fact
that the Security Council has been incapable of stepping
up to one of the bloodiest and most painful internal
conflicts of our times. I am referring, of course, to the
situation in Syria, and its impact on its neighbours and
painful humanitarian cost.

Despite the fact that we came together on two
occasions to produce resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043
(2012), internal divisions of which we all are aware
subsequently prevented further progress. As a result,
the emergence of a point of convergence between the
Russian Federation and the United States of America
over one issue - the rejection of the use of chemical
weapons - should be welcomed. We congratulate
Minister Sergey Lavrov and Secretary of State Kerry
for their initiative that gave rise to the Framework
for Elimination of Syrian Chemical Weapons of
14 September.

We also appreciate their efforts in codifying
that agreement so that both the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the Security
Council could act today. We believe that this step is
highly significant for its intrinsic value and because it
breathes new life into efforts to resolve the underlying
issues, end the violence, resolve the humanitarian
situation and meet the demands of the Syrian
population. That is why we have consistently supported
the Final communique of the Action Group for Syria
(S/2012/523, annex) of 30 June 2012 and the need to
convene an international conference with a view to its
implementation.

That also explains why my delegation co-sponsored
resolution 2118 (2013), which was just adopted and
which establishes a mechanism for the verification and
destruction of chemical weapons, upholds the principle
of accountability, stresses the urgency of a political
transition process, and emphasizes the need for Syria's
due compliance with the conditions set forth in that
agreement.

The adoption of the resolution is of vital importance,
considering that the Council had adopted its most
recent resolution on the situation in Syria (resolution 2043 (2012)) in April 2012. I would also emphasize that
this decision was taken unanimously by the Council,
and that is why it does not represent a victory for any
single country in particular. It is great victory for the
United Nations and, through the United Nations, a great
victory for all of humankind.

Given those factors, we would like to stress the
following points. First, although we understand the
sensitivity and sense of urgency surrounding this
particular situation, we would have preferred to have
a greater opportunity to participate in the development
of the resolution. We could have contributed positively
to it.

Secondly, it is necessary to prepare for and
commit to ensuring strict implementation of the
resolution just adopted. We recognize, therefore, the
importance of cooperation between the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the
United Nations, especially in terms of the access and
safety of personnel, operational support, privileges
and immunities, and sufficient financial resources to
properly carry out their duties.
Thirdly, and as a result of the aforementioned points,
we hope that, in the short term, the intention to convene
the international "Geneva II" conference in November
can be fulfilled, that a transitional Government with
full executive powers can be established with the
mutual consent of all parties, and that all parties shall
engage constructively in the search for stability and
reconciliation. We believe that it essential that any
Government established by inclusive and that it take
advantage of the positive aspects of the institutions
developed over decades by the Syrian State.

In conclusion, we can only reaffirm our commitment
to the objectives contained in the Charter of the United
Nations and the Final communique of the Action Group
for Syria (S/2012/523, annex) of 30 June 2012, and
express our hope that a ceasefire will soon finally be
reached.

