Mr. Sawaneh: My name is Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh. I am 14 years old, and I come from Sierra
Leone.

In 1997, when I was 10 years old, I went for my
Christmas holiday to my uncle's house in my village,
Madina Loko, in northern Sierra Leone. During the
second week of my stay, we heard that the rebels were
10 miles away from us. We ran into the bush to hide.
At night, we came out quietly and cooked whatever we
had in an old farm hut. On the second night, my elder
brother and I went to look for water to do the cooking
when we ran into the rebels. They searched our pockets
for money and, because nothing was found, we were
beaten up. We were taken back to our village where we
were tied up, beaten again and kept in the hot, burning
sun. Many houses were burnt down, properties
destroyed and people killed. A group of rebels who had
gone into the bush in search of food caught my uncle
and the rest of the family. My uncle was later killed.

That same night, we were ordered by the rebels to
go with them to their base behind Kabala town. It was
over 100 miles from the village. We walked for about
10 days in the bush, resting only a few hours in
between, most times on empty stomachs. On arrival,
we were trained for a week to shoot and dismantle AK-
47 guns. Thereafter, I was used to fight when we
attacked. During these attacks, we killed people, burnt
down houses, destroyed properties and cut off limbs.
But more often I went on food raids and did domestic
work for my commander's wife. This is because I was
so skinny.

In January 2000, two years after my capture,
United Nations peacekeepers met with our commander
to explain the process of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR). We were told that the
discussion included the release of all child soldiers.
Our commander returned to our base the next morning
and ordered the other commanders to release us. He
said that those who failed to do so would be killed. The
information was passed on to all the fighters, and
within two days over 250 children were released to the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
in the town of Kabala. We were taken to a care centre
in Lunsar.
In Lunsar I was first registered for demobilization
and then, later, handed over to Caritas Makeni for care
and protection. I immediately reported to the health
centre for treatment because I was completely covered
in scabies. I had not seen any family member for about
two years, so when Caritas told us they would assist us
in finding our families I was very happy to give the
information requested. Unfortunately, it was not safe
for them to get to my village, so I was put into a
community secondary school. In May that year, the
leader of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) was
detained again after a demonstration in Freetown. The
rebels decided to attack again, and they attempted to
recruit us again. We did not want to fight any more, so
we ran away into the bush with our social workers.
Over 200 of us were able to get to Freetown, where we
were picked up by Caritas.

In Lungi we met other children in the Caritas
programme who, also out of fear of being re-recruited,
had escaped from centres in Port Loko and Makeni.
There were over 350 children in that new centre. At
first, the Lungi people did not want us in their town,
and that was demonstrated by their highest-ranking
chief. The United Nations Children's Fund and Caritas
Makeni had a meeting with him and the other local
leaders. They explained that we had been demobilized
and did not want to fight any more. This changed their
minds, and we were allowed to stay. I was again put in
a community school, together with other children.

The meeting with the people did not end with the
local leaders because the community school children
were not friendly to us. They kept calling us rebel
children. Thank God we attended the afternoon school,
and therefore were able to avoid them for the most
part. Caritas then had several meetings with various
people of the community to get them to forgive and
accept us. This worked very well because, at the end of
the year, a woman from the community agreed to
provide me with foster care. I am still living with her
because my family has not yet been found.

It is important for the Council to know that the
journey I have made so far has been less difficult
because I entered the DDR programme. I did bad
things in the bush, and I saw very bad things done to
both children and adults. Taking my gun from me was a
vital step for me. The programme helped me feel
natural and normal again. It helped me develop ways to
fit into society again.

As I have said, the road has not been easy. In
school I suffered resentment from other schoolchildren.
They looked at me differently, like an evil person.
Maybe they had good reasons. After all, we used to do
very horrible things to them, their families, friends and
communities. But we suffered just like them because
we were forced to do those things by our commanders.
We have to ask for forgiveness and demonstrate
extremely good ways of living.

I have faced a lot of distrust from family
members. Some doubt whether I will ever be a normal
child again. I am easily reminded of my past when I
make mistakes. "Do not bring your rebel life here",
they say. People in the community can be really
dangerous. Some want revenge at all costs, and in
whatever form. With the support of families, friends
and agencies working for children, we are overcoming
this.

The DDR programme is coming to an end, and I
am very happy that thousands of children have been
given the chance to go through the process. I know
there are more children held back, especially our
sisters. I ask this body, on behalf of all the children of
Sierra Leone, to do all it can to bring our sad story to
an end. We want to be able to move about freely in all
parts of the country to attend the schools of our choice.
We want to be able to visit our friends and families
everywhere in the country without fear of abduction,
recruitment and other dangers. Above all, we want our
parents to be able to work and to educate us so that we
can become useful citizens. This is what peace means
for me in Sierra Leone.

I thank the Security Council for inviting me to
tell my story on behalf of my brothers and sisters in
Sierra Leone and in other countries at war. I hope that
the United Nations and Governments in all countries
will listen to children and take our words into account.
We want a better life. We want peace. We are counting
on continued support for this.

