Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French):
The Senegalese delegation congratulates you,
Mr. President, on organizing today's meeting on the
situation in Liberia, a fraternal and friendly country
for Senegal, with which we share membership in
all international organizations, and above all, our
subregional organization, the Economic Community
of West African States. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing. And I also thank our colleague and neighbour,
Olof Skoog, Chair of the Liberia configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his visit and for the
briefing he has just given us about his visit. We look
forward to the statement by our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Liberia.

The Senegalese delegation would simply like to
take the floor to recall the long way that Liberia has
come to reach this day.

Since before the intervention of the United
Nations, the subregional engagement of the Economic
Community of West African States Monitoring Group
has contributed to stabilizing the country, ultimately
leading to the stability and security of the situation in
the country only a few months before the upcoming
presidential and legislative elections in October, for
which 22 political parties and coalitions will present
their candidates and 2.1 million voters have registered,
of whom - it is important to underscore - 48 per cent
are women. Those elections are all the more important,
as they will enshrine a historic and peaceful transition
of power, while, at the same time, consolidating the
transformation of Liberia and sustainably establishing
peace and democracy within the context of the
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). The Liberian forces will then resume their
sovereign right concerning security matters, with the
support, when needed, of the Senegalese rapid-reaction
force, which has been redeployed from the United
Nations operation in the Congo to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and could be deployed from Mopti.

In that regard, the Senegalese delegation welcomes
the various stakeholders' commitments to ensuring
that the upcoming elections are held in a free and
transparent manner and that all disputes are settled
peacefully through established mechanisms and in
accordance with the rule of law. Accordingly, we
commend the important work carried out thus far by the
National Elections Commission and call on the various
stakeholders to lend it all the necessary support, in
particular by providing the $1.8 million necessary to
fill the gap for financing the electoral process.

On 23 January, the President of Liberia, Ms. Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf, presented her final annual state of
the nation address, in which she identified national
reconciliation the fight against corruption as the
Government's priorities for the rest of her tenure.
On 31 May and 1 June, the Government of Liberia,
supported by UNMIL, the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States, hosted
a national forum facilitated by the Interreligious
Council of Liberia, which culminated on 4 June in
the signing of the Farmington River Declaration by
standard-bearers and political leaders of 20 out of the
22 registered political parties. The signatories to the
Declaration declared their commitment to a peaceful
electoral process and the transition of power to a new
Government in January.

I stress the issue of elections because the Council
has noted that, in the western part of Africa, electoral
processes continue to be a source of tension. But I would
also like to underscore the concern - which we should
all share - with regard to the macroeconomic situation,
which continues to be affected negatively by the general
decline in commodity prices and the residual impact of
the Ebola epidemic. The International Monetary Fund
estimates that Liberia faces a significant shortfall in
revenue despite receiving approximately $75 million in
direct budget support from donors for the fiscal year
2016-2017.

The Council should therefore consider the
importance of finding the optimal way of responding
to the various challenges that continue to confront
the country, especially by fully supporting the
implementation of the peacebuilding plan developed by
the Government of Liberia at the request of the Security
Council, involving financial resources, institutional
capacity-building and expertise. It is at such a price
that, after having achieved making Liberia into a
success story with regard to peacekeeping, the Council
will continue to transform Liberia, thereby making it
into a success story in terms of peacebuilding.

