Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
First of all, I should like to thank Mr. Bernard
Kouchner for the briefing he has given us today.

(spoke in English)
I will focus on four points very briefly.

First, the demonstrations in Kosovo over the past
few days have highlighted the importance of
proceeding with the release of Kosovar detainees in
Serb prisons. As a minimum, the charges against them
should be specified and due process of law afforded to
them. This issue remains a key obstacle, in our view, in
defusing inter-ethnic tensions in Kosovo.

While Canada congratulates the Yugoslav
leadership on the release of Ms. Flora Brovina and
other Kosovars, far too many still remain imprisoned
unjustly. The Yugoslav Government has the ability to
help stabilize the situation in Kosovo, and we
encourage it to move quickly with the necessary steps.

It is also, and equally, essential that Kosovar
Albanians respect the rights of Kosovar Serbs and all
other minority groups.

Secondly, Canada is gratified that the municipal
elections on October 28 were held so successfully. We
salute the work of Mr. Kouchner personally and of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) more generally, as well as that of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Kosovo Force (KFOR), and all the others
who worked so hard to make the electoral process a
success.

We recognize that the elections were not perfectly
done. We have plenty of evidence that elections are
rarely perfectly done these days, but we do not share
the criticism one delegation voiced earlier of the work
of Mr. Kouchner and of UNMIK. Probably alone
around this table, and possibly in this room, I was part
of the team at the Group of Eight meeting that
negotiated resolution 1244 (1999). In reading the report
that Mr. Kouchner has submitted, I must say that I am
struck by the distance we have travelled. I can tell the
Council without any hesitation that UNMIK, and
Kosovo more generally, have made progress in the last
16 months or so that far exceeds the expectations that
we had around that table when we negotiated that
resolution.

The immediate challenge now is to implement the
results of the municipal elections. These elections
represent the first step in the devolution of power to
democratically elected authorities. Of equal
importance, as the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom has observed, is the establishment of
satisfactory conditions for province-wide elections in
the foreseeable future. The participation of all
Kosovars, including Serbs and other minorities,
throughout the entire electoral process will greatly
enhance the legitimacy of the results. To the leadership
of Kosovo, we will say that the legitimacy of those
results and the participation of those minorities will be
an indicator of Kosovo's political maturity.

(spoke in French)

Thirdly, Canada supports the full implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999). We continue to believe that
the question of future status is one that must be
resolved through negotiations, as established in that
resolution. This will take time, patience and goodwill
on the part of all parties.

Finally, full cooperation by all the parties
concerned with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia will likewise be necessary.
There can be no lasting peace without reconciliation
and no reconciliation without justice.

