Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad and Tobago is pleased to contribute to this open debate on upholding the Charter of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security. We commend the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, as current President of the Security Council, for this welcome and appropriate open debate. We thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders, for their comprehensive presentations, which set the platform for a meaningful discussion. I also wish to congratulate the Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. With a population of 110,000 people, it is the smallest nation ever to be elected to the Security Council. It is indeed regrettable that as we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, our discussion on this topic comes amid escalating tensions and threats to peace and security in many parts of the world. As a family of nations, we face challenges that require us more than ever to place emphasis on multilateral, rather than unilateral approaches. Trinidad and Tobago remains convinced that, by strengthening partnerships through mutual respect and cooperation, we can transform our global circumstances to the benefit of humankind. It is evident that the challenge before us is to make the world peaceful and secure, and this should be a priority for all States. Trinidad and Tobago therefore submits that, to achieve that objective, all States must conform to the principles of the international rule of law and observe the principles and purposes laid down in the Charter of the United Nations. The Charter has as its main purposes to maintain international peace and security, to promote and protect human rights and to effectively address pressing international economic and social issues, such as development, through international cooperation. All of the possible principles, methods and procedures for the maintenance of international peace and security are laid down in the Charter of the Organization, delineated in Chapters VI and VII, on the pacific settlement of disputes and on action with respect to the peace, breaches of the peace and acts of aggression, respectively. Trinidad and Tobago is of the view that global adherence to the Charter significantly contributes to the maintenance of international peace and security. As a result, Trinidad and Tobago fully subscribes to the rule of law, in keeping with our legally binding obligations flowing from the Charter. The vulnerability of women and girls in situations of armed conflict and armed violence continue to engage our attention. We hold firmly that women and girls must be equal partners in our collaborative efforts to build peaceful and sustainable societies and to promote and protect human rights. The promotion of gender equity and equality is essential in this regard. It is equally important to consolidate an integrated social protection system that improves living conditions and creates opportunities for women and girls to achieve their full potential. Trinidad and Tobago remains a strong proponent of the Arms Trade Treaty, which we submit represents a significant achievement in the global fight to eliminate the diversion of conventional arms to the illicit market, which could contribute to the reduction of untold suffering, particularly that of women and girls. The quest for international peace and security cannot be divorced from the fervent desire of all peoples to live in freedom and without fear for their lives. The lack of religious and ethnic tolerance and respect for human rights have fuelled horrific crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and crimes of aggression. The Security Council has a key role to play in responding to acts of aggression, as stipulated in Article 39 of the Charter. The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) takes account of this key role and preserves the primary role of the Security Council in determining an act of aggression. The international community should therefore seek to strengthen the foundations of the ICC, of which Trinidad and Tobago is one of the founding architects, as the tribunal for bringing to justice those accused of committing the most serious crimes of concern to the international community. The embrace of the ICC by all members of the international community would greatly assist in ensuring the peace and security of Member States and in promoting and protecting the human rights of peoples. Trinidad and Tobago will continue to join multilateral efforts that contribute to peaceful and secure societies. On a national level, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago remains committed to ensuring the safety and security of its citizens and has adopted a whole-of-Government approach to national security, where all ministries and national agencies share responsibility and are accountable for the safety of the State. In conclusion, Trinidad and Tobago affirms that the maintenance of international peace and security, pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations, is in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and, if implemented fully, will promote and encourage peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development and enhance the lives of all peoples around the globe.
