Let me, first of all, thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing. We have heard a lot today with regard to the deteriorating humanitarian situation. We were not able to receive answers to our questions at the last meeting. We hope it will be different this time. We studied carefully the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/401) on the review of the United Nations humanitarian cross-line and cross-border operations, and would like to flag the following points. The report cites economic problems inside Syria, such as price increases and shortages in some basic goods, but it ignores unilateral sanctions. We need the Secretary-General's assessments of how unilateral economic measures worsen the economic situation and hinder the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). On humanitarian access to the north-west, according to reports of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), no COVID-19 cases have yet been confirmed in that region. Why, then, does it say in paragraph 14 of the report that the joint mission by the United Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to Idlib approved by the Government of Syria was temporarily put on hold due to "concerns related to COVID-19"? What were those concerns? We have different information, which says that it was Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham that blocked that mission. To us, the reason is obvious: Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham does not want it - it would undermine their monopoly control over cross- border assistance. We all know that Idlib is controlled by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, but the cross- border operations have always been regular. The resonating story with arbitrary levies by terrorists at Bab Al-Hawa border crossing in Idlib in late 2018 did not prevent the continuation of United Nations cross-border operations there. Even the Board of Inquiry, in its report of 6 April, admitted the financial accountability problems of humanitarian operations in Idlib - the United Nations does not know to whom it pays and cannot track the final distribution of aid. Over the past five years, we have continuously underlined the need to make a list of implementing partners and detailed nomenclature of supplies, to perform systematic and preliminary notification of Syrian authorities and to mark convoys. But none of that has been taken on board. We would like to get back to the Secretary-General's February report on the review of alternative modalities for the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah (S/2020/139), since it contains much more food for thought, especially now that the ongoing campaign to reopen Al-Yarubiyah heats up and new arguments are taken out of an old box. No clear explanation is provided for why five other crossing points to the east of the Euphrates controlled by Damascus cannot be used. In the Secretary-General's report, it is clearly stated that using those five would not require Security Council authorization. Our understanding of the problem with using those crossing points is that it would entail a request for the consent of Damascus. As for recommendations in the report on the improvement of cross-line deliveries - which allegedly do not function properly but are in fact the source of the bulk of humanitarian assistance in Syria - the solution depends on one thing only: whether there is strong interest on the part of humanitarians in delivering aid to those most in need rather than in inventing artificial obstacles and blaming Damascus. When the Government of Syria is required, in paragraph 47 (c), to "approve access to all areas and facilities within north-east to ensure that assistance reaches all people in need, impartially and without discrimination", OCHA forgets that some of those areas are not under the control of Damascus and, as such, Damascus simply cannot guarantee the demanded provisions. Such issues must be negotiated with local authorities. Does the United Nations have a plan on how to do it and how to guarantee, for its part, that the assistance will reach the most vulnerable? That applies to wherever the assistance comes from. Let us turn to another recommendation, that in para 47 (d), addressing the "facilitation of deliveries by local authorities in the north-east to all locations without delay". Whose prerogative is it to negotiate with local authorities? Who should be responsible for it? Who is the United Nations addressing this question to? Maybe our American colleagues can help with it? I wish to welcome the first road convoy of the World Health Organization to the north-east. We definitely need to study this example carefully. The International Committee of the Red Cross and the non-governmental organization Medecins sans frontieres continue working to the east of the Euphrates as well. That means that, no matter how complicated conditions are, it is possible to deliver humanitarian aid to the north-east of Syria. What is needed is the will to do so. We would also like to welcome the intention of the United Nations to establish a laboratory in Qamishli based at the city's national hospital. We heard this good news that in Geneva from the Resident Coordinator in Damascus, Mr. Imran Riza. We would like to receive more information on United Nations plans in this regard: among other things, how it will be equipped and how will test samples be collected, especially in the hard-to-reach areas not under the control of Damascus? Concerning sanctions, repetitive slogans on humanitarian exemptions are - and I am sorry to say so - not worth a penny. I highly recommend that those colleagues - in particular Christoph, who addressed me yesterday - who keep insisting that unilateral restrictive measures are harmless to ordinary citizens should Google a recent European Union (EU) Commission guidance note on the provision of humanitarian aid to fight the COVID-19 pandemic in certain environments subject to EU restrictive measures, dated 11 May, which is specifically and in a timely manner focused on Syria. That document fully proves quite the opposite. Let me quote just one excerpt: "Sanctions may alter countries' ability to fight COVID-19 by affecting the procurement of certain goods and technologies, either because such goods are subject to restrictions (for instance, dual-use goods which can also be used for military purposes), or because the persons involved in their procurement are sanctioned. In addition, there may be an indirect, but significant effect caused by certain operators' unwillingness to engage in transactions related to a sanctioned country or individual, even if those are legitimate (over- compliance), for fear of accidentally violating the sanctions, or a lack of economic incentives to engage in comparison to the risks stemming from those transactions. In addition, those targeted by restrictive measures may pass on to the civilian population the economic consequences of international sanctions imposed on them, thus increasing hardship for the non-targeted civilian population". This relates to the claims aimed at whitewashing illegitimate sanctions regimes. As a recent example, I would cite the negative experience of the Norwegian Refugee Council when, owing to these restrictive measures, it refused to buy interactive educational programmes for children in Syria. I want to draw the attention of our Belgian colleagues, since they are responsible in the Council for the dossier on children. To sum up, I would say to colleagues, having negotiated resolutions on the cross-border mechanism each time we agreed on its urgent but temporary status, that they should not pretend they do not know about it, or probably they want to forget. They should stop cherry-picking their individual political dividends that have nothing to do with humanitarian principles. Today I would like to reiterate what I said last time. No time should be wasted on efforts to reopen the closed cross-border points. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs should be encouraged to work with Damascus to find routes and cross-border points as well as on cross-line deliveries to the north-east and throughout Syria. And, of course, we want to hear answers to our new set of questions.
