Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Prosecutor for briefing the Council on her
seventeenth report to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), on the situation in Libya. The
United Kingdom remains fully supportive of the work
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) to tackle
impunity in Libya and ensure that those responsible for
the most serious crimes of international concern are
held accountable.

The Prosecutor's latest report highlights once again
the highly troubling situation in Libya. It is particularly
concerning that the security and humanitarian
situations continue to deteriorate, with numerous
incidents of civilians being killed. The increasing
instability and violence benefit no one. The Libyan
people deserve better, and we must continue to support
the United Nations efforts to bring about the security
and stability that all Libyans should have. We call on
those involved in the conflict to commit to a ceasefire,
return to the United Nations-led process and respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law.

In that context, we would note with approval
that the Prosecutor issued a preventative statement
on 16 April calling on all parties and armed groups
involved in the fighting to respect fully the rules of
international humanitarian law and avoid committing
any crimes within the Court's jurisdiction. We note her
determination to pursue those who commit such crimes,
while fully respecting the principle of complementarity.
Separately, it is essential to negotiate humanitarian
pauses to allow innocent civilians, including displaced
persons, refugees and migrants, to be evacuated
to safety.

Despite the increasingly challenging environment,
we must ensure that all those who commit serious
breaches of international humanitarian law and human
rights violations and abuses in Libya, including unlawful
killings, are held accountable. The United Kingdom has
previously supported calls for accountability and for
those committing acts in Libya amounting to war crimes
or other serious breaches of international humanitarian
law to be investigated and, as appropriate, prosecuted.
Reports of such violations cannot be met with impunity.

The ICC has an important role to play. We once
again call on all parties to cooperate with the ICC,
including through the execution of outstanding arrest
warrants. The United Kingdom is grateful for the
Prosecutor's reports on the cases against Mr. Al-Werfalli,
Mr. Khaled, Mr. Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Al-Senussi and
notes in particular the Prosecutor's update on the
Court's activities in relation to Mr. Al-Qadhafi. The
United Kingdom believes that it is important for the
people of Libya that the Court continue its efforts to
see those and other individuals in relation to whom it
is working brought to justice. We note in particular that
Mr. Al-Werfalli apparently still continues to be at large
within Libya.

The United Kingdom notes with deep concern the
deteriorating situation of displaced persons, migrants
and refugees in Libya. We will continue to work
closely with other Member States, the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan Prosecutor General's Office
in the investigation of reports of appalling crimes and
human rights violations and abuses, such as torture,
unlawful killings, sexual violence and forced labour,
some of which have been perpetrated by militias and
armed groups in Libya against migrants, including
international migrants transiting through Libya.

We are also appalled by the conditions and abuses
that some migrants face in detention facilities and
call on the Libyan authorities to pursue alternatives
to detention. The human rights of displaced persons,
migrants and refugees must be respected. We
acknowledge the work of the ICC in tackling human
trafficking. The United Kingdom has been clear on the
need to do more to break the business model of people
smugglers and to tackle organized immigration crime.

The United Kingdom continues to be a strong,
principled supporter of the work of the ICC. We will
continue to provide our full support to the Prosecutor
and her team while they carry out their investigations.
In the light of the devastating security situation, it is as
important as ever that the Council monitor and assess
developments in Libya and that States support the
Prosecutor in her efforts. The international community
must be united in its condemnation of the situation
in Libya and provide its full support to combat the
challenges faced there, including through calls for
a ceasefire and a return to the United Nations-led
political process.

