Mr. Moreno Zapata (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. We also appreciate the briefing and report
by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman.

The situation of conflict on the ground in the Middle
East has not changed. The reiteration of statements that
most States have made during the debate convened
by the Council on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, cannot be viewed
merely as words. It is about a renewal of momentum
and the maintaining of pressure by the international
community in order to achieve a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the region. The Security Council
has adopted many resolutions on the issue of Palestine
since 1947, and Israel has fulfilled none of them.

The impunity with which the occupying Power
acts, flouting the resolutions adopted by this body,
strip from it any credible authority or morality to judge
anyone. Its criminal record of assassinations, torture,
disappearances, apartheid, arbitrary detentions, among
other crimes against the Palestinian people, continues
to horrify the world.

Notwithstanding any negotiations that may be
taking place, we have to realize the need for a positive
atmosphere, and for such an atmosphere it is vital to
stop the settlements policy of the occupying Power,
Israel. That is an indispensable prerequisite for holding
any kind of conversation. Moreover, the situation
clearly shows a waning in the power of mediation that is
exacerbated, not only by the use of the veto to block the
application of sanctions against the occupying Power,
Israel, but also by the fact that the mediation is being
conducted by a partner of the Government of Israel.

Acts of aggression by settlers against the Palestinian
population and segregationist controls and roadblocks
and illegal settlements are ongoing. They sabotage the
peace process, negotiations and violate the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
humanitarian law, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Venezuela reiterates to the Council that
there is a need to address the situation using the purview
granted to this body by the Charter of the United
Nations. And we fervently endorse a Palestinian State
that is independent, viable and territorially contiguous,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The State of Palestine has shown that it is
committed to participating in negotiations in good
faith, but the ongoing Israeli aggression against its
sovereignty and territorial integrity and the ongoing
threat to the viability of the two-State solution
make peace impossible in the region. The constant
provocations and attacks, such as those that occurred at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and against Palestinian cemeteries,
churches and mosques, are all elements that lead to the
deterioration of the negotiations. The announcement
by the Government of Israel to move forward with a
settlement plan on Palestinian territory that includes
3,000 illegal settlements constitutes an act of aggression
that places them on the margins of international law
before the international community. Such war crimes,
acts of State terrorism and systematic violations of
human rights committed against Palestinians must be
tried in international tribunals.

Israel's frequent violations of Lebanon's sovereignty
and its occupation of the Golan are also a source of great
concern. It is deplorable that, rather than encouraging
peace and supporting efforts to achieve a space of
dialogue, as is claimed for the "Geneva II" conference,
some countries - acting from outside - are instigating
the more extremist and terrorist factions in Syria to
continue the violence. Only political dialogue and
diplomatic negotiations can contribute to solving the
conflict that is affecting the Syrian people.

The warmongers do not want peace in Syria. They
seek to bolster their geopolitical interests through
regime change. They aim to destroy Syria and create
a new political map in the Middle East. That is
empowering terrorist groups like Jubhat Al-Nusra and
Al-Qaida, which represent opposition forces linked to
atrocities, including the destruction of the Twin Towers
in this very city, an event that shook the entire world.
Financing or encouraging such groups, which deny the
existence of anyone who thinks differently from them,
be they Christian, Muslim or Jew, and which promote
hatred and the suppression of women, is a crime against
humanity and compromises world peace.

In that regard, the Venezuelan Government regrets
and deplores the terrorist acts recently committed in
the suburbs of Damascus in which 30 people died at the
hands of the groups I have just mentioned.

Venezuela encourages a negotiated solution to
the conflict in Syria and commends the Government
of Syria for its initiative in joining the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their
Destruction.

