Ms. Landgren: The Secretary-General's report
before the Council (S/2009/553) is being submitted
pursuant to resolution 1879 (2009) of 23 July, which
requested him to report, by 30 October, on the
implementation of the resolution and on progress in
creating conditions conducive to the completion of the
activities of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) by the end of the current mandate, including
implementation of the commitments made in the
Nepalese Government's letter of 7 July (8/2009/360, annex). It surveys recent developments in Nepal's
peace process. In brief, while limited progress has been
made in the effort to give renewed impetus to the
remaining tasks of the peace process, overall the
process has faced protracted deadlock, with the added
risk of confrontation.

It is three years since the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement was signed and 18 months since Nepal's
historic elections. The impasse that emerged following
the events of May 2009, when the President revoked
the Army Chief's dismissal and the Unified Communist
Party of Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M) consequently stepped
down from the Government, remains unresolved.
Despite continuing efforts, the level of trust among the
major parties has continued to dwindle.

Much of the past three months has offered a
semblance of calm. Nepal's long festive season
coincided with a sharp uptick in meetings among the
large political parties and fewer street protests. Now,
however, the Maoists - having found no resolution to
their grievances, notably on the issue of the President's
powers with regard to the Army - have stepped up
their disruptive protests, and on 1 November initiated a
nationwide protest programme. Talks between the
parties are expected to continue, but now, four months
after Prime Minister Nepal and Maoist Chairman
Pushpa Kamal Dahal "Prachanda" agreed formally to
take measures to resolve the stalemate, their talks
remain inconclusive.

While the Maoist protests have been
predominantly peaceful, the past few days have seen
low-level clashes in some eastern districts between the
Maoist-affiliated Young Communist League and the
Unified Marxist-Leninist Youth Force. In my recent
discussions with the Maoist leadership, I have
09-59689

 

indicated how seriously we take the potential for
confrontation and have urged restraint. In the current
climate these protest actions carry a significant risk of
confrontation and violence. The Government has
placed the security agencies, reportedly including the
Nepal Army, on high alert. The 22 governing parties
have warned that the agitations are a breach of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. Some political
actors have challenged the continued validity of the
peace agreements. There is an urgent need to
de-escalate the tensions and to find a framework for
taking the peace process forward.

The Secretary-General's report highlights the
renewed effort being made to define the modalities for
the integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army
personnel. The Special Committee charged with the
supervision, integration and rehabilitation of Maoist
army personnel resumed its work on 1 September. Its
Technical Committee has also resumed its work.
Concrete progress on integration and rehabilitation is
likely to depend on the existence of a favourable
political environment. Similarly, a new effort is under
way to move forward in the near future to discharge the
Maoist army personnel disqualified through UNMIN's
verification. On 11 October, Government teams briefed
Maoist army personnel in the main cantonment and
satellite camps in Sindhuli on the discharge process
and on possible support packages. This was the first
such contact. The Peace Minister, senior Maoist leaders,
UNMIN and the United Nations country team are
cooperating to develop the modalities for discharge.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, hopes to return to Nepal before the
year is out to assess progress on discharge, which upon
full implementation would open the door to removing
the Maoists from the Secretary-General's list of parties
using children in conflict.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, the
Maoists have blocked the functioning of the legislature
for all but one month since May, contending that the
President's reinstatement of the Army Chief was
unconstitutional. They have unsuccessfully called for
Parliamentary discussion on the President's action, as
well as measures to rule out a recurrence. It would
appear to be in the interest of the democratic process
for the parties to agree, pending the promulgation of
the new constitution, on the ambit of presidential
authority.

 

Moving forward through consensus is the central
challenge of the moment for the parties. As long ago as
July 2008 (see S/PV.5938), my predecessor expressed
concern at the breakdown of efforts to find consensus
on the establishment of a coalition Government. The
parties themselves have long recognized the need for a
unity Government if the peace process is to be success.
The impact on the peace process of a major party's
being in opposition, as the Nepali Congress was
previously and the Maoists are today, is evident,
especially in the absence of other inter-party
mechanisms to unite the parties and help address
problems. The Maoists represent one party to the peace
agreement and are the instrumental partner in the
integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel.
They also hold close to 40 per cent of the seats in the
Constituent Assembly, a decisive proportion in the
context of the promulgation of a new constitution.

In July, the Security Council called on the
Government (see resolution 1879 (2009)) to continue
to take the necessary decisions to create conditions
conducive to completion of UNMIN's activities. The
mandate of UNMIN, originally designed for supporting
the election of the Constituent Assembly, cannot go on
indefinitely. The present mandate will expire in
11 weeks. During this period, the parties need to arrest
the loss of momentum and invest goodwill, realism and
rigour in their pursuit of sustainable peace in Nepal.
Until the parties establish a clearer framework for
cooperation and find ways of moving forward on major
elements of the peace process, it will be difficult to
plot a structured exit for UNMIN.

Three years on, a review of progress in the
implementation of the major peace agreements may be
overdue. The principal parties should also be
encouraged to take stock of the state of the peace
process. The parties themselves have repeatedly
underlined their continued commitment to this process
and their intention to see it through to a positive end. It
would be tragic if the successes so far were permitted
to unravel. Nepali politicians, civil society and
commentators repeatedly draw to our attention their
ability to produce agreements and consensus at the
eleventh hour. It is still possible that these coming days
will yield such a breakthrough. We strongly encourage
the parties to recall and to repeat the cooperation which
has to date yielded such significant achievements.
Let me conclude by expressing, on behalf of the
United Nations Missions in Nepal, our warmest

 

appreciation for Ambassador Madhu Raman Acharya
for his efforts, engagement and support in our shared
aim. It has been a pleasure to work with him; I thank
him and we wish him all the best.

