Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me seize this opportunity to offer our deepest condolences to the families and loved ones of the victims of the plane crash outside Tehran. We hope that all circumstances of that tragic event will be fully investigated. Allow me also to congratulate you, Mr. President, both on your assumption of the Security Council presidency this month and on the commencement of your Council membership. We have full confidence that Viet Nam will contribute greatly to international peace and security over the next two years. I also thank you, Sir, for giving us this opportunity to discuss the relevance of the Charter of the United Nations, which is now more relevant than ever. The upcoming seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations is indeed an opportune moment to deliberate on how to uphold and ensure adherence to the Charter of the United Nations - the cornerstone of the international rules-based order - and how to contribute to achieving its unavoidably linked and mutually reinforcing aims - peace and security, respect for human rights, justice and international law, social progress and the expansion of freedom. But discussions are not enough. What is necessary is determined action towards achieving those goals. Given the time restraints, let me provide just a few action-oriented examples that are limited to the focus area of our meeting, that is, what we, the peoples of the United Nations, Member States, the Security Council and the United Nations as a whole could do. First, we must respect and promote respect for international law, including the very basic principles enshrined in the Charter, which many of my colleagues have already highlighted. Therefore, we must react to any violation of those principles, in particular the gravest ones, such as the Russian Federation's illegal annexation of Ukrainian Crimea and _ the city of Sevastopol. Russia's claims of sovereignty over territory seized by force in contravention of international law - including the Charter, which obliges States to refrain from the use of force against the territorial integrity of any State - should not and cannot be recognized. Acting in line with the Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly resolution 68/262, the States Members of the United Nations should reaffirm their commitment to the sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders. Secondly, we must take steps in order to prevent and punish atrocity crimes, including by joining the relevant international legal instruments and implementing them. We must promote our work on a convention on crimes against humanity, ensure that relevant laws and human rights are upheld at all times, and report on genuine, measurable change at the domestic level to prevent atrocity crimes. A number of further, practically-oriented ideas in that regard are contained in documents S/2018/560 and S/2019/48, which are the respective takeaways from the Council's debate on upholding international law within the context of the maintenance of international peace and security, convened by Poland during our presidency on 17 May 2018 (see S/PV.8262), and the Arria Formula meeting on raising the effectiveness of atrocity crimes prevention, convened by Poland, Belgium, Cete d'Ivoire, Germany, Kuwait and Peru on 10 December 2018. Thirdly, we must fully implement Security Council resolutions, as highlighted by the Secretary-General, including those on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, such as resolution 2475 (2019), on persons with disabilities. We must therefore take measures in accordance with our obligations under applicable international law to protect civilians, including those with disabilities; to prevent violence and abuses against civilians in armed conflict, including killing, maiming, abduction and torture; and to prevent rape and other forms of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict situations. Another issue that is of utmost importance to us is ensuring full respect for international humanitarian law. It is deeply regrettable that, recently, we have once again witnessed the systematic violation of those laws. Here, I wish to recall S/PRST/2019/8, adopted in connection with the seventieth anniversary of the adoption of the universally ratified Geneva Conventions of 1949. Allow me to stress that compliance with international law, including international humanitarian law, is not a matter of choice. It is both our legal and moral obligation. Finally, notwithstanding the recent conclusion of Poland's 2018-2019 term on the Security Council, the organ that bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, we will continue to contribute towards that goal, including by upholding the Charter of the United Nations, fulfilling in good faith the obligations assumed under it, and bringing the aims of the United Nations closer to realization. We call on others to do the same. Solidarity, responsibility and commitment - both within and outside of the Council - are needed and expected by the peoples of the United Nations.
