Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): We
are pleased to see you, Sir, the representative of the
friendly country of Pakistan, presiding over the
Security Council this month. Of course, we thank you
for all your efforts.

Our thanks also go to Germany, last month's
President of the Council, and its Permanent
Representative.

Allow me to join you, Sir, in welcoming the
presence of Secretary-General Kofi Annan to this
important meeting.

We express our appreciation to the Security
Council for its adoption of resolution 1544 (2004) and
hope that the Council will follow up on compliance
with and implementation of its provisions, an essential
matter under the United Nations Charter. We also hope,
of course, that Israel, the occupying Power, will
comply with the resolution and with the provisions of
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Times of War. First and foremost,
however, it must immediately cease its ongoing
military operations in the Rafah area. For our part, we
stand ready, as we have emphasized in the past, to fulfil
our obligations under the road map and to return to the
negotiating table.

(spoke in English)

Over the past few days and throughout the period
since I last addressed the Security Council on the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, Israel, the occupying Power,
has continued and intensified its barbaric military
campaign against the Palestinian people. Flagrant
violations and grave breaches of international law -
war crimes - are being committed by the occupying
Power against the Palestinian civilian population every
single day, including at this very moment.

In this regard, I believe that it is necessary to
recall before this Council that wilful killing, wilfully
causing great suffering or serious injury to body or
healt h, and extensive destruction and appropriation of
property, not justified by military necessity and carried
out unlawfully and wantonly, are among those acts
considered to constitute grave breaches of the Fourth
Geneva Convention.

In grave breach of the Convention, which governs
military occupation, and in serious Violation of other
relevant provisions of international law, Israel
continues to use excessive and indiscriminate force
against Palestinian civilians, killing men, women and
children, and wantonly to destroy Palestinian homes
and properties in the occupied Palestinian territories,
particularly in the Rafah area of the Gaza Strip. Left
defenceless and unprotected by the international
community, the Palestinian people continue to suffer
the wrath of Israel's violent and lethal occupation
policies and practices.

The slaughter today of innocent Palestinian
children by the Israeli occupying forces in the Rafah
camp is the most recent and most telling illustration of
the vicious and barbaric behaviour and actions of that
occupying Power. The occupying forces fired at least
one missile and several tank shells at a large crowd of
about 3,000 Palestinians marching from Rafah towards
the Tel Sultan neighbourhood in Rafah in protest
against the invasion and destruction of their
neighbourhood and the killing of their families, friends
and loved ones. These people were unarmed
demonstrators, many of them schoolchildren. While the
situation on the ground remains chaotic, as of now it is
being reported that at least 10 Palestinian civilians
were killed in this assault, most of them children; that
more than 60 civilians were wounded, including
women and children, more than 30 of them in critical
condition; and that nine other Palestinians were also
killed today in the same area.

This is terrorism. This is State terrorism. These
are war crimes, for which the perpetrators must be held
accountable under international law. What we have
seen today and in recent days and months - the blood
of Palestinian civilians flowing in the streets, the
demolition of their homes, and their constant
humiliation, suffering and collective punishment - is
exactly what the Palestinian people have been
subjected to under nearly 37 years of Israel's
belligerence. It has been a constant barrage of war
crimes, State terrorism and systematic human rights
Violations, for which the international community must
hold this occupying Power responsible. The
lawlessness and impunity of Israel must be brought to
an end, and the Palestinian people must be accorded
their rights under international law, including their
right to protection as a civilian population under
occupation.

Since the start of this month of May, the Israeli
occupying forces have killed at least 96 Palestinians,
including 28 children. This is the Palestinian death toll
in less than three weeks' time. This has included
brothers and sisters, fathers and sons. Families and
lives are being destroyed by the occupying Power on a
wholesale basis as it continues launching military
assaults against the Palestinian population. The rate of
death and destruction is staggering and continues to
rise. From September 2000 to date, more than 3,000
Palestinians - men and women, children and the
elderly - have been killed by the Israeli occupying
forces. To be exact, at least 3,023 Palestinians have
been killed. Many were the targets of extra-judicial
killings by the occupying forces, and nearly 600 of the
total number of Palestinians killed were children. In
that same time period, more than 40,000 Palestinians
have also been wounded by the occupying forces.

Palestinian hospitals and emergency rescue
personnel, poorly equipped and in desperate need of
supplies, have been unable to keep up with the growing
number of casualties. Morgues have been unable to
keep up with the rising number of dead. Funerals for
the martyred have become a daily occurrence. The
bloodshed and loss caused by the occupying Power has
been great, because Israel has breached every single
one of its obligations under international law as an
occupying Power. It has blatantly violated all norms
and standards of international law, including
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
and has completely ignored the pleas of the
international community to cease its violations against
the Palestinian civilian population and to adhere to
international law and uphold its obligations. Why?
Because that is the core of the mentality of this
occupier; it is brutal, Vicious and inhumane in all
actions against the occupied people, seeking to torment
them and impose on them maximum loss, misery and
suffering while pursuing its illegitimate aims of
colonizing the land and expanding its boundaries.

In addition to the human losses and devastation it
is causing, Israel continues to pursue its illegal and
inhumane practice of destroying Palestinian homes and
properties, causing widespread destruction and material
losses and compounding the grief, suffering and
humanitarian hardships of the Palestinian people.
Thousands of homes and thousands of dunums of
Palestinian land have been destroyed by the Israeli
occupying forces throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories since September 2000. Tens of thousands of
Palestinians have been made homeless, the majority of
them Palestine refugees who have been displaced and
dispossessed yet again.

During the past several days, the occupying
Power has escalated this unlawful practice in the Rafah
area of the Gaza Strip, including in particular in the
Rafah refugee camp, causing excessive and vast
destruction. Using armoured bulldozers, tanks and
helicopter gunships, the Israeli occupying forces have
raided the area, terrorizing the civilian population and
destroying dozens of homes - even attacking some of
them while the families were still inside.

Reports indicate that in just the past few days
more than 100 homes have been completely destroyed
by the occupying forces in Rafah. Some estimates put
the toll of destruction much higher, at about 120
homes, and fears continue to rise that even more will
be destroyed as Israeli officials threaten to demolish
hundreds more homes. As a result of these most recent
assaults, more than 1,100 Palestinians have been made
homeless, and hundreds of other Palestinians have been
fleeing the area, fearing the impending destruction of
their homes and property.

Tragically, this is not the first time that the Rafah
refugee camp and surrounding area have been besieged
and attacked by the Israeli occupying forces. Since
September 2000, the Rafah area has been severely
targeted. As many here may recall, just over a year ago,
a young American, Rachel Corrie, was brutally crushed
by a huge armoured Caterpillar bulldozer while trying
to prevent the demolition of Palestinian homes in
Rafah. Regrettably, those responsible for her tragic
death did not even have to explain. They were not held
accountable, and the practice of bulldozing the homes
of innocent civilians did not cease. Indeed, as home
after home and building after building in Rafah are
destroyed by the Israeli occupying forces, the entire
community is being torn apart, piece by piece, and laid
to ruin. Since September 2000, more than 1,300 homes
in Rafah alone have been demolished or severely
damaged and made unliveable, and more than 12,000
Palestinians have been made homeless.

The humanitarian impact has been overwhelming.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestinian Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has
been unable to keep pace with the widespread
destruction being caused by the occupying Power
within the refugee camps. It has been struggling to
provide shelter to house all those who have been
displaced and is still trying to repair and rebuild the
thousands of refugee homes that have been damaged or
destroyed since the start of this military campaign,
while now faced with even more destruction and
displacement. Yet, within its limited resources,
UNRWA continues to provide tents, food and other
relief for those devastated refugee families.

With the ongoing military operation being carried
out by the Israeli occupying forces in the Rafah area
and the declarations made by Israeli officials that
hundreds more Palestinian homes there are targeted for
demolition, it is clearer than ever that the aim of those
Israeli actions is the effective levelling of the Rafah
camp and areas in the city of Rafah itself to allow for
the enlargement of the so-called security zone by the
occupying Power. Indeed, some of the statements made
by Israeli officials are starkly clear about this very
intention. These ongoing actions are part and parcel,
and reveal the exact meaning, of Prime Minister
Sharon's "disengagement plan". This is, of course, an
attempt to isolate the Gaza Strip from the outside
world, ensuring that it has no border with Egypt and
thus ensuring the creation of a large prison for the
Palestinian civilian population in Gaza.

I wish to impart some basic information about
Gaza for the benefit of those who may be unaware of
it. Gaza covers a total of only 360 square kilometres. It
is a very poor and deprived area with no natural
resources - not even water - and constitutes the most
densely populated area in the world per square
kilometre, with a population of more than 1.3 million
people. More than 10 years after Oslo, at least 35 per
cent of Gaza remains under the full control of Israel,
for the sheer enjoyment of 7,000 colonial Israeli
settlers illegally transferred there, and the entirety of
Gaza remains a killing field for the Israeli occupying
forces to continue their target practice against the other
human beings - the Palestinians - who have the
misfortune to live there.

Racist ideologies have always fuelled colonialist
phenomena, and throughout history colonizers have
always committed crimes against the colonized or
occupied people. The occupation of the Palestinian
territory since 1967 is no exception. However, it must
be said that the occupation of Gaza takes the
phenomenon to a different level. The occupation of this
poverty-stricken area, the relentless killing of its
civilian inhabitants, the wanton destruction of homes
and shelters and the constant imposition of suffering on
the masses there defy all logic and reason. These
constitute transgressions against the most fundamental
rights and dignity of persons, for which the violators
must be held accountable and must be punished. The
same applies to those who want to make sure that they
destroy what is actually left in Gaza before they
presumably leave it.

As I said at the beginning of my statement, the
wilful killing and injury of civilians constitutes a grave
breach - a war crime. Without a doubt, therefore,
Israel is committing war crimes against the Palestinian
people repeatedly. The demolition of one home
constitutes collective punishment. The excessive and
large-scale demolition of homes and confiscation of
property constitute grave breaches: war crimes. This
must all be unequivocally condemned by the
international community, and measures should be taken
to ensure the cessation of all such breaches. Action
should be taken to ensure the protection, the safety and
the well-being of the Palestinian civilian population
under Israeli occupation. Action should also be taken
to ensure that due reparations are made to those whose
homes and properties have been destroyed.

The international community, including through
the Security Council and the Quartet, must act firmly
and collectively to uphold international law, to counter
the precipitous decline of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and to
prevent the complete extinguishing of any hope for a
resumption of the peace process towards the resolution
of this tragic and unjust conflict.

We reiterate our appreciation to all the members
of the Council.

