Mr. Searle (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): On
many occasions when the Security Council has met to deal
with the situation in Liberia, we have had to refer to
breaches of the cease-fire, to resumptions of hostilities and,
in general, to continually unfulfilled agreements.

My delegation hopes that we are coming to the end of
that cycle of tragedies that has characterized the peace
process in Liberia and that the new timetable for
implementation of the Abuja Agreement, agreed to at the
recent Summit of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) on 17 August, will mark the
beginning of the final restoration of peace and stability to,
and the reconstruction of, Liberia.

We appreciate the extremely valuable and effective
role played by ECOWAS and the positive events that the
Secretary-General relates in his latest report to the
Security Council. These enable us to consider favourably
at this time a three-month extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL),
as well as to maintain the deployment of this force at
appropriate levels.

Furthermore, the appeal contained in the draft
resolution to provide logistical and financial support so
that ECOMOG can carry out its mandate is fully in
keeping with the above.

In the context of the new schedule for implementing
the Abuja Agreement, we attach particular importance to
the monitoring mechanism that enables ECOWAS to
monitor compliance with the planned stages, as well as to
the warning of measures that may be taken against those
who might obstruct the Agreements.

The statement made by the Heads of State of
ECOWAS that they would not recognize any government
that came to power in Liberia through the use of force is
very relevant, in the view of my delegation, since that is
an essential element for laying the foundation of any
lasting process of peace and reconciliation.

Furthermore, we welcome the designation of the new
Chairperson of the Council of State, and particularly the
fact that that decision reflects the increasing influence of
Liberian civilian society in the peace process. My
delegation urges that efforts continue at all levels to
ensure that that influence grows, because we are
convinced that it will be the most effective manner to
achieve peace and stability for all Liberians.

In considering the peace process over the years, we
think that it is timely to warn the leaders of the factions
that they must bear clearly in mind that the international
community's patience is not unlimited. The reprehensible
events of last April, characterized by threats to the
security of the people and the personnel of international
organizations, as well as the generalized looting of
property, cannot be tolerated again. Even less can we
tolerate the continuation of the inhuman and barbaric
practice of recruiting, training and using children in
combat. For this reason, my delegation decidedly supports
Italy's initiative, which has been supported by the Council
and is reflected in paragraph 9 of the draft resolution
before us.

 

We hope that actions, more than promises, will enable
this Council to continue to back the peace process in
Liberia and that the timetable decided in Abuja will be
complied with without delay so that by installing in June
1997 a new, democratically elected government, the people
of Liberia will start on its long-desired path to progress,
development and well-being.

In conclusion, we wish to express our gratitude to the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Ambassador James
Jonah; his Special Representative, Mr. Anthony Nyakyi;
and to all the military and civilian personnel of UNOMIL
and humanitarian agencies who have been sorely tried in
recent times, and who are now beginning this new stage
with renewed hope.

