Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Mr. Farid Zarif for his comprehensive briefing. Rwanda
commends the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in the
implementation of its mandate under the leadership
of Mr. Zarif. I appreciate the statement made by
Mr. Daeic', Prime Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Thaci,
Prime Minister of Kosovo. I welcome them both to New
York.

On the political arena, we are pleased to hear that,
as reported in our last briefing (see S/PV.7026), Serbia
and Kosovo have continued to work together in the
implementation of the first agreement on principles
governing the normalization of relations, on 19 April
2013. Rwanda welcomes the successful elections
conducted in Kosovo between 3 and 17 November.
While we condemn the violence and interruptions
at three polling stations in northern Kosovo caused
by some groups, we commend the role played by the
parties for the successful completion of those historic
elections. It is very important for all parties to continue
to work together towards the resolution of oustanding
issues, especially the establishment of administration
and security institutions.

On the security situation, while we note that it
has remained generally calm, we are very concerned
about incidents reported in ethnically mixed areas. We
strongly condemn the attack on the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) convoy on
route to gate 1 in northern Kosovo on 19 September,
which resulted in the death of a EULEX officer. We
extend our condolences to EULEX and Lithuania, as
well as to the family ofthe deceased. But we believe that
it is a good sign that Belgrade and Pristina, northern
Kosovo Serb leaders as well as international actors
have condemned those attacks. All parties concerned
must work together to bring the perpetrators to justice.

On the rule of law, we welcome the positive steps
undertaken by the Assembly of Kosovo, especially the
adoption of several laws aimed at improving rule-of-
law standards. We also commend the continued
implementation of the protocol on integrated border/
boundary management between Serbia and Kosovo,
signed on 19 March.

As the report (S/2013/631) of the Secretary-General
makes clear, much more effort is still needed on the
issue offinding missing persons and on the performance
of the Kosovo judiciary. We commend the continued
support of UNMIK and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo in that regard.

On human rights, it is clear that Kosovo is
making tremendous efforts aimed at promoting the
rights of minorities. We welcome the adoption of
the comprehensive policy documents related to the
promotion of the rights of minorities, as well as the
recommendations to increase the allocation of funds
from the central budget for that purpose.

The finalization of the action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
inclusion on the Kosovo legislative agenda of the new
draft law on gender equality are also commendable
steps. While urging Kosovo to translate all those efforts
into tangible actions, we commend UNMIK, UNESCO
and the European Union for their invariable support in
that regard.

Before I conclude, allow me to emphasize that
coexistence and tolerance among all communities
in Kosovo is very crucial for a brighter future and
reconciliation in the region. I commend UNMIK for
its continued facilitation of activities by UNESCO in
Kosovo with regard to cultural and religious heritage.
We also urge local authorities to refrain from obstructing
the implementation of decisions taken in that regard.

Finally, it is very important for the authorities in
Kosovo to redouble their efforts in creating a conducive
atmosphere for the safe return of refugees to their
homes. We believe that that could bolster the number
of refugees willing to return to their homes, which is
inevitable for ensuring sustainable peace.

