Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting, which complements the meeting convened by the State of Kuwait during its presidency of the Council in February 2018 (see S/PV.8185) on the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and Mrs. Mary Robinson for their informative briefings. At the outset, I want to underscore the dangerous escalation in the Gulf region, which is a source of grave concern for all of us. Its repercussions could affect the security and stability of the region. We echo the repeated appeal of the Secretary-General for de-escalation by calling for restraint in order to address the situation politically and prevent further tensions and threats. Seventy-five years after the creation of the United Nations, the Charter continues to be a constitution that guides multilateral action. It is an instrument of international law that outlines a clear framework for governing relations among States. It also provides measures that allow us to address threats to international peace and security in a collective and effective way. The purposes and principles of the Charter include action to establish friendly relations among States by working collectively in a unifying manner in the face of aggression, while respecting the principles of sovereignty and non-interference in internal affairs of others. The Charter, its purposes and principles represent the first line of defence for small countries. We in the State of Kuwait recognize that very well. The liberation of Kuwait in 1991 clearly demonstrated what the international community can do when it acts under the auspices of the United Nations. Security Council resolutions aim to champion the rule Organizationf law, right and justice. Kuwait's liberation is a successful historic example of the ability of the Security Council to put an end to aggression and to violations of the noble purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. During our term, we were guided by the Charter when dealing with the issues on its agenda. We are confident that the Council could be more effective in addressing the challenges of today's world by utilizing the instruments provided to it by the Charter, including by making the best possible use of Chapter VI, which includes the peaceful settlement of disputes, mediation and arbitration. We also emphasize that the Council must give more attention to precautionary measures aimed at preventing disputes by addressing them at an early stage. We strongly believe in the constructive role that could be played by regional and subregional organizations in maintaining peace and security at the regional and international levels in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. Greater cooperation should take place between the Security Council and regional organizations. During our term on the Council, we introduced a presidential statement on cooperation between the United Nations and the League of Arab States (S/PRST/2019/5). We hope that the Council will follow this up with a view to promoting dialogue between the League and the Security Council, all the more so because many of the items on the agenda of the Security Council relate to Arab issues. We therefore welcome Viet Nam's intention to hold a debate this month on cooperation between the United Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. In conclusion, the success achieved by the tools provided by the Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security will depend on unity and consensus within the Council. Over the decades, we have seen the Council unable to resolve some crises owing to deep-rooted differences between the positions of its members and to the use of the veto. Consequently, we stress the importance of the Council showing unity so that it can uphold its responsibilities under the Charter and take firm and effective decisions to counter the dangerous threats and challenges facing our world in this new decade.
