Mr. Therriault: A capable and accountable police
force is a key social and institutional asset for any
society. When citizens see themselves in their police,
trust their State institutions and see their dignity and
safety in good hands, citizens trust each other, the
social contract holds and, above all, peace holds.
(spoke in French)

United Nations doctrine is positioned to view the
role of United Nations Police in the broader context of
the rule of law and to ensure that the rule of law and
human rights are fully integrated into its activities.
Police services are a part of governance that aim
to ensure that the rights of all persons, without any
distinction, are protected, encouraged and respected
and that personnel reflect the communities they serve.

(spoke in English)

The greatest comparative advantage of the United
Nations Police may lie in the fact that it brings
international legitimacy to efforts aimed at developing
local police. Through its independence, impartiality,
commitment to United Nations values and respect for
international human rights standards, it contributes
to building local confidence in the police and reaches
into all spheres of society to promote the rule of law.
The United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), which is the only peacekeeping
mission without a military presence, is a perfect example
ofthat. MINUJUSTH relies on its 295 individual police
officers and seven formed police units deployed across
the nation to promote safety and security through joint
operations with the Haitian National Police as a united
and professional critical mass of peace officers.

Among other achievements, that arrangement has
enabled the continuous development of the Haitian
National Police's public order management and its
capacity, under the guidance of collocated international
police advisers, to positively impact the security and
stability perception, which is undermined when
democratic protests turn into violence. In addition, the
United Nations Police has the advantage of acting as
part ofa larger mission. Thus, it benefits from access to
political influence and additional specialized services
offered by other mission components.

In accordance with its Strategic Guidance
Framework for International Police Peacekeeping and
with a view to professionalizing the Haitian National
Police, the police component of MINUJUSTH promotes
the rule of law in Haiti in consultation with other actors
on human rights, community violence reduction, gender
and internal control mechanisms, to name a few. In fact,
by continuing to support the development of the Haitian
National Police General Inspectorate, the United
Nations Police ensures that when it withdraws, it will
be eventually replaced by a robust oversight mechanism
that will be able to maintain internal controls, conduct
audits, investigate human rights violations and provide
recommendations for continuous improvements and the
professionalization of the Haitian National Police.

(spoke in French)

In recent years, the fact that the United Nations
Police has been an integral part of overall efforts to
reform the security andjustice systems has also been an
advantage because it has enabled missions to address
the issue of the rule of law in a more coordinated and
comprehensive manner. Police reform has a multiplier
effect as a vehicle for stability in every society and
plays a central role in all approaches to conflict
prevention. For the Haitian National Police, significant
progress has been made as a result of the involvement
of all stakeholders in the implementation of the reform
and development plans from 2005 to 2016 and the
implementation of the 2017-2021 strategic plan.

In addition, there are now 15,735 members of
the Haitian National Police force, 1,568 of whom
are women. That is the police force that will ensure
public security throughout the country following the
departure of MINUJUSTH. In 2004, when the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti was established,
the Haitian National Police had approximately 6,000
officers, which means that over time, and with the
support of the United Nations, the Haitian National
Police has increased its strength more than twofold.

(spoke in English)

Generations of United Nations police officers have
served in different missions around the world to build
the capacity of host States in preventing conflict and
sustaining peace through the increased participation
of women in peace operations, sharing their expertise
and a policing approach centred on the core notion
of a civilian police force built on professionalism,
transparency and accountability. Those men and
women, working in synergy, have risen to the challenge
of supporting police reform in failed and fragile
States to empower national authorities to protect their
populations and create the conditions for the prevalence
of the rule of law.

