Mr. Mercado (Philippines): My delegation joins
other delegations in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this public meeting to pursue continuity and
follow-up with regard to the work of the Security
Council in Central Africa. My delegation also
expresses its appreciation to Assistant Secretary-
General Kalomoh for his introduction of the Secretary-
General's progress report (S/2004/52).

The Central African subregion is the heart of the
continent, and its peace and stability have considerable
impact on the entire region. The report of the
Secretary-General is fittingly titled, since there has
been significant progress in the implementation of the
recommendations of the mission in the past seven
months. The international community should capitalize
on that positive momentum and should continue to
build upon the achievements to date.

My delegation wishes to preface its statement by
concurring with the view expressed by the
multidisciplinary assessment mission that visited the
Central African region from 8 to 22 June 2003 and
concluded that

"the prospects for positive change remain high,
especially if the international community
maintains and intensifies its partnership with
subregional organizations, Governments and civil
society groups to address the problems
confronting Central Africa." (S/2003/1077, p. 3)

The Security Council mission led by France set
out the direction and provided the impetus for progress
in Central Africa. Despite the present challenges, the
Council and the international community must sustain
their efforts in the subregion. It is in that light that my
delegation wishes to highlight the following.

Concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we wish to commend the Congolese, the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the African
Union, particularly the Troika - Mozambique, South
Africa and Zambia - for the establishment of the
transitional Government last June and for the
subsequent actions undertaken to build the foundations
for security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
notably the establishment of integrated army and police
forces, as well as the formation of the National DDR
Commission. Efforts to consolidate the authority of the
transitional Government in the entire country,
particularly in the eastern part, need to be accelerated.
My delegation also hopes that efforts to halt the
proliferation of arms and the illegal exploitation of
natural resources will be intensified, given that those
activities account for the continuation of conflict in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that
regard, my delegation is confident that the Council will
be able to adopt a resolution addressing those concerns.

My delegation agrees with the assessment made
last week by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, William Lacy Swing, that the
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo set
for 2005 can be carried out if the international
community provides its robust support, particularly to
the United Nations, which would be organizing its
largest elections ever. Those historic elections would
also be an opportunity to lay the groundwork for a
positive political environment in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in which the electorate would
be able to make educated choices.

Concerning Burundi, my delegation is pleased to
note that the prospects for peace in that country have
improved. In that regard, we urge the transitional
Government, the Burundians and the United Nations
Office in Burundi to persevere in their efforts to further
the peace process. The general insecurity and human
rights abuses need to be addressed. Continued signs of
peace are necessary to encourage the international
community to accelerate the disbursement of pledges
made at the Paris and Geneva conferences. As it is, we
welcome the European Commission's announcement of
the approval of $19 million in humanitarian aid for
Burundi. We hope that that will encourage other donor
countries to fulfil their pledges.

Application of the regional approach has never
been more relevant than it is in the Great Lakes region.
For years, the idea of an international conference on
the Great Lakes region has been put forth, with no
action being taken until now. It is thus gratifying to
note from the Secretary-General's report that
developments in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo
and in Burundi have created new momentum in favour
of such a conference, which could be held at the
ministerial level by October of this year and at the
summit level the following month. We hope that the
change in the schedule for the conference, which was
tentatively planned for June will provide enough time
for the participating countries to consider the substance
of the conference and to come up with concrete
proposals to address the interlocking tragedies in
Central Africa.

We commend the Group of Friends, co-chaired by
Canada and the Netherlands, for its important role in
providing political, diplomatic, technical and financial
assistance in support of the preparatory process for a
conference. We hope that all those efforts will lead to a
security pact that will in turn lead to lasting and
durable peace and stability in the Great Lakes region.

We must not forget that more than 3 million
people have already died as a result of the conflict in
Central Africa and that the complexity of the situation
has hampered its effective resolution for far too long.
In that regard, my delegation would support the
additional allocation of resources to the Office of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region to ensure
that it can effectively carry out its mandate and the
regional tasks entrusted to it.

