Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank Mr. James Swan,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union
Mission in Somalia. We also wish to thank Ms. Ibrahim,
Chair of the National Independent Electoral Commission
of Somalia, and Mr. Moallim, Executive Director of
Somalia Youth Development Network.

In the light of the current developments in Somalia,
I wish to focus on several points. First, with regard
to political progress and development, the Federal
Government of Somalia has achieved a great deal
despite the numerous challenges the country is facing.
We therefore applaud its success as it progresses on the
path towards national reconciliation, notwithstanding
the obstacles, thanks to Government-led efforts aimed
at building and strengthening institutions of the State,
particularly through its support for the Somali national
development plan. At Annual Meetings of their Boards
of Governors in October, both the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund pointed to the fact that the
plan was on track.

We also welcome the steady improvements
witnessed in the political and security situation,
particularly in terms of the establishment of conditions
conducive to the holding of elections in 2020 and 2021,
the adoption of the draft electoral law by December, and
the conclusion of the constitutional review process by
June 2020, as was reaffirmed at the Somali Partnership
Forum held at the beginning of October, which
resulted in an agreement on the Mutual Accountability
Framework. We wish to highlight role the League of
Arab States has played in technical meetings with the
Federal Government of Somalia in setting up a support
mechanism for the Somali national development plan
and in ensuring the implementation of its initiative on
the forgiveness of foreign debt.
On the security situation, we appreciate the
important role being played by the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
working in tandem with the Somali national security
forces, to bolster stability and improve the security
situation. However, we remain concerned by the
growing offensive capability of armed groups, in
particular Al-Shabaab. Indeed, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/20l9/884) mentions significant
developments in Al-Shabaab's ability to manufacture
improvised explosive devices. In this regard, we
condemn all the attacks carried out by Al-Shabaab,
whether they be against the United Nations and
AMISOM. or international partners. We call upon the
international community to fully support the Federal
Government of Somalia in its efforts to rebuild and
rehabilitate security and military institutions and step
up efforts to improve Somali security capabilities,
especially in the light of the transition plan and the
gradual drawdown of AMISOM.

Turning to the humanitarian situation, like
others, we are concerned about the dire humanitarian
challenge and its effects on the population, in particular
the increasing number of internally displaced persons
as a result of the floods, drought and armed conflict
that continue to exert tremendous pressure on Somali
citizens, the Government and international partners.
We call upon donors to redouble their efforts so as
to prevent the emergence of a food insecurity crisis
affecting more than 2 million Somalis and to address
the acute malnutrition and food insecurity in the
country. Accordingly, we welcome the efforts of the
United Nations, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the World Health Organization
and other humanitarian organizations present on the
ground, all of which deliver assistance to those in need.

In conclusion, we call on the international
community to support the Federal Government of
Somalia in every way possible and to safeguard its
security, sovereignty and territorial integrity, with a
view to consolidating and strengthening the country's
national unity.

