The President: I thank the representative of China
for his kind words addressed to the presidency and to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Prime Minister of the Netherlands.

I very much agree with what was said this morning
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and also
by the Secretary General of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU): that it is important to highlight the positive
developments that have taken place and are taking place
in Africa. The many problems that face Africa today tend
to make the headlines, while the continent's promises are
often overlooked. Like the Secretary-General, we would
warn against "Afro-pessimism". That is why we called for
this debate today.

Still, African countries are grappling with war,
instability and lack of development. These issues are so
fundamental that the way in which we meet these
challenges - and meet them we must - will affect not
only the lives and future of millions of Africans, but also
the credibility of the United Nations, for many years to
come.

The prevention and resolution of African conflicts
requires the undiminished attention, the vigorous
engagement and the firm, consistent support of the world
community as a whole and of this Council.

Recently, the Security Council made a necessary and
vigorous collective effort to restore peace and stability to
East Timor, deploying a range of instruments of pressure
and influence little used in the past. A similar
determination is needed for the resolution of intractable
conflicts in Africa and the elimination of their causes.
Many of these causes call for painstaking, long-term
efforts, addressing underdevelopment and the continent's

 

related structural problems. It is equally urgent for us to
give a credible answer to matters like arms flows and the
reckless, uncontrolled conduct of warlords.

Deadly conflicts in Africa, like the one between
Ethiopia and Eritrea, or the appalling humanitarian drama
unfolding in Angola, risk becoming forgotten wars. It is
necessary to redress this imbalance and to focus our
political attention on these wars and their countless victims,
too.
Africa is one of the top priority areas of the
Netherlands foreign policy, including our development
policy. Our view of the root causes of conflicts and the
promotion of sustainable development closely mirrors the
Secretary-General's report on the subject.

Our proposals for a common strategy can be summed
up in a few words: first, to encourage and support positive
developments in Africa in a coherent manner; secondly, to
place the emphasis where we can make a difference; and,
thirdly, to address the underlying causes of instability and
underdevelopment.

For my country, that means assisting African efforts
at conflict prevention and enhancing peacekeeping
capacities, through regional and subregional organizations.
It means giving firm support to the integrated approach to
conflicts and threats to peace, as advocated in the report of
the Secretary-General. It means strengthening ties with
African countries that are a force for stability on the
continent. And it means concentrating bilateral aid
relationships on countries with sound economic and social
policies and good governance.

That is why we in my country are aiming to target at
least 50 per cent of our development aid on Africa, and
why debt relief for African countries is at the top of our
agenda. Our policy is driven by humanitarian involvement
and a sense of justice. The Netherlands will continue to
provide substantial emergency aid to victims of conflict.
We pledge that our efforts to rebuild the Balkans, which is
of paramount importance for durable peace and stability on
our European continent, will not be at the expense of our
support for Africa.

The basic rule should be that peacekeeping is done by
United Nations troops and financed from the United
Nations peacekeeping budget. Unfortunately, too often we
are forced into situations where regional peacekeeping
efforts founder because of a lack of funds. As a result,
complicated constructions have to be devised to serve the
cause of international peace and security.

Fresh creative thinking on these issues is long
overdue. African efforts at conflict prevention and
peacekeeping should be vigorously supported. Let me
suggest some options.

First, one idea currently being floated aims to link
the extent of debt-relief with African participation in
peacekeeping operations on the continent. I believe this
idea can be taken further.

Secondly, where an African State undertakes to
engage in a regional peacekeeping effort, enhanced
assistance to that country should be considered.

Thirdly, we should take a creative look at new ways
of strengthening the assistance we provide to boost
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and peacekeeping on
the African continent.

I believe that these and similar ideas merit further
examination, as part of the follow-up to the Secretary-
General's recommendations and as part of our collective
effort and obligation to stand by Africa in the new
millennium.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Ukraine, His Excellency Mr. Borys Tarasyuk. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

