Mr. Annadif (spoke in French): It is always an
honour and a pleasure to address the Security Council as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Mali and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
This meeting takes place one year to the day after our
discussions last year (see S/PV.77l9) on the renewal of
the MINUSMA mandate, which resulted in the adoption
of resolution 2295 (2016).

Last year at the same time, we were worried and
we wondered about the slow implementation of the
Agreement, including the establishment of the interim
authorities, the mixed patrols, the Conference for
National Harmony * in short, a number of important
aspects related to the interim period. Despite the regular
meetings of the Agreement Monitoring Committee,
there has been a distinct lack of dialogue among the
signatory parties.

This meeting is being held on the eve of 20 June
2017, which is also the date of the second anniversary
of the signing of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation that emanated from the Algiers process.
Moreover, this meeting takes place on the eve of the end
of the interim period of that Agreement, but it can be
said that it is taking place against a truly calm backdrop
in comparison to that of last year.

As outlined in the report of the Secretary-
General before the Council (S/20l7/478), the past few
months have seen significant tangible progress in the
implementation of the Agreement. Thanks to the good
offices of the international mediation team, MINUSMA
and, above all, thanks to the ongoing consultations
between the Malian parties themselves around the High
Representative of the President, we note - and should
welcome and be pleased that - first, the Conference
for National Harmony was held in satisfactory
conditions, and the charter for peace, unity and national
reconciliation is being developed.

Secondly, interim authorities were set up in the five
regions concerned, even if the pace of their work varies
from one region to another.

Thirdly, the various Operational Coordination
Mechanisms and mixed patrols are on track. At this
juncture, there is no longer a political deadlock, but
rather considerations of a technical nature.

Fourthly, the process of security sector reform,
which is a crucial part of the redesign of the Malian
army, and the process of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration are ongoing, even if the pace
remains slow.

Those are positive developments and they
complement the various numerous institutional and
political reforms, for which the Government deserves
credit. They will no doubt enable the progressive
redeployment of State authority, which will yield,
in a very concrete manner, peace dividends for the
populations of the regions concerned.

All those positive developments are at risk
of collapsing, however, due to the tensions that
unfortunately persist in the Coordination des
mouvements de l'Azawad and the Platform coalition of
armed groups, which have turned into a community-
based conflict, of which civilian populations are its
main victims. The Security Council should address a
stern warning to the military and political leaders of the
two movements in order to put an end once and for all to
the killings of the innocent and unarmed populations.

For its part, MINUSMA is sparing no effort to
protect those populations. It is also using its good
offices to halt this fratricidal conflict and ensure
reconciliation among the protagonists, in consultation,
of course, with the Malian authorities. Unfortunately,
those practices play into the hands of terrorists and
other extremists who are gaining ground, both in terms
of their modus operandi and in the sophistication of the
equipment they use. Worse, they are extending their
areas of operation and influence.

As Council members are aware, for some time
now, the central region has also become a source of
concern. As stated in the Secretary-General's report,
the Government of the Republic of Mali has adopted
a multidimensional security strategy for the central
regions. We commend and support this promising
initiative, which is an important tool that MINUSMA,
working together with the international community,
intends to support in order to tackle the rampant
insecurity in the centre of the country, particularly in
Mopti and its surroundings.

In that spirit, MINUSMA seeks to strengthen
its presence in this region as part of an integrated
multidimensional approach in partnership with other
important stakeholders, such as the European Union.
The forthcoming deployment of the Rapid Reaction
Force is part of that arrangement. More important,
however, we must ensure that State authority is present
and strengthened in the central region.

Resolution 2295 (2016) assigned a robust mandate
to MINUSMA. Thanks to that mandate, we were able
to readjust our rules of engagement, which enabled us
to strengthen our patrols and pre-empt certain threats
while carrying out proactive and preventive operations
with a view to protecting civilian populations and
United Nations personnel. The other innovation
set out in resolution 2295 (2016) is the support that
MINUSMA must provide to the Malian defence and
security forces. While we are operating in a difficult
budgetary context, it is crucial that we flesh out such
support, as the ascendancy of the defence and security
forces depends upon it, as does the deployment of the
Malian administration.

The legitimate expectations expressed on both sides
for a strengthened role for MINUSMA in the light of
the changing political and security situation require us
to review our priorities. For example, the strengthening
of the passive and active security of MINUSMA
facilities and operations on the ground needs to be seen
as a sine qua non condition for the Mission to be able to
deliver on its responsibilities. To do so, we are currently
redoubling our mobilization efforts with contributing
countries while seeking innovative partnerships and
concepts with the aim of bridging operational gaps
such as the shortage of armoured personnel carriers,
inter alia.

In that regard, I solemnly thank the contributing
countries that, during the MINUSMA force generation
conference held on 22 and 23 May, pledged to deploy
uniformed personnel and essential equipment to ensure
security in the transfer of our units and to provide
support for our operational activities. We can never
emphasize enough the fact that a lack of a convoy
escort battalion and a shortage of attack and transport
helicopters are major handicaps.

Despite the those challenges, MINUSMA intends,
first, to scale up its support for the implementation of
the Agreement in accordance with the timelines and
benchmarks agreed with the Government; secondly, to
continue to expand its good offices role and carry out
the necessary negotiations with the signatory parties
involved in the implementation of the Agreement;
thirdly, to support international mediation efforts and
regional initiatives related to the implementation of the
Agreement, such as the initiatives of the Group of Five
for the Sahel; and, fourthly, to strengthen its partnership
with the Malian defence and security forces with a view
to building their operational capacities and ensuring
their highly anticipated and sought-after redeployment
throughout the country, as I mentioned earlier.

It would be advisable for the MINUSMA mandate,
which the Council will consider in the days to come,
to take into account those obligations, which are
necessary to support Malian men and women as they
seek to achieve lasting peace and stability. The men and
women of MINUSMA, on whose behalfI speak today,
are fully committed and will live up to the confidence
that the Council has placed in them.

