Mr. Kolby (Norway): The peace process in the
Middle East is facing its most serious crisis ever.
Norway is extremely concerned about the dramatic
escalation of violence in recent weeks. Present
developments are threatening all of the achievements
made since the Declaration of Principles was signed in
1993.

Norway strongly condemns the Palestinian
terrorist attacks, including the use of Kassam rockets.
The Palestinian Authority must fight Palestinian
terrorism vigorously and dismantle the terrorist
networks. We welcome the arrest of the suspected
murderers of Israeli Minister Ze'evi as an important
step in this regard.

The security situation did improve after President
Arafat's 16 December speech. Norway very much
regrets that Israel did not take advantage of that
positive momentum.

The Israeli bombardment of Palestinian cities and
institutions, which has led to death and destruction on
a scale unprecedented since the start of the peace
process, is unacceptable. These Israeli military
operations are out of proportion in relation to military,
security and police needs. Norway fails to see how
these attacks can contribute to greater security.

It is Norway's conviction that both parties must
now adopt forceful and immediate measures to stop the
escalating violence. These steps include the following.

The Palestinian Authority must do its utmost to
halt Palestinian terrorist attacks. Continued terrorist
attacks cannot be tolerated.

Israel must stop its attacks on Palestinian
infrastructure, stop incursions into area A, withdraw its
armed forces, lift completely the house arrest of
President Arafat, stop the targeted killings, lift the
closure and transfer the value-added tax (VAT) owed to
the Palestinians.

A serious political dialogue must be resumed
immediately, with the aim of ending the Middle East
conflict and establishing a viable Palestinian state
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) as well as the Oslo Accords.

The Tenet plan and the Mitchell
recommendations must be implemented immediately
and unconditionally.

Humanitarian and development assistance to the
Palestinians must be increased to counter the
increasingly difficult economic and social situation.

The international community, and indeed the
Council, must stand united in its demand that these
measures are implemented.

The Israeli and Palestinian leaders seem today
locked in a battle with no exit strategies. This is
untenable. The final responsibility to end the hostilities
continues to lie with the parties themselves. At the
same time, the Security Council must assist the parties
in reaching this goal. Norway stands ready to make its
contribution in this regard.

The aim of the Oslo process was to end the
occupation and to create security for Israel. We can
still achieve that goal, but only if a political process is
started now. In that regard, Norway finds the informal
ideas presented by Saudi Arabia very interesting
S/PV.4478

 

indeed. Norway strongly encourages the further
exploration of those ideas.

