Mr. Asomani (Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees): I wish to thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to address the Security Council on the
report of the Secretary-General on protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations.

I should also like to thank all those who have made
generous remarks about the work of the Office of the High
Commissioner.

The report under consideration is of great importance
to the whole humanitarian community and to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), and we are deeply appreciative that the Council
is once again devoting the necessary attention to these
issues. I must say here that the report might not have seen
the light of day without contributions from several United
Nations sister organizations, agencies and departments, as
well as the keen advice and support of a number of
delegations in the Council, including, Mr. President, your
own.

In her introduction this morning, the Deputy Secretary-
General very competently placed the report of the
Secretary-General in the right context. Many delegations
have elaborated on key elements of the report. Allow me,
however, to share UNHCR's perspectives on aspects of the
report.

First, there is a need to strengthen compliance by both
State and non-State actors within the provisions of
international law. This problem of compliance has
dramatically worsened in recent years because of the
changing pattern of conflicts. Forced displacement of
civilian populations is now often a direct objective, rather
than a by-product of war. Many conflict situations have
been rendered particularly complex and violent because of
the involvement of militias, criminals and other disparate
groups that may have little knowledge of or respect for the
rules of international law. A further problem has been the
failure to bring to justice those who violate the law,
resulting in the development of what are now
characterized as "cultures of impunity". This has been
particularly evident in the Great Lakes region of Africa,
and more recently in Kosovo.

To reverse these trends, UNHCR strongly supports
the Secretary-General's recommendations regarding the
vigorous promotion of accession to international legal
instruments, the dissemination and advocacy of
humanitarian principles, and more effective mechanisms
to ensure compliance with international law. Effective
compliance is also linked, in our view, to the important
concepts of burden-sharing and solidarity, which have
been stressed by other speakers. In this connection, I am
pleased to mention that this theme - the theme of
solidarity and burden-sharing - will be at the centre of
the debate of the governing council of UNHCR - the
Executive Committee - which will start meeting next
Monday in Geneva.

Secondly, there is the issue of humanitarian access,
which has been increasingly hampered in recent years by
various factors, including general insecurity arising from
conflict, the inability or unwillingness of parties to allow
access and, finally, obstruction of access, often through
armed attacks. The Secretary-General's report rightly
reaffirms that States have primary responsibility for
ensuring that refugees, internally displaced persons and
other civilians in conflict situations benefit from the
necessary assistance and protection and that United
Nations and other humanitarian organizations must have
safe and unimpeded access to these groups. Furthermore,
these groups do have a right to humanitarian assistance
and protection, and therefore humanitarian access should
not be seen as a concession to be granted to humanitarian
organizations on an arbitrary basis.

Predictable mechanisms should be developed to
ensure security and access for humanitarian operations.
Already, a number of measures are under consideration in
connection with the Secretary-General's Africa report
recommendations. In particular, efforts should be made to
ensure that refugee camps are located at a reasonable
distance from international borders, that armed
combatants are separated from refugees and other
civilians, and that trade in arms to conflict areas is
adequately monitored and regulated. I am pleased to
inform the Council, in connection with ongoing measures
being developed, that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and UNHCR are collaborating in preparing

 

and elaborating a matrix that presents the range of options
which may be deployed in different security situations
where there are refugees and internally displaced persons.

Thirdly, I wish to highlight concerns that relate to the
safety and security of the personnel of the United Nations
and other humanitarian organizations. As the Deputy
Secretary-General has pointed out, there has been a
disturbing increase in recent years in the number and scale
of direct, calculated attacks or use of force against
humanitarian personnel.

Actors in conflict situations disrupt humanitarian
actions which they consider as undermining their own
strategic goals. Regrettably, there is even a desire to
remove actual or potential witnesses to human rights abuses
and other violations of international law by creating an
environment in which it is not safe for them to operate.

The existing instruments of international law, as many
speakers before me have said, do not effectively cover the
security needs of United Nations and other humanitarian
personnel. The Secretary-General's report outlines a number
of measures required to reinforce the safety of humanitarian
personnel, and UNHCR fully supports them. In particular,
UNHCR welcomes the provisions of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court whereby attacks against both
United Nations and other humanitarian personnel now
constitute war crimes and fall within the jurisdiction of the
Court.

As the Ambassador of France noted this morning, I
would, in the same vein, like to take advantage of this
occasion to remind the Council about the plight of our
French colleague, Mr. Vincent Cochetel, who was abducted
in North Ossetia 243 days ago. We still hope he will be
found and will be released soon.

Fourthly, I wish to highlight the role of the Security
Council in humanitarian operations. In the open debate,
held on 24 April 1998, on the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Africa, the High Commissioner
for Refugees, Mrs. Sadako Ogata, strongly stressed how
humanitarian crises, particularly large-scale refugee
situations, often affect international peace and security, for
which the Security Council has primary responsibility. It is
therefore essential that the Security Council be kept
regularly informed of the humanitarian situation in cases of
potential or actual conflict, to ensure that humanitarian
activities are not viewed in isolation from the overall social,
political and economic context. Such actions may also
ensure that timely and appropriate action is taken.

UNHCR therefore warmly welcomes the growing
commitment of the Council to these issues, and it is our
fervent hope that it will be accompanied by concrete
follow-up measures.

One final concern remains to be highlighted: the
need for adequate resources to implement these protective
measures. This need fuels a tension which we, as
operational agencies, must confront on a daily basis in
several humanitarian operations. A very current example
is the case of Guinea (Conakry), where all the
humanitarian actors are convinced of the need to establish
Sierra Leonean refugee camps at a reasonable distance
from the border, in accordance with the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-Generals report. This measure
is required in order to lessen the dangers of infiltration of
undesirable armed elements into the refugee settlements.
However, we continue to ponder whether the costs
involved are too high, and in the meantime the security
situation continues to deteriorate.

I would like to end on this somewhat grim note
regarding the tensions that we have to live with between
resources and needs relating to the protection for
humanitarian assistance.

