Mr. Moutari (Niger) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to express the gratitude of the Niger for
being able to speak on this agenda item concerning the
report of the Panel of Experts on the traffic in
diamonds and the conflict situation prevailing in Sierra
Leone, which was introduced this morning by
Ambassador Chowdhury of Bangladesh.
For us, the fact that this Council - which bears
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security - is being presided
over by Mr. Kishore Mahbubani of Singapore is a
guarantee of a dispassionate and fair debate whose
outcome will be beneficial to Sierra Leone, Africa and
the world.

With the aim of bringing peace to our West
African subregion, and peace, stability and well-being
to our continent as a whole, as our people so
profoundly desire, my country has been working
closely with the other members of the Economic
Community of West African States for such a long
time.

That is why, when my delegation was presented
with the information in the report, my Government
began to carry out the necessary preliminary
investigations and communicated to the Secretariat the
following information.

The BAC-lll aircraft, with the registration VP-
CLM, belonging to the company Aeroleasing Inc., did,
indeed, land in Niamey on 22 December 1998 at 21.11
local time, having come from Monrovia, and departed
on 23 December 1998 at 19.02 local time. However, at
present it is not possible to say what kind of goods that
aircraft may have been carrying because the records are
kept for only three months. Nevertheless, the
competent authorities of the Niger have ordered an
investigation to be carried out in order to obtain the
information that has been requested.

The Niger will, of course, provide its full and
wholehearted cooperation for any initiative that this
Council undertakes to bring peace and security to
Sierra Leone and the subregion.

I should like to convey our great admiration to
you, Sir, and wish you every success as you carry out
your functions as President of the Council. I should
also like to express to your predecessor, Ambassador
Lavrov, Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation - that great country of which we still have
vivid memories of a pleasant visit fl our deep
appreciation for the outstanding way in which he
presided over the Council last month.

