Mr. Choquehuanca Cespedes (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Today is 6 August, the
day that my country celebrates its independence. I
should like to welcome the struggle, the rebellion and
the resistance of my people, who for centuries did not
give up and will never give up peace and harmony.
Today Bolivia is experiencing a revolutionary process
that is sustained by democracy and the conscience of
the people.

Here in the twenty-first century, we feel that it is
anachronistic to maintain the categories of permanent
and non-permanent members of the Security Council.
After 68 years, it is clear that some of these so-called
super-Powers were and still are the causes of conflicts
and wars in different parts of the world. Preserving
peace is not and will not be the result of the existence
of international policemen, but rather as a result of the
promotion of social justice, equity, complementarity,
solidarity and respect between States.

Latin America is an emerging zone ofpeace thanks
to the desire of its leaders to write its history without
oversight from other Powers. While NATO organizes
interventions in South America, the Union of South
American Nations has averted coups and conflicts of
various kinds. The existence of two categories violates
the principle of the equality of rights among States,
whether large or small, as established by the Charter
of the United Nations. In the twenty-first century,
the existence of monarchistic practices within the
United Nations is unacceptable. Those who claim to
be promoters and defenders of democracy in the world
must be the first to set an example and must respect
the basic principles of democracy within the United
Nations.

So long as we fail to discuss these substantive issues,
international peace and security will not be guaranteed
no matter how many cooperation programmes we have.
The day will come when all States Member of the
United Nations exercise their rights and participate in
equal conditions - in other words, when there is true
democracy in the United Nations. So long as the veto
exists, we will not have a true democratization of the
United Nations. We will have first-class and second-
class nations. All Members of the United Nations must
be equal in all its bodies. We must achieve the equality
of rights of large and small nations enshrined in the
United Nations Charter.

The Security Council's action has not been
participatory. We require a Security Council that is
transparent, democratic and flexible; that acts with
authority; but above all, that is open to the vigilance of
all of the Members of the United Nations. In important

matters, the General Assembly must have the power to
review and to take a stand on issues and not simply leave
it in the hands of the Security Council. Transforming the
Security Council and the comprehensive transformation
of the United Nations are critical to enabling us to
tackle the various crises that have begun to merge and
that affect the important issues facing humankind and
the planet, such as energy, finance, food and climate
change.

Before concluding, I should like to express our
rejection and condemnation of the practice of espionage
on the part of the United States. I should also like to
express the grief and indignation of my people and my
Government over the act of aggression experienced
by President Evo Morales Ayma, which has been
described by the international community as offensive,
humiliating, discriminatory, colonialistic, unfriendly,
and a violation of human rights and international
standards. Given the grave nature of these facts, we ask
the United Nations to clarify these events and to take
measures to guarantee human rights and international
law so that no one will have to suffer such violations
again.

