Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, for their briefings. I would also like to
convey my gratitude for the twelfth report that has been
submitted under resolution 1966 (2010) (see S/2018/471).

Peru, which is committed to multilateralism and
international law, is honoured to preside over the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
We took that Office in succession to Uruguay and its
representative, Ambassador Elbio Rosselli. It should be
recalled that the Informal Working Group deals with
issues related to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, as the repository of the
functions of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), and that the Mechanism is
currently in the process of being reviewed and renewed,
in accordance with the need to ensure accountability
and prevent impunity.

Peru believes that the development of international
criminal law, a process to which the Council has
contributed, is vital to ensuring that justice is
served, promoting reconciliation, deterring potential
perpetrators from committing atrocity crimes and,
ultimately, promoting sustainable peace. In that regard,
we also believe that the Security Council, which is
responsible for maintaining international peace and
security, should stand united in its support for the
Residual Mechanism.

We would like to commend the transparent,
expeditious, efficient and effective way in which the
Mechanism has carried out its mandates and the trials
with which it is currently seized. That is particularly
important given the closure of the ICTY last December.

We underscore the steps taken to implement the
recommendations contained in the report of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services (S/2018/206), and take
note of the amendments made to the Rules of Procedure
and Evidence, which call for balancing the different
approaches of the Romano-Germanic and the Anglo-
Saxon legal systems. Moreover, we wish to welcome
the willingness of several African and European
Governments to allow convicted persons to serve their
sentences in their respective countries, and underscore
the need to bring the remaining fugitives to justice.

We stress, in that regard, that the success
of the Mechanism depends to a large extent on
the cooperation of States in complying with the
judgements, abiding by the orders and responding
to the Mechanism's requests for assistance.
We also note the concern raised about the early
release of persons convicted by the Special Tribunal
for Rwanda, some of whom have expressed no regrets
about their crimes. In that regard, we encourage the
Mechanism to assess options within the framework of
relevant procedures to address that concern.

I conclude by reiterating Peru's commitment to the
promotion of justice, the rule of law and accountability,
as well as to the work ofthe Council's Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, and by thanking
the Office of Legal Affairs and the Security Council
secretariat for their continued support.

