Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): The
Security Council declaration adopted by heads of State
or Government on 7 September is a seminal document
that will guide this Council for many years to come.
My delegation is pleased to have this opportunity to
participate in this very preliminary assessment of
where this Organization and its Member States stand
with respect to the implementation of the elements
contained in resolution 1318 (2000). We are grateful to
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting
today.

I will focus mainly on two of the six questions
contained in the explanatory note to which you referred
(8/2001/185, Annex), Mr. President: the third question,
on strengthening United Nations peacekeeping
operations; and the sixth, on strengthening cooperation
and communication between the United Nations and
regional or subregional organizations and
arrangements. The commitments undertaken by the
Council last September serve as benchmarks against
which United Nations Member States will measure the
performance of those upon whom we have conferred
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, that is, the members of
this Council.

The Council's report card on the strengthening of
peacekeeping operations contains both good and bad
elements. We are pleased that the Council responded
quickly to the Brahimi report by adopting resolution
1327 (2000). We have already begun to see changes in
the Council's decision-making processes with regard to
peacekeeping operations, including, particularly in the
case of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), a
willingness to amend mandates in order to ensure that
they are clear, credible and achievable. We regret,
however, that, in that particular case, the Council's
duty to provide for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict was not upheld.

Some progress has also been evident in giving
effect to the observation, in the declaration, of the need
for a transparent three-way relationship between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop-
contributing countries. Singapore's initiative in
consulting the broader membership on strengthening
consultations with troop-contributing countries is
welcome indeed. Now is the time to transform into
action the words that were uttered during that
important debate. I think that this is what the
Secretary-General has urged us to do this morning.

We were pleased to see the establishment of a
Security Council Working Group on peacekeeping, and
we were especially satisfied to see the chairmanship of
that Group placed in the very capable hands of
Ambassador Curtis Ward of Jamaica. But the Council
must not allow the creation of a working group to
substitute for a vigorous response to the ideas put
forward during the open debate.

Subsequent to its intervention in January's
debate, my delegation circulated a proposal for a
"mission-specific cooperative mechanism for Security
Council-mandated operations" (5/2001/73, annex). In
that proposal, we emphasized that the issue was not
one of communications or consultations but rather one
of cooperation and participation. If we, the Member
States of the United Nations, want to develop a
meaningful and trustworthy three-way relationship,
then it is you, the members of the Security Council,
who must find a way for troop contributors to
participate fully in the decision-making process for
Council-mandated operations.

Both the Council and the Secretariat must be able
to win and sustain the confidence of troop-contributing
Governments. It must be clear that the strategy and
concept of operations for any new mission are sound
and that the plans for their implementation are well
thought through. Troop-contributing Governments
must also be confident that their troops or police would
be serving in sensible missions with effective
leadership. That confidence comes from cooperation,
not from mere notification or even from consultation.

We hope that the Working Group will focus
seriously on these and other issues, making specific
and practical recommendations for Council action. We
look forward to learning of the results of the Working
Group, established by presidential statement 2001/3,
including the interim decisions due next month.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to say a few words regarding the
Council's relationship with regional and subregional
organizations and processes. Over the past five years,
the Secretary-General has made substantial progress in
improving the Secretariat's ability to work with
regional and subregional bodies. That progress has not
been matched by the Security Council.

Too often, the Council has been absent when
peace agreements were negotiated. In some instances,
the result was that the United Nations was assigned
roles it could not possibly execute -whether the
forced disarmament of combatants, the supervision of
vast territories or other functions the signatories
themselves were not willing to take on. It is not in
anybody's interest that peace agreements be premised
on false expectations. The Council must find a way of
ensuring that its views of what is attainable are fully
understood by the parties to any peace process in which
subsequent United Nations action may be a factor.

On the other hand, where the Security Council
has engaged regional or subregional bodies, too often
the result has simply been to delay effective Council
action. This, too, serves nobody's interest over the long
run.

Effective collaboration with regional and
subregional organizations and arrangements may never
be easy, but the Council's ability to get it right may
well determine whether the Council succeeds or fails in
its Charter-mandated responsibility to maintain
international peace and security.

In conclusion, I wish to re-emphasize my
delegation's continuing support for the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1318 (2000). I also wish
to register our support for efforts to ensure
transparency in the Council's working methods and to
provide an opportunity for Council members to benefit
from the views of the broader United Nations
membership. Of course, debates in this Chamber must
not become a substitute for meaningful Council action,
and simply listening to non-members of the Council
must not become a substitute for really hearing, and
acting upon, what they say.

