Mr. Llanos (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
the presidency of the Russian Federation for convening
this open debate and for the concept note (S/2014/384, annex) on a theme of importance and relevance to the
Organization. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

Peacekeeping operations are an important tool
in the work of the Organization under its peace and
security pillar. The international recognition of that
tool rests, in part, on its origin and the principles that
inspire the missions, namely, impartiality, the consent
of the parties and the non-use of force except in cases
of self-defence or defence of the mandate.

Peacekeeping operations have changed from a
traditional concept, basically serving the functions of
observation, monitoring and reporting on ceasefires
between and among States, to a scenario in which the
conflict situations that occur are often intra- State and the
operations are assigned multiple responsibilities. That
has resulted in so-called multidimensional mandates,
robust mandates or even, in some exceptional situations,
the establishment of a force intervention brigade,
as in the case of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. This new scenario requires thorough
analysis and discussion, which, as we see it, should be
held with the entire United Nations membership, and
in particular, with the troop-contributing countries
and police-contributing countries. In that regard, the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the
General Assembly has a particular role to play.

My delegation favours a multidimensional focus as
the approach to conflict resolution, since it transcends
the mere cessation of hostilities and involves tasks
that include the facilitation of political processes;
the protection of civilians; the protection of human
rights; the promotion and support of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; the restoration of the
rule of law and the promotion of national reconciliation.

The complexity of such tasks demands that the
Council provide clear, realistic mandates, along with
sufficient resources for their attainment. Perhaps
we should explore a structure that would, among
other things, provide for strengthening the civilian
component and an efficient comprehensive matrix for
the remaining components, through which the United
Nations agencies on the ground would be subordinate
to the leadership of a given mission. Furthermore, we
must develop more precise regulatory frameworks
based on lessons learned. We stress the need to
take effective steps to strengthen the focus on fully
integrated missions. As we indicated earlier, we believe
that it is important that those steps should arise from
an interaction between the General Assembly and the
Security Council.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's suggestion
regarding a review of the peacekeeping operations
under the Charter of the United Nations. With respect
to the so-called robust mandates and intervention
brigades, we share the President's concerns regarding
to the principles of impartiality and consent. The use of
force by the United Nations will always entail political
implications and will always be susceptible to generating
unforeseeable consequences. For that reason, political
control of such decisions should be strengthened, and
the mechanisms for their implementation should be
precisely spelled out, paying special heed to the views
of troop-contributing countries. Along those lines, the
progressive development of international law demands
the elaboration of clear and precise rules of engagement
that take into account the new challenges involved and
provide for appropriate mitigation measures.

The possible use of force should be determined
by weighing such varied factors as mission capacity,
public perception, humanitarian impact, staff security
and protection and, most importantly, the impact of
such actions on the national and local consensus with
regard to the mission. Peacekeeping operations should
be aimed at de-escalating violence on the ground and
returning to forms of persuasion that do not involve the
use of force. Should the use of force be authorized, we
believe that neighbouring countries and countries ofthe
subregion should not undertake the tasks that involve
the use of force. It would seem desirable for individual
units to have clearly defined and differentiated
functions.

Whatever function is ultimately adopted, we stress
the importance of reinforcing a gender perspective in
all peacekeeping operations and of remaining vigilant
so as to ensure that all ground operations include a
gender component, as provided for in resolution 1325
(2000).

With regard to the use of new technologies, in
particular the use of unarmed drones, my country
supports the principle derived from the Brahimi
report( S/2000/809) concerning the need to provide
all peacekeeping operations with better information
for the execution of their mandates, for developing and
planning their specific tasks, and for evaluating their
results. Drones are a good tool for accomplishing such
tasks and, in principle, my country supports their use.
However, we need to establish the legal framework for
their use. In that regard, we propose the development of
a legal study and the creation of a framework for their
operational use to be submitted to member States for
their review and approval.

Finally, with respect to cooperation between
missions, my country sees peacekeeping operations
as a flexible and useful tool in dealing with rapidly
unfolding situations or as part of regional clusters.
Nonetheless, norms in this instance should also be
more precisely defined. Inter-mission cooperation must
always emanate from a process of consultation and
should be accompanied by the respective memorandums
of understanding that fully document their legal
grounds. The consent of troop-contributing countries
is fundamental, along with the presentation of a status
report on the situation of the contributing mission, as
well as a clear definition of the mandate and the use of
force in the receiving mission.

Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are among the
permanent objectives of my country's foreign policy.
We View the concept of peacekeeping operations as
a broad one, involving both the maintenance and the
promotion of peace-one whose civilian and military
components should work in a coordinated fashion
with an integrated focus. Only a focus of that nature
is capable of maintaining the link between security
and development and of creating better conditions for
preventing future conflicts.

As a troop-contributing country, we reiterate our
commitment to the Organization in the noble task of
contributing to peace and security.

