Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
once again welcome Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, to the Security
Council to brief us on the progress in fighting impunity
in Darfur.

Over the past several years, the Security Council
has considered the question of Darfur in the Sudan
many times. During those considerations, the Chinese
delegation has always emphasized the viewpoint that
the Darfur issue involves a political process,
peacekeeping deployment, economic development,
humanitarian assistance and justice. It is very complex
and requires tremendous political wisdom to find a
comprehensive solution that ensures that peace and
justice are achieved.

Fostering early and substantive progress in the
political process in Darfur is a key precondition of and
important guarantee for progress in all areas. Earlier
this week, the Security Council heard briefings by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Joint
African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for
Darfur on the latest developments in Darfur (see S/PV.6227). Judging from their briefings, peacekeeping
deployment continues to progress and the Mission is
75 per cent deployed.

A conference to launch the Darfur comprehensive
peace talks was held in Doha, Qatar. Many
representatives from all parties, including many
members of the Security Council, attended the
meeting. There is hope that the negotiations between
the Government and the rebel movements will be
relaunched within the year. Civil society
representatives have also been invited to attend the
Doha process, further broadening the social basis for
the political process in Darfur.

Humanitarian work continues to progress steadily
and there has been a marked improvement in the
relations between the Sudan and Chad. Recently, there
has been an active effort by all parties to create
favourable conditions and an environment conducive to
the smooth participation of the people of Darfur in next
year's January elections.

That represents hard-won progress. One important
reason is the political mutual trust and positive interaction
of all parties. The tripartite mechanism of the United
Nations, the African Union (AU) and the Sudanese
Government is operating smoothly, and that is a key
factor in ensuring progress in deployment.

The concern of the Sudanese Government and
civil society over their national future and destiny is
the inner drive for the political negotiations to forge
momentum. The African countries' worry over peace
and security in the Sudan and its subregion is the
common impetus for the international community's
promotion of a genuine solution to the Darfur issue. All
of this points to the fact that trust is the basis for
cooperation, and that cooperation is the important
precondition for resolving all questions and diffusing
all misunderstandings and differences. Similarly,
questions of impunity cannot be addressed without the
trust and cooperation of all parties concerned.

The AU is an important strategic partner for the
United Nations in settling the question of the Sudan.
Not long ago, the African Union high-level panel on
Darfur, led by former President Mbeki, submitted an
important report with recommendations on the format
of cooperation to achieve peace and reconciliation and
to address impunity. We note that the AU Peace and
Security Council has approved the Mbeki report. An
AU high-level delegation will come to New York later
this month to brief the Council on that report. We look
forward to the Security Council's in-depth exchange of
views with the AU on certain questions. We also hope that
Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo will continue to follow the
latest developments in all areas connected with Darfur,
maintain close communications with all parties,
objectively review the latest developments and various
challenges on the Darfur question, and contribute to the
comprehensive and proper settlement of the Darfur issue.

