Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
Sir, may I offer you our heartfelt congratulations on the
assumption of your brotherly country, a citadel of African
liberalization, of the presidency of this Council. We are
pleased to see you personally presiding over this meeting.

I also convey my thanks to your predecessor, the
brotherly delegation of Malaysia, for its active presidency
of the Council last month.

Allow me, too, to pay tribute to your delegation's
initiative in calling and organizing this open debate, which
reflects Namibia's concern for and interest in the search for
viable solutions to the question of children and armed
conflict, a matter of prime importance to the international
community, Africa in particular.

I take this opportunity also to express our gratitude for
the tireless efforts of Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, to raise awareness of the dimensions of
this problem and for his constructive initiatives in this
regard. We welcome his comprehensive report on the
situation of children and armed conflict.

Armed conflicts continue to cause suffering,
particularly among such vulnerable groups as children and
women. The negative effects and long-term repercussions
of these conflicts directly affect the viability of
establishing an atmosphere conducive to peace and
stability. We remain firmly convinced that the ultimate
solution to this suffering lies in addressing the root causes
of these conflicts, be they racial, economic or
developmental, not to mention those with foreign
dimensions. This approach is the only way to avoid the
scourge of such conflicts.

My delegation deems it imperative to devote
adequate attention to children in such conditions. We
must make every effort to put an end to these conflicts
and ensure the reintegration into society of those affected
by war - children in particular. It is also necessary to
rebuild and rehabilitate the infrastructure of conflict
regions once peace has been achieved.

In addition, the ministerial meeting of the
Organization of African Unity - held in my capital,
Khartoum, in December last year - and the resulting
recommendations on internally displaced persons, in
particular women and children, are evidence of the
OAU's interest in this very important question, which
directly affects the entire continent of Africa.

My delegation would like to inform the Council of
the efforts deployed by my country's Government
regarding the question of children and armed conflict. My
country has devoted particular attention to this question,
as evidenced in its ongoing efforts to find a
comprehensive and lasting solution to the war in southern
Sudan.

My Government has granted the right of self-
determination to southern Sudan. It has cooperated fully
with the United Nations in order to facilitate access by
the affected groups to humanitarian assistance. Its efforts
are reflected in the many initiatives it has taken to put an
end to the conflict, the most recent of which was its
decision last month to call for a nationwide ceasefire.

I should like to state here before all present that my
Government is fully prepared to negotiate a permanent
ceasefire with a View to reaching a lasting solution to the
question of southern Sudan. In addition, it has made
considerable efforts to establish peace and stability in

 

war-affected regions. It has also urged the international
community further to pressure the rebel factions to come to
the negotiating table and enter into a serious dialogue.

My country has cooperated fully with all relevant
United Nations bodies concerning the question of children.
Both this year and in 1998, my country received the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict. It welcomed his mission at the highest
level and took the necessary practical measures to facilitate
the discharge of his lofty mandate.

I should like in this respect to state that my
Government reaffirms its full and principled commitment
not to recruit children under the age of 18 into military
service and has enacted national legislation to this effect. It
has also abided by international instruments on the rights of
the child.

My Government has fulfilled its promise to allow the
United Nations mission to carry out a survey last June in
the Nuba Mountain region to assess humanitarian needs in
that area. It provided the mission with everything it
required to do its work. My Government has cooperated
with the relevant United Nations agencies, including the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, in finding and releasing
children abducted by opposition forces in a neighbouring
country and in returning them to their families. A number
of these children have been released, three of them during
the Special Representative's visit to the Sudan last year.

We listened with great interest to the statement made
this morning by the representative of the United States on
her Government's resolve to alleviate the suffering of
children in Africa. We fully appreciate that sentiment, and
we hope that the representative will translate her words into
action. She should acknowledge that her Government made
a mistake in bombing the Al-Shifa factory in the Sudan.

Last week, on a very sad occasion, many Sudanese
citizens gathered before the ruins of the Al-Shifa
pharmaceutical factory to mark the one-year anniversary of
the American aggression against that factory. Indeed, a full
year has elapsed since the United States of America
committed its act of aggression against the Al-Shifa factory
in my country. We continue on a daily basis to receive
relevant information. The whole world knows that this act
of aggression was the result not only of erroneous
information and intelligence but of a lack of Vision. We
would have expected a super-Power such as the United
States of America to set an example of humanity and
respect for rights, an example of justice and fairness; to
acknowledge the mistake it had made; and to compensate
the children of the Sudan for depriving them of the source
of 70 per cent of the medication they need to prevent
illnesses, and of 100 per cent of medication for animals,
who provide meat and milk.

We would like to reiterate once again that my
Government will continue to cooperate with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in his effort to
deal with the problem of children and armed conflict. In
this respect, we find it necessary to tackle this question in
a transparent manner and to give it the attention it
deserves. We must avoid falling into the trap of
concentrating on one region and neglecting others.

All of this is of prime importance for my country.
As a matter of fact, for years the rebel movement in
southern Sudan has been abducting large numbers of
innocent children, enlisting them forcibly in its ranks as
soldiers and preventing them from returning to their
families. These practices have been known to the
International Committee of the Red Cross for years and
years but the international community did not condemn or
deplore them.

My delegation supports the efforts undertaken by the
Special Representative aimed at supporting and enhancing
the cultural heritage and the special norms and values of
local societies and protecting them against deterioration
and disappearance, because these values are vital in
educating the new generations.

We would like to mention with appreciation the
study undertaken by Ms. Graca Machel on the impact of
conflicts on children. My delegation finds that it is
necessary to provide the necessary support to the Special
Representative in his mission and in his continued efforts
to raise awareness concerning this dangerous problem.

My delegation has read the draft resolution
submitted by Namibia on children and armed conflict. We
appreciate the interest of Security Council members on
this question, but we urge them once again to make
further practical efforts to put an end to the suffering of
children in armed conflict, in full coordination with
United Nations Members and its agencies and specialized
organs.

