Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to personally thank you,
Mr. President, and the entire delegation that you head
for the skilful and effective completion of the role of
President in the month that is ending, which has once
again been characterized by a very heavy agenda. I will
focus on a number of key issues.

One focus of our programme of work was the
meeting on the issue of inclusive development (see S/PV.7359). We agree with the premise that the
interconnection ofthe issues ofensuring security, human
rights and development has become more relevant in
the current period of the United Nations post-conflict
reconstruction of States. The United Nations needs
to assume a coordinating role. Peacebuilding support
must be based on national priorities that are developed
by national Governments and be geared towards the
development of national capacity. At the same time, we
call for moderation and caution in considering issues
within the framework of unofficial formats, particularly
those by the Security Council. We consistently support
the efficient division of labour among the principal
United Nations bodies, as well as consideration by the
Security Council of only those issues that have a direct
bearing on international peace and security.

Discussions in the Security Council have been very
productive on another important topic: peacebuilding.
We reiterate our assessment that the primary aims of
States that have overcome the most active stages of
conflict are consolidating national reconciliation and
establishing security and peace for all their people,
which are essential to avoid any repetition of armed
conflict.

Once again, we did not hear any good news from
the Middle East in the month of January. It has been a
year now since the Palestinians and Israelis suspended
their negotiations, and their rift is widening. The
situation on the ground continues to worsen, and the
issues concerned with normalizing the situation in the
Gaza Strip after the bloody conflict in 2014 still remain
unresolved. Under those conditions, all opportunities
must be used to unblock the peace process. Russia,
especially, is working hard to hold a ministerial meeting
of the Quartet as quickly as possible. Also, the work of
the Security Council needs to be more focused on the
Middle East peace process.

Another source of concern is the escalating
situation on the borders between Israel and Lebanon
and Syria. We call on all sides for restraint and caution.
We understand that emotions are heated, but the region
cannot afford to have another hotspot of conflict. That
could completely destabilize the region against the
backdrop of growing terrorist threats. In that regard, I
would like to express our condolences to the delegation
of Spain in connection with the death yesterday of a
Spanish peacekeeper of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon.

The Syrian conflict that has been dragging on has
a very negative impact on the situation in the Middle
East. We would like to once again emphasize that the
only way to stop the conflict is through dialogue. In
order to launch the process of national reconciliation,
all opportunities must be utilized. In that connection,
we have undertaken considerable efforts in launching
inter-Syrian consultative contacts in Moscow. Russia's
efforts on the Syrian settlement are completely
transparent. We are always ready to work on the basis
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
with all those who are truly interested in launching the
process of political resolution.

Everyone needs to understand that the process
will be lengthy and will require additional efforts in
developing a truly effective format for dialogue. Not all
representatives of the opposition who were invited to
Moscow were able to attend. We do not consider that a
major problem. Efforts to promote national dialogue in
Syria will continue, not only by us; we see added value
in the efforts by Egypt. We will welcome any effort by
other States or organizations that are aimed at creating
optimal conditions for inclusive national dialogue,
within the framework of which the Syrians will reach
an agreement by themselves. We also see potential
in the mission of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria, Mr. De Mistura, who is promoting a
number of interesting ideas that, of course, will require
the support of all interested parties.

The Council has considered the situation in
the Ukraine twice this month. Unfortunately, the
discussions have been highly politicized, while the
recent tragedies there have become pretexts for stoking
frenzy rather than promoting honest discussion about
the reasons for the Ukrainian crisis and ways of
overcoming it. We have again seen the flawed practice
of colleagues attempting to include unadoptable
provisions for propaganda purposes in documents
that are humanitarian in essence. We are certain that
genuine results in settling the conflict can be achieved
only through direct dialogue between Kyiv and Donetsk
and Lugansk, which the Ukrainian authorities have
declined for the time being, having adopted the ruinous
course of trying to solve the situation in the south-east
by force. Without the inclusive political process that
must be the framework for parameters of constitutional
reform, as required by the Geneva declaration and the
Minsk negotiations, an national settlement will be
unattainable.

In conclusion we would like to once again welcome
the delegations of Angola, , Malaysia, New Zealand,
Spain and Venezuela, whichjoined us on 1 January and
which right from the start have begun to make very
useful contributions to the work ofthe Council. We also
wish every success to the delegation of China, which
will lead the Council in February. It can count on our
full support.

