Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Let me
too begin by commending the Chinese delegation for
its initiative to convene today's open debate on this
important topic and by thanking the Secretary-General
and the otherbriefers fortheir enlightening presentations.

Seventy-three years ago, the founders of the United
Nations came together to sign the Charter of the United
Nations, which enshrines their strong commitment
to save future generations from the scourge of war,
protect human rights and dignity, respect international
law, and promote social progress and better standards
of life. Yet today's reality is a far cry from what the
founders of the United Nations envisioned. Protracted
armed conflicts, large-scale human rights abuses, and
complex cross-border problems such as terrorism and
human trafficking are just a few of the challenges
we face today. And amid the slow progress in the
international community's efforts to address these
challenges, multilateralism and the United Nations are
viewed with increased scepticism and suspicion. Critics
are asking whether the complexity oftoday's challenges,
along with polarization and inequality among and
within nations, have outduelled the Organization and
our collective will to realize the goals set forth in
its Charter.

Indeed, multilateralism is under fire. However,
none of these criticisms means that we should go back
to the days when the United Nations did not exist.
On the contrary, the United Nations must stand up
to the challenges. What is called for is not a perfect,
but more relevant United Nations. That is why for the
past two years we have dedicated ourselves to pooling
our wisdom with a View to creating a reformed and
reinvigorated United Nations. While reaffirming
our full support for the Secretary-General's reform
initiatives, I would like to highlight a couple of points
that I believe are important in our collective efforts
aimed at strengthening multilateralism and making the
United Nations more relevant.

First, the United Nations must make better use of
its convening power. The United Nations is the only
organization with both the legitimacy and capacity to
bring knowledge and resources of the international
community together to tackle global challenges. The
convening power of the United Nations is all the more
relevant today with the increased role and visibility of
non-State actors. From mobilizing financial resources
to seeking collective solutions to complex challenges,
the United Nations should leverage its convening
power to bring relevant actors together. The reason
why the Action for Peacekeeping initiative is so widely
supported is because its key goal is to bring together all
partners and stakeholders in supporting United Nations
peacekeeping operations. As Secretary-General
Guterres rightly pointed out, the resources are already
out there. The question is how to connect the dots.

Secondly, we must identify and magnify the
successes of multilateralism and build upon what has
proven to be effective. From the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and to the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, multilateralism has time and again proved its
ability to achieve ground-breaking successes. And,
most recently, multilateralism helped to bring the
Korean peninsula back on the road towards peace. The
unity of the Security Council in particular has played
a critical role in this regard. As we continue to work
towards the complete denuclearization and permanent
peace on the Korean peninsula, we count on the
Council remaining united in supporting the ongoing
process of negotiations towards a diplomatic solution,
while faithfully implementing the relevant resolutions
in place.

In our collective efforts to strengthen
multilateralism and the role of the United Nations, we
must benefit from the wisdom of Winston Churchill,
who is reputed to have said, "A pessimist sees the
difficulty in every opportunity; an optimist sees the
opportunity in every difficulty".

The Republic of Korea is a country whose very
existence is a living testament to the relevance and
competence of the United Nations. Had there been
no help from the United Nations from the time of its
foundation to the Korean War and in the post-war
reconstruction, the Republic of Korea as it stands
today would not exist. We are therefore committed
to playing a greater role in rebuilding confidence in
multilateralism and the United Nations, drawing upon
our unique experience of simultaneously achieving
industrialization and democratization. To this end, we
will focus mainly on the following three roles.

The first role we can play is that of facilitator.
In the process of transforming itself from a war-
stricken agrarian society to an industrial powerhouse
with a vibrant democracy in a span of half a century,
the Republic of Korea has earned a good reputation
and the trust of the international community. It is
therefore uniquely positioned to play a role as a bridge
in facilitating communication and cooperation among
relevant actors, including developed and developing
countries. A case in point is our role as one ofthe Chairs
of the Group of Friends on Peace Operations, together
with Norway and Ethiopia. We are committed to playing
a role as a facilitator or interlocutor in other areas as
well, wherever we deem it necessary or appropriate, in
order to help move the multilateral process forward.

The second role we can play is that of supporter.
Having overcome all the challenges and constraints
associated with being an aid recipient to then join the
ranks of full-fledged donor countries, the Republic
of Korea, more than anyone else, appreciates and
understands the difficulties that developing countries
face in their journey towards socioeconomic and
political development. We will use our experience as
a valuable asset in supporting developing countries,
especially those in transition, as well as fragile
States, in their efforts to achieve sustainable peace
and development. Such efforts will not be confined to
sharing our experiences on a bilateral basis, but extends
to multilateral arenas, as we did in our contribution to
reinvigorating the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
as its Chair last year.

The third role we can play is that of initiator. With
so many successes and failures in its quest for economic
prosperity and political stability, the Republic of Korea
has learned a number of precious lessons. It is therefore
better poised to have a balanced perspective on many
of today's emerging issues and global challenges. From
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals, to peacebuilding and sustaining peace, and to
new technologies, the Republic of Korea will continue
to seek a constructive and more proactive role, initiating
and advancing new agendas for promoting global peace
and security.

As former Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold
once reminded us, the United Nations was created
not to take humankind to heaven, but to save us from
hell. Undoubtedly, the greater the challenge is, the
bigger the need is for a strengthened role of the United
Nations and multilateralism. The Republic of Korea
will remain firmly committed to working closely with
all stakeholders within and outside the United Nations
towards this end, playing a role befitting a country of
its stature.

