Ms. Loj (Denmark): I should like to thank the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
Ambassador Denisov, for his comprehensive briefing,
which my delegation fully endorses. His able
administration of the Committee's work is greatly
appreciated. We support the ambitious 90-day work
programme he has submitted, which includes well-
established priorities. My Government also has high
expectations for what the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) can accomplish when established,
and we note with great satisfaction that the CTED is
breaking new ground.

As Denmark fully associates itself with the
forthcoming statement by my colleague, the
Ambassador of Luxembourg, on behalf of the
European Union, I would like to limit my intervention
to a few brief points.

First, I would like to express my Government's
general support for the recommendations on counter-
terrorism contained in the report of the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change. In cruel and
despicable ways, terrorism keeps reminding us how
serious a threat it poses to international peace and
security. A lot has been done by individual countries,
as well as through multilateral cooperation -
including through the efforts of international, regional
and subregional groups - in limiting the terrorists'
room to manoeuvre. But, as we all realize, this is only
the beginning. We are facing a long and arduous battle
that requires a sustained and multi-pronged approach.

In this long-term endeavour, it is essential that
the United Nations take the leading role. We agree that
it is important to develop a comprehensive strategy to
counter the threat of terrorism and look forward to
making our contribution to implementing this
recommendation of the High-level Panel.

It is of great concern that a growing number of
countries are falling behind in their reporting
obligations. We recognize that reports alone do not
stop the work of terrorists. Nevertheless, those reports
remain the backbone of the CTC's ability to monitor
the actual steps taken on the ground. It is therefore of
particular concern that 31 countries have not submitted
their second reports; in fact, those 31 countries are
losing touch with the CTC. We realize that reporting
can be a strain on already limited administrative
resources. But in the light of the potential risk posed by
terrorists exploiting loopholes, we urge those
Governments to seek assistance in meeting their
obligations rather than simply giving up.

While the responsibility for reporting and
implementing obligations under resolution 1373 (2001)
lies with States, the CTC should also be creative in
helping countries to overcome possible constraints in
order to get back on track. The establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED)
provides a much needed infusion of resources to
Secretariat support for the CTC. The CTED is already
at the starting block and will soon be up and running.
We are hopeful that that will pave the way for a more
substantial dialogue with States on the implementation
of their obligations. As the Chairman has outlined in
the work programme for the next 90 days, the first on-
site visits to States are likely to take place soon. We
strongly support those visits and encourage States to
extend full cooperation to the visiting teams.

Much has been said about the need to make it
easier for countries to access the technical assistance
they need to fulfil their obligations. My Government
considers that a high priority. The CTED's role as
facilitator of technical assistance is crucial and we are
moving in the right direction, but the glass may not be
even half full. We hope that a fully staffed CTED can
ensure that needs are efficiently identified and
prioritized. Also, it is essential to focus on matching
those needs with potential donors and implementing
agencies. We look forward to working with the CTC
and the CTED in achieving that goal.

Finally, I strongly believe that we will achieve
those goals only if we succeed in duly involving
international and regional organizations. Therefore, I
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the
Chairman and the organizers of the CTC's fourth
special meeting with international, regional and
subregional organizations and bodies, which will take
place later this month. Better cooperation is the key to
ensuring efficient use of resources invested in
countering the terrorist threat.

