Mr. Laursen (Denmark): First, allow me to
underscore that Denmark aligns itself with the statement
of the European Union.

Let me start by thanking the presidency of Morocco
for having organized today's timely debate focused on
post-conflict peacebuilding. Denmark welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in
the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746). We also wish to
thank him for his personal commitment to strengthening
the United Nations efforts towards building lasting
peace in post-conflict countries.

It is vital that we continue to strengthen the
United Nations peacebuilding capabilities, and that the
United Nations deliver timely, coherent and integrated
support to nationally owned and led processes. In
our View, the key to success lies in delivering actual
concrete results on the ground that are inclusive and
demand-driven. Ownership and leadership of the kind
demonstrated by the Group of Seven Plus is noteworthy
and should be encouraged. In this respect, partnerships
of all interested parties - including the international
financial institutions, civil society and the private
sector - are all crucial to ensuring long-term stability,
maximizing consistency and avoiding overlap.

The Secretary-General's report outlines how the
implementation of the 2009 agenda has enabled the
United Nations to provide "a more coherent, timely
and effective response to immediate post-conflict
priorities" (S/2012/746, para. 2). This is a welcome
development and one that needs further focus and
attention over a wide range of interrelated issues that
the United Nations system faces on a daily basis.

The report also acknowledges a number of
areas where progress has been less impressive. It
is of significant interest to Denmark that progress
continue towards promoting and increasing the active
participation of women in peacebuilding, governance
and economic recovery. Denmark firmly supports
resolution 1325 (2000) and the setting of concrete
targets so as to ensure women's equal participation in
the promotion of peace and security.

Post-conflict peacebuilding is increasingly high
on our collective international agenda, and with good
reason. No post-conflict or fragile country has achieved
any of the Millennium Development Goals. The
United Nations plays a central role in addressing this
complex and pressing issue. To this end, Denmark has
been a strong supporter of a more ambitious and more
effective United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
and Denmark is ready to deliver.

Denmark hopes to become a member of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2013. As highlighted in the Secretary-
General's report, the Peacebuilding Commission should
continue to strengthen its political support to countries
emerging from conflict in order to foster greater
coherence among funds and initiatives and to mobilize
international support.

Furthermore, Denmark supports the work of
the Peacebuilding Fund. The Fund provides crucial,
timely and gap-filling financial support during
critical transition moments. Consequently, Denmark
has recently decided to renew its financial support
by providing a new contribution of 50 million Danish
kroner - some $8.6 million - for the years 2012-2014.

It is our conviction that one of the key ingredients
in a successful integrated approach to post-conflict
peacebuilding involves quick and hassle-free
deployment of civilian capacity, whether within the
United Nations system or beyond. Allow me on this
occasion to reaffirm Denmark's support, including
through substantial financial support, for the
Secretary-General's civilian capacity initiative and the
team working diligently on furthering this important
work. Denmark welcomes the Secretary-General's
report on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2011/527), and encourages further progress on this
central aspect of post-conflict stabilization efforts.

As co-Chair of the International Dialogue on
Peacebuilding and Statebuilding, Denmark would
like to encourage the United Nations system to bring
even greater focus to the New Deal for International
Engagement in Fragile States when working with
conflict-affected and fragile countries. The Steering
Group of the International Dialogue met earlier this
week in Juba, South Sudan, and confirmed a strong
focus on the implementation of the New Deal in pilot
countries in coming years. The real challenge is in
many ways to create a strong and lasting partnership
at the country level. The United Nations has a key role
to play in this regard. The ambition is to build peace
and stronger States in some of the world's poorest and
most fragile nations, and the New Deal can make a real
difference in that respect by supporting country-owned
and country-led processes out of fragility.
Fragile States are those furthest from reaching
the Millennium Development Goals. This is not
sustainable. Denmark believes we should draw upon the
work of the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding
and Statebuilding, including the peacebuilding and
State-building goals, and work to ensure that a new
development framework post-2015 recognizes that
peace, security and development are interconnected.

In conclusion, Denmark is committed to doing its
part. We will, in coming years, further scale up our
support to and cooperation with fragile States, and
Denmark will continue to give full support to the work
of the Secretary-General in this respect.

