Mr. Williamson (United States of America): I
thank the Secretary-General for his remarks. I would
also like to thank Mr. Gaviria for his thoughtful
presentation.

The United States is committed to its membership
in the Organization of American States (OAS), and
believes that there is a vital role for regional and
subregional organizations to play in the furtherance of
peace and security. One thing that can be a limitation
on the United Nations is that it can be too distant and
too bureaucratic - a victim of its own success, with
many more Members than its founders could have
imagined. The United Nations is often stretched thin in
efforts to respond to problems in all corners of the
globe. Regional organizations - as opposed to those
of us here in New York - have a far greater vested
interest in, and sensitivity to, regional situations, not
least because they recognize that a crisis in a
neighbouring State can soon become their own crisis.

Regional organizations help to impose
responsibility upon their member States, strengthening
the will of States to deal with regional problems.
Regional organizations have a great deal to teach, and
learn, from each other. From supervising elections to
training police, from economic development to
regional law enforcement and from border control to
the establishment of the rule of law, expertise
transcends national and regional boundaries. A worthy
outcome of this meeting would be the development of a
systematic way to share that expertise.

I would like to ask Mr. Gaviria whether, as he
considers the problems and challenges facing regions
other than our own, he thinks that there are areas in
which the Organization of American States has
developed expertise that can be shared with other
regional organizations and whether there are models of
cooperation with the United Nations that can be
adapted usefully by others.

Additionally, I would like to touch briefly on just
two areas in which regional organizations can work in
conjunction with the United Nations.

First, the United Nations should rely increasingly
on regional organizations to assume responsibility for
peacekeeping efforts. In that regard, I praise the
decision of the African Union to establish a Peace and
Security Council to resolve and manage conflicts on
the African continent. In that regard, I have a question
for the representative of the African Union. Several
African States face internal instability and conflicts
that, while not immediate threats to peace and security,
nonetheless require the attention and assistance of the
international community. The Security Council takes
up those issues, but often a coordinated economic and
political approach is needed. Guinea-Bissau is one
example; another is the Central African Republic. What
role could the African Union's new Peace and Security
Council play in addressing those problems?

The United States will continue to support the
development of the sustained capacity of subregional
organizations and African militaries to prevent,
mitigate and resolve conflicts and crises. Consistent
with the Group of Eight Action Plan to enhance
African peacekeeping capacity, where regional and
subregional organizations show promise and member
commitment, the United States provides assistance to
enhance both ongoing peace-support activities as well
as long-term training and infrastructure requirements.
For example, the United States has been pleased to
provide over $10 million to assist with South Africa's
efforts in Burundi, where South African peacekeepers
have helped to keep an unsteady peace process on track
for over a year.

Also with regard to the African Union, the issue
of human rights atrocities and the need to end the
culture of impunity in African States such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi is
before the Security Council and the United Nations. A
lasting resolution to those conflicts requires that
accountability and justice be carried out by the people
and transitional Governments in those States. To do so
they will need assistance to develop their investigative
and judicial capabilities, as well as the ability to
establish fact-finding commissions. The African Union
has established a bureau to address human rights
issues. What role can the African Union play in
assisting with those transitional justice issues in places
like the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi? Would the perception of justice be better
served if a regional organization like the African Union
assisted with fact-finding tribunals rather than having
them run entirely by the United Nations or other
international organizations?

During the recent crisis in Cote d'Ivoire the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and its member States developed capable
military leadership and competent units. In response,
the United States has worked with France, the United
Kingdom and others to provide significant assistance to
the ECOWAS deployment. That support, valued at over
$4.5 million, includes troop and equipment
transportation, as well as maintenance of United-
States-supplied equipment such as vehicles, generators
and radios.
Donor support from maturing regional
organizations must be multifaceted and contingent
upon the good-faith efforts of the member States.
Significantly, the United Nations has formalized the
importance of working with regional groups. The
Security Council has just passed resolution 1474
(2003), calling on regional organizations -
particularly the African Union - to assist Somali
parties and States in the region in their efforts to fully
implement the arms embargo, which is an essential part
of the Somali national reconciliation process.

Because the traffic in arms, drugs and diamonds
destabilizes Governments and undermines peace and
security in Africa, regional efforts can be increasingly
important. In that vein, I have a question for the
representative of ECOWAS. The Security Council has
spent a great deal of time addressing the issue of small
arms in West Africa. The ECOWAS Moratorium on the
Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small
Arms and Light Weapons in West Africa is consistently
identified in our discussions as having the most useful
potential for stopping the flood of weapons, and the
Security Council has endorsed the Moratorium in
several of its resolutions. But the Moratorium and its
enforcement provisions are not working as effectively
as they should. Why is that? A key problem appears to
be the failure of ECOWAS States to establish the
monitoring and enforcement agencies they pledged to
establish. What can the United Nations Secretariat do
to spur that?

The United Nations Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is working closely with regional and
subregional actors elsewhere in Africa, particularly for
the enhancement of the capabilities of African troop
contributors. Those efforts are not intended to replace
the engagement of non-African countries in
peacekeeping operations on the continent, but they
recognize an increasing commitment and responsibility
on the part of African countries. The recent meeting
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and African Chiefs of Defence Staff was an important
step in developing a framework for enhancing African
peacekeeping capabilities on a multilateral basis.

A second area in which regional organizations
can work in conjunction with the United Nations is
counter-terrorism, a problem not limited to just a
handful of countries. Since 11 September 2001, we
have seen the United Nations galvanized to fight the
threat of terrorism. But to be effective, the United
Nations must combat terrorism on a regional basis as
well. No State can control its own borders alone; it
must have the active cooperation of its neighbours. The
vocal reaction of the African Union to the terrorist
attack in Kenya and that of the Association of South-
East Asian Nations to the bombing in Indonesia signal
recognition, on a regional basis, of the human and
economic toll of terrorism.

The 6 March special meeting of the Security
Council Counter-Terrorism Committee showed that
international organizations - including global,
regional and subregional organizations - have major
roles to play in the full worldwide implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). That meeting
brought more than 65 such organizations together and
will help solidify regional relationships and raise the
counter-terrorism profile of those organizations.

The United States is pleased that the Organization
of American States (OAS) has agreed to hold a follow-
up conference in Washington for regional and
subregional organizations, and we look forward to
providing support to the OAS on that initiative.

Regional organizations - including the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Organization of American States - have
endorsed resolution 1373 (2001), have drafted counter-
terrorism action plans and have created special
counter-terrorism bodies to help their member States
implement the resolution. I would be interested to hear
how they plan to live up to resolution 1373 (2001).

Regional and subregional organizations in
Africa - including the African Union, ECOWAS and
the Southern African Development Community -
must assist their member States by encouraging them to
give top priority to working with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and with global/functional
organizations to improve African States' counter-
terrorism capabilities and to become parties to all 12
international Conventions relating to terrorism.

Organizations such as the Group of Eight, the
Financial Action Task Force and the international
financial institutions have developed expertise,
standards and practices that are invaluable to United
Nations Member States, to regional organizations and
to the Counter-Terrorism Committee as they all work
separately and together to implement resolution 1373
(2001). The challenge will be to define the venue: to
develop, through experience, the most efficient ways of
working together.

Ultimately, States must take responsibility for
conflict that plagues their regions. Through dealing
with issues on a regional level, States may take pride in
living up to their responsibilities to their neighbours
and to their own people. Regional organizations will be
most successful if their member States are truly
representative of their people.

