Ms. Al-Mutawakel: I would first like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to bring the voice of
civil society to the Security Council. Many Yemenis
hope that the Council can have a positive impact on
their war-weary lives.

I have come here from forgotten Yemen,
overburdened by bearing witness to the grave human
suffering that millions of Yemenis have endured as a
result ofthe war. My country is in a state oftotal collapse.

On my shoulders, I bear the weight of the stories
that have been gathered over the last three years by the
Mwatana Organization for Human Rights. Mwatana
operates across Yemen in extremely difficult and
complicated conditions, and we do everything possible
to document and give voice to the victims and survivors
of human rights violations that are happening daily by
all parties to the conflict in all parts ofthe country. One
of Mwatana's goals is to build a human rights memory
that will provide the foundation for future justice and
accountability for the people of Yemen. Most Yemenis
are not involved in the war and do not have anything to
do with military activity. The most common refrain we
hear from people in our field work is "We hate war. We
want to live."

War in Yemen did not happen suddenly. It is the
result of accumulated mistakes by all parties over the
past years. However, there are real opportunities to end
this war and achieve a fair settlement that puts Yemenis
on track to build a State grounded in the rule of law.
For those who counted on war to bring solutions, what
has war achieved except thousands of civilians killed
and injured, many of them women and children? War
has destroyed the basic and limited infrastructure
that Yemen took decades to assemble. War led to the
collapse of the health system. War is stopping hundreds
of thousands of Yemeni children from going to school,
undermining the development of an entire generation.
Hundreds of children are forcibly recruited to serve
in the front lines. War has led to a humanitarian crisis
that is so acute that famine is imminent. Millions are
invisibly internally displaced, and recently an outbreak
of cholera has infected thousands of Yemenis.

If we put a lens closer on Yemen, we could easily
catch the terrifying absence of State institutions in
areas controlled by de facto authority of the Houthi
Ansar Allah armed group and its ally, former President
Saleh, as well as in areas controlled by the authority
of President Hadi and parties and armed groups allied
with him. Yemenis aspire to a strong Administration
capable of providing security and basic services.
Instead, they have only found armed groups engaged in
conflict over power at their expense. War is providing
an ideal environment for extremist groups to take hold
and flourish. These groups have been working tirelessly
through the war to consolidate their power at the local
level. They are virtual landmines in Yemen's future
and they cannot be weakened unless a state of law and
order exists.

Yemenis today need the international community
and the Security Council to fulfil their responsibilities
to protect them. Throughout the past three years of
war, all parties to the conflict have committed grave
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. This cannot be allowed
to continue unchecked.

The Mwatana Organization for Human Rights
has documented grave violations by the Saudi and
Emirates-led coalition that has brought about the
killing of thousands of civilians, mostly women
and children. This coalition has struck residential
compounds, public markets, cultural and heritage sites,
hospitals, schools, bridges and factories. We have also
documented extensive violations by Ansar Allah armed
groups and their ally former President Saleh, especially
in Taiz, including the use of landmines in different
areas in Yemen. Furthermore, we have documented
violations, including extrajudicial executions by the
forces of President Hadi and parties and armed groups
allied with him. Both sides share responsibility for the
indiscriminate shelling ofcivilians andcivilianfacilities,
recruitment of children, denial of humanitarian access,
arbitrary detention, enforced disappearance, torture,
violations of freedom of speech and the disappearance
of a free press, harassing minorities, such as Bahais,
and other grave violations.

This war is taking the greatest toll on Yemeni
women, who have become prime civilian targets for
all warring parties. They have lost their breadwinners,
forcing them to suffer an even greater level of poverty
than was evident before the conflict. Women are living
an increasingly dangerous and insecure situation that
restricts their movement and ability to fight poverty.
Scenes of mothers, wives and daughters running from
one prison to another in hope of hearing something
about their detained and forcibly disappeared loved
ones has been one of the hardest things to witness in
this war. The people of Yemen look to the international
community to ensure accountability for these serious
violations of international law. Yemenis expect to see
serious steps taken to restore their confidence in the
capacity of the United Nations to maintain peace and
security and promote justice.

During war, peacebuilding becomes an act of
courage and bravery. I call on the Security Council to
come together to revive the peace talks so there can
be an end of this senseless war. I call on the Security
Council to support the Special Envoy for Yemen to be
strong in the face of warring parties and to impress an
inclusive peace plan that is not biased by the vision of
one party alone. I call for the comprehensive inclusion
of all Yemeni parties in the peace talks and to give
ample space for the participation of civil society,
women and youth. I call on Security Council members
to stand beside Yemenis, halt support for any party to
the conflict and stop transferring arms to any warring
party in the country.

The suffering of Yemenis cannot come to an end
unless war ends. Long-term commitments are needed
to promote peace. The Security Council also needs to
take urgent concrete action to immediately mitigate
suffering. These actions will require the Security
Council to show courage, commitment and resolve.
The Security Council should urgently establish an
international independent commission of inquiry to
investigate violations by all parties to the conflict, stop
the sale of weapons to parties involved in human rights
violations in Yemen, demand an end to the targeting of
civilians and civilian objects through aerial and ground
attacks, ensure the release of civilian detainees who are
arbitrarily held and those forcibly disappeared under
the authority of the Houthi-Saleh alliance or under the
Government of President Hadi and his allies, demand
that there be unhindered humanitarian access to all areas
and all people in need, ensure that Sana'a International
Airport is reopened, insist upon immediate agreement
among the parties for a mechanism to pay salaries to
public sector employees, protect Hodeida port from
the armed conflict and ensure that it is restored to full
functionality so it can better meet the needs of millions
of Yemenis, and demand that the restrictions on the
operation of civil-society organizations are lifted, press
freedoms restored and all detainedjournalists released,
especially those who are under Houthi authority.

We have before us an opportunity for the Security
Council to take action to protect the people of Yemen
and support us in finding the path to a sustainable
peace. Despite the difficulty of the situation on the
ground, it is still possible to turn around and chart a path
towards peace, democracy and economic development.
However, as the war continues, we need to keep in
mind that what is possible today might not be possible
tomorrow. Urgent action is therefore crucial.

