Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Mr. President, I
have a text in front of me, but, as you just said,
Ambassador Brahimi has put across some very
important messages that we need to respond to. So I
will deviate from my text a little, and I apologize if my
remarks may seem a little choppy as a consequence.
But there are basically three or four points that we
would like to put across.

The first point is to congratulate Ambassador
Brahimi and his team on the good work that they have
done in Afghanistan. Paying compliments is normally
the easiest part of our work. But because we pay
compliments every time a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General comes here and speaks to us, our
compliments become so routine that it is difficult to
explain that this time they are real and not perfunctory
and routine. As I struggled for words, I luckily found
relief in the report of the Secretary-General, where he
said that

"under the wise and inspired leadership of
Lakhdar Brahimi, [the staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)]
have endured difficult conditions, long hours,
much stress and no rest over the past six months.
Yet they have delivered quality results in all their
activities, be they political, humanitarian,
developmental, logistical or administrative".
(S/2002/73 7, para. 71)

I believe that is an understatement by the
Secretary-General. I say this having taken note of the
points that Ambassador Brahimi emphasized to us.
First, he said that UNAMA did this with a very light
expatriate footprint. Secondly, he talked not just about
the complexities of having to deal with an obviously
complex political solution in Afghanistan but also
about the complexities of trying to integrate the United
Nations family within Afghanistan. For all that he has
done, we really do commend Ambassador Brahimi.

My second point concerns the political situation.
The Secretary-General's report of 11 July 2002 on the
latest situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security as well as the
presentation that Ambassador Brahimi has given us
paint a balanced and realistic picture of the state of
affairs in Afghanistan. We hope that they will be
studied even after these meetings. The remarkable
thing that we should take note of is that, despite the
ambitious time line set by the Bonn Agreement and the
inherent complexities created by long years of warfare
and neglect, the Bonn process has largely been on
track.

The big achievement in all this was the convening
of the Emergency Loya Jirga. We can point to the
imperfections of the Loya Jirga. Yet, as Ambassador
Brahimi said a few minutes ago, it was an event that
many people doubted would ever take place. The fact
that it did take place, on schedule and without a single
security incident, is a great achievement. I completely
agree with the Ambassador's assessment. Certainly, the
Loya Jirga has gone a long way towards providing a
more balanced, broad-based and representative
Transitional Authority for Afghanistan. This is an
outcome resulting from Afghan participation and input.
We believe that the Loya Jirga may have actually
provided the foundation for change as the Secretary-
General put it in the report, through "the promotion of
a new standard of legitimacy: namely, that power
should be based on popular participation rather than
military might". (S/2002/737, para. 42)

 

We all know that, despite these achievements,
considerable challenges remain. Indeed, Ambassador
Brahimi spelled out those challenges in his remarks
here today. The first and the biggest challenge is
reflected in the fact that there is in Afghanistan today
an existing power infrastructure that is the result of two
or three decades of conflict. We talk about all the
armed factions in various parts of the country. Our
challenge now is to try and persuade those armed
factions to join the main political process in the
country. The good news, as Ambassador Brahimi
reported to us is that, "no one has so far opted out of
the peace process" (supra). That is the good news. But
it is not enough. The challenge is to go one step
further, to integrate those regional military leaders and
to try to persuade them that it is in their long-term
interest to relinquish whatever economic and political
power they have in their own regions to the central
authorities. That is one of the appeals that I was going
to make.

I had three other appeals that I wanted to make:
first, to call on President Hamid Karzai, after receiving
the compelling vote of confidence from the Emergency
Loya Jirga, to redouble his efforts to extend the
authority of the Transitional Administration beyond
Kabul; secondly, to call on the Afghan diaspora to
respond to President Karzai's call for them to return to
help in the reconstruction of Afghanistan, which would
go much further in helping Afghanistan than criticism
from afar; and thirdly, to call on the Afghan delegates
who participated in the Emergency Loya Jirga and who
showed a tremendous amount of political courage and
maturity to continue to display the same degree of
commitment in the months and years ahead.

Having made those calls, I realize that they can
be credible only if we can in a sense respond to the
concerns of those to whom they are addressed.
Ambassador Brahimi has just told us that foremost
among these concerns is security, which is one of the
main critical requirements of sustainable peace but
which has remained elusive in many parts of the
country. I believe that this is perhaps the main message
that Ambassador Brahimi was trying to put across to
us. As he said in his remarks, the recent assassination
of Vice-President Haji Abdul Qadir certainly caused
quite a few tremors in Afghanistan.

I was also very troubled by the remarks that
Ambassador Brahimi made about intimidation
involving the National Directorate for Security. He
referred to the case of a young man who died after
interrogation. I do not know whether Ambassador
Brahimi will be responding to questions later. If he is,
can he tell us how we can try to make the National
Directorate for Security, which we understand is
causing much fear within Kabul and elsewhere in
Afghanistan, a bit more open and accountable to ensure
that it is not perceived to be a negative force in
Afghanistan? But that is only a small part of the
picture.

The larger question is the challenge of
establishing security not just in Kabul but throughout
Afghanistan. We are glad that Ambassador Brahimi
applied the rules of the Brahimi report when he spoke
to us today and told the Security Council "what it
needs to know and not what it wants to hear"
(5/2000/809, para. 64).
I thought that it was very brave of Ambassador
Brahimi, and also of the Secretary-General, to make a
very strong case for the possibility of expanding the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to other
parts of the country.

I hope that the Council will take note of what he
said after calling for the expansion of ISAF. He said:

"We continue to believe that the expansion
of ISAF would have an enormous impact on
security and that it could be achieved with
relatively few troops, at relatively little cost and
with little danger" (supra).

This is a fairly strong point that Ambassador
Brahimi is putting across to us. I suspect that I am not
giving away any secrets if I suggest that some people
will be sceptical about the suggestion he is making, but
I would ask him if, when he responds, he could
highlight that point. Indeed, most of us are sympathetic
and supportive of his request, and if he could elaborate
a little more on this issue, then possibly the case for
expanding ISAF beyond Kabul might, hopefully, gain
some traction in the course of these discussions here.

Of course, as I said earlier, all the other calls that
we have made through the regional commanders to join
the main political process, the call on President Karzai
to expand the scope of his authority - all of that is
linked to the establishment of security. I hope that we
will, during the course of this meeting, show great
support for the call that Ambassador Brahimi has made
to us.

Finally, a quick word on the humanitarian
situation. Here, of course, we all know that, while the
worst of the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan has
been avoided, much more remains to be done in areas
relating to humanitarian relief, recovery and
reconstruction.

We all know that the donor community made
generous pledges at the Tokyo donors' conference, but,
again, as Ambassador Brahimi has just told us, he is
calling for an urgent translation of the pledges made
into commitments. I hope that will also be
forthcoming.

In conclusion, I wish to make two points. The
first is to emphasize the point that Ambassador
Brahimi made in his conclusion:

"The challenge before us now is to prove to
the people of Afghanistan that we will not
disengage until we make good on our promises to
them, and that we will not allow setbacks to
reverse our course. We owe this to the people of
Afghanistan and to regional and global security"
(supra).

I am glad that he added an important last phrase,
when he said:

"For we know all too well that instability in
a remote part of the world can have grave
repercussions far beyond the borders of
Afghanistan."

We support that conclusion.

I wish to touch on another point. The thought
struck me as I was listening to Ambassador Brahimi
that perhaps the big lesson that we can learn from the
latest example of Afghanistan is that, even in a country
such as Afghanistan, which has experienced decades of
conflict and which is known to have martial traditions
and so on, there is indeed among the people a very
deep desire for peace. If the international community
can give them even the barest amount of help, they
want to seize that opportunity and go back to a normal,
peaceful life.

If we can succeed, in a sense, in turning back
decades of conflict in a county such as Afghanistan,
imagine the impact on the minds of people in other
countries which have experienced far less conflict but
which also want to return to a normal life. So if we can,
with a light expatriate footprint, turn things around in
Afghanistan, imagine what we can do in other
countries around the world.

