Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to thank Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim and my
great friend former General Assembly President
Eliasson for their briefings. I would also like to convey
to them the gratitude of the Republic of Panama for
their tireless efforts and personal dedication to this
difficult task. We hope they will continue to work as

vigorously as they have in the past.

There are currently three closely interlinked
socio-political processes under way in the Sudan that
involve the Security Council. These are the peace
process; the deployment and operationalization of the
Hybrid Operation; and the decision of the Council to
refer the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court. None of those processes is making the
appropriate progress expected. As pointed out by
Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Salim, the failure of the peace
process is in large part due to the failure, both on the
part of the Khartoum Government and certain rebel
groups, to decide to begin a political dialogue.
Moreover, some of the rebel groups are being
supported by influential members of the international
community from within and outside the region.

With regard to the deployment of the Hybrid
Operation, despite a small amount of progress, there is
a clear lack of cooperation on the part of the Khartoum
Government. In addition, despite significant efforts in
that regard by the Organization, including the Security
Council and the Secretariat, the United Nations has not
been able to put together the necessary troops and
equipment to allow the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur to carry out its mandate.

With regard to the decision of the Council to refer
the situation in Darfur to the International Criminal
Court, the Court has carried out the task given to it.
Nevertheless, the Council has not provided the support
that decision merits. In that connection, I cannot fail to
refer to the words of President Kabila as cited here by
Ambassador Sawers:

(spoke in English)

4:

. one cannot put justice aside and hope for a
durable peace ..." (supra).
(spoke in Spanish)

If we add to the foregoing the repeated
breakdown of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement -
as recently reflected in the reprehensible destruction of
the town of Abyei - and the conflict between the

Governments of the Sudan and Chad, we cannot but
conclude that, despite the words of Ambassador
Spatafora, we are facing a fairly hopeless situation.
Given that situation, we cannot hope to overcome the
violence in Darfur and in the Sudan in general unless
the Council and all Members of the United Nations act
differently and in greater conformity with the decisions
of the Council. As Mr. Eliasson has said, that will
require that we provide incentives and disincentives to
the parties to the conflict. As the Permanent
Representative of Libya said, it will require more
active participation by civil society and traditional
leaders. And as the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom said, it will require strengthening the
current sanctions, especially the arms embargo, and the
imposition of new sanctions if necessary.

