Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): I should like first
to congratulate you, Madam, on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July, and also to express my appreciation to you and
the other members of the Security Council for this
opportunity to address this Chamber on a matter that is
of grave importance to all of us - the peace, security
and stability of the Middle East.

The Philippines associates itself with the
statement delivered this morning by the representative
of the Arab Republic of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Align Movement, but at the same time wishes to
stress certain points.

The Philippines position regarding the situation
in the Middle East, specifically the Palestinian
question, remains clear and consistent. The Philippines
has always supported the establishment of a free and
independent Palestinian State, and the Philippines has
for many years joined in the global clamour for the
establishment of a Palestinian homeland. In this regard,
the Philippines sees merit in the two-State solution
proposed by our partners for peace, and hopes that both
Israel and Palestine will join hands together to achieve
a long-lasting and durable solution to the problem.
The Philippines is sensitive to the legitimate
security concerns of the State of Israel and the right of
its people to live free from fear and free from harm.
Indeed, the Philippines shares Israel's deep concern for
its safety and its existence as a State. But as we have
witnessed repeatedly, force only begets force.

The Philippines joins the Non-Aligned Movement
and other partners in calling for the full and immediate
lifting of the blockade leveled against Gaza to enable,
to the extent possible, the free entry of food, medical
supplies and other daily necessities. The Philippines
believes that the continued existence of this blockade
only succeeds in alienating and punishing the innocent
Palestinians. Moreover, the residents of Gaza must also
be allowed to move freely and to travel to their place
of work or employment outside of Gaza without
hindrance or harassment. We cannot turn a blind eye to
the suffering of innocent Palestinian civilians in Gaza,
particularly women and children, who suffer the most
in this conflict. The United Nations therefore bears the
inescapable responsibility to take the steps necessary to
alleviate the pain and suffering of the Palestinian
people.

The Philippines urges Israel and Palestine to
re-establish their proximity talks and negotiations. It is
a tortuous and fitful process, but it is the only viable
course of action. The Philippines believes that only a
diplomatic solution - that is, resumption of a sincere
and meaningful dialogue between the two contending
parties - can bring a just, comprehensive and
enduring solution to this problem. The environment of
conflict and anguish and the climate of fear should not
be allowed to continue. Instead, both parties must
promote a climate of trust and respect towards one
another, as future neighbour States.

The Philippines strongly supports the role of the
Madrid Quartet - the United States, the European
Union, the Russian Federation and the United Nations -
the Arab Group, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the Non-Aligned Movement and even
non-governmental organizations and advocacy groups in
ensuring that the momentum for peace talks does not
fizzle out.

From a much broader perspective, all countries in
the Middle East must be encouraged to find the
fortitude to explore uncharted avenues to durable peace
in their part of the world. The 2010 Review Conference
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), through follow-on action to the
resolution on the Middle East adopted at the 1995 NPT
Review and Extension Conference, has opened a
gateway through which other options could contribute
towards a peaceful Middle East.

In conclusion, the Philippines applauds the
Security Council for its full and continuous
involvement in this issue. I wish to assure the Council
and all of our partners in the United Nations that the
Philippines stands ready to do its part to contribute to
the building of a lasting peace in the region and to
helping Israel and Palestine find a way forward
towards peaceful and friendly coexistence.

