Mr. Guehenno: Several delegations have
expressed their concern with respect to the events
along the Macedonian border and their potential impact
on the situation in Kosovo. I would like to respond to
those concerns.

First, with regard to the situation on the border, I
am not in a position at this stage to give additional
information on the incidents mentioned by the
delegation of Ukraine. But I would like to inform the
Council that just yesterday no less than 35 Kosovo
Albanians were arrested for illegally crossing the
border into Kosovo. Over the last weekend, no less
than 96 Kosovo Albanians were similarly intercepted
while crossing the border. I think this shows the degree
to which the Kosovo Force (KFOR) is actively
patrolling the border to make sure that it does not
transform Kosovo into a safe haven for extremists as
the situation returns to normal in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia.

Secondly, a question was raised by the delegation
of Jamaica about the impact of border closures. Indeed,
the closure of the border does complicate significantly
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). It also complicates
police rotations. At this stage, I do not think it has yet
directly affected the operations of the police. But I
think it affects them indirectly, in the sense that
increased economic hardship in Kosovo can certainly
only play into the hands of those extremists who do not
want Kosovo to return to normalcy.

More broadly, the representative of Singapore
raised the issue of the impact of the events in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on our whole
strategy in Kosovo. At this stage, I would just say that
this is a reminder that there will not be any lasting
solution in the Balkans that does not address the
regional dimension. That is true at the political level
because the principles that are established in one place
have validity in other places; we always have to take
into consideration the implications of what is decided
in one situation for other situations. That is true also in
the very practical sense that we know that organized
crime does not recognize borders or boundaries: there
have been links between organized crime and extremist
activities. Some kind of regional approach - in police
work, for instance 4 is certainly warranted.

As far as the role of the United Nations is
concerned vis-a-vis the situation in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, other
organizations - the European Union, the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) - have taken a leading role. The United
Nations has a supportive role to play and, as the
Secretary-General mentioned in the letter just cited by
the representative of Macedonia, we stand ready to
give our full support and to share whatever expertise
we have to help in the follow-up to what is now being
done by NATO in operation Essential Harvest. It is
clear that that operation sends a strong political signal.
It is also achieving, we hope, very practical results. But
beyond the political signal that is being sent, there will
certainly be a need for monitoring. There will be a
need for a return to normalcy. That requires time, and
we stand ready to give our support in any way that is
asked of us.

The representative of Colombia asked about the
registration process outside of Kosovo. I would like to
emphasize that much has been done to facilitate out-of-
Kosovo registration and voting. Agreements have been
reached with the International Organization for
Migration and with the OSCE, and between the OSCE
and the relevant authorities in Serbia and Montenegro,
which have allowed for the opening of registration
centres in both Serbia and Montenegro, primarily in
those areas where the displaced are concentrated. As
was noted by the representative of Yugoslavia, we
would like those practical measures to yield more
results. We still hope that they will, and that more
people will take advantage of the facility to register.
That is a political message that is being emphasized in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. There have been
articles in the press. There have been radio spots to
spread the word that the possibility to register exists,
and that those who can register should make good use
of that possibility. Additionally, to ensure the
transparency of the process, representatives of the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are
allowed to be present during the data-inputting process
in both Pristina and in Vienna to make sure that
everything is done in the most adequate way.

A question was also raised by the representative
of Colombia on detention facilities. As I mentioned in
my briefing, progress is already being made with the
so-called quick-build detention facility and with the
refurbishment of the larger facility of the Dubrava
prison. But it is clear that with the adoption of new
regulations, the legal ground upon which individuals
can be charged and detained will become broader and
there will probably be a need for greater detention
capacities. We are confident that with the strengthening
of the justice and police pillar, the issue of having
adequate detention facilities in Kosovo will be
addressed.

The last question you raised, Mr. President, was
with respect to the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC). I
would like to mention here that UNMIK recently
adopted a KPC disciplinary code, and also that it relies
on cooperation with KFOR for reports on acts by KPC
members that would constitute criminal or serious civil
offences. Whenever evidence is found, the UNMIK-
KFOR Joint Executive Committee will direct the
commander of the KPC to suspend immediately a KPC
member who is suspected of committing an offence.
That was the case, for example, following the issuing
of the United States executive order at the end of June.
If after that immediate suspension, the investigation
confirms the suspicion, the KPC member will receive a
dismissal order and will leave the KPC. I would
mention in that respect that besides yesterday's case,
three other KPC members were dismissed- not
suspended: dismissedf in August. Others have been
suspended, and we are waiting for the conclusion of
those investigations to see whether they will be
dismissed.

