Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
peacebuilding. I would also like to thank Ambassadors
Kamau, Skoog and Rosenthal for their briefings and for
their important work to assist the world's most fragile
countries in building sustainable peace.

This meeting is especially important in the light of
the ongoing review of the United Nations peacekeeping
architecture * an architecture that Member States
developed over a decade ago. Three of the most crucial

tenets at that time remain the core of our efforts today,
namely, sustaining international attention to countries
emerging from conflict, developing more effective
strategies to build peace and continuing to mobilize
the necessary resources to prevent a relapse into
violent conflict.

The United States continues to support the goals
of the peacebuilding architecture in service of the
important objectives of ensuring that we not only
respond to symptoms, but also address root causes;
ensure that we are not only responding to war, but that we
help to actually build peace; and ensure that the United
Nations system is well-positioned to strategically and
effectively address the needs of countries and regions,
notjust while civilians are under attack, but in the days,
months and years after a conflict has ended.

While we continue to support those goals, we
also believe that, fundamentally, the peacebuilding
architecture has not lived up to its mandate or fully
fulfilled the role that it was created to perform. We have
diagnosed the problem many times in many different
forums. Virtually every conflict-affected country
considered by the Council - from Haiti to Liberia - has
struggled with consolidating peace in the aftermath
of conflict. We have seen the devastating human and
financial consequences of deadly cycles of relapse in
recent years, from the Central African Republic to
South Sudan to Burundi. We know that the United
Nations must do a better job of consolidating peace and
preventing such relapses, but we have failed to translate
our shared understanding of the problem into practical,
achievable and impactful changes in how we actually do
business so as address those challenges. That is why we
agree with many of the assessments and support many of
the recommendations of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture,
including the conclusion that peacebuilding remains
underrecognized, underprioritized and underresourced
globally within the United Nations system. With the
ongoing peacebuilding architecture review in mind, I
would like to lay out the vision of the United States for
what a strong, coordinated and effective peacebuilding
architecture should look like.

First, the primary challenge is not necessarily
a lack of resources - which is too often our first
port of call when efforts at the United Nations are
underperforming - it is a lack of coherence. The
complex nature of conflict means that United Nations
entities must work in a more coordinated fashion.
Conflict prevention, conflict management and post-
conflict stabilization efforts by the various parts of
the United Nations system must go hand in hand if
peacebuilding efforts are to succeed.

We have seen examples recently in Sri Lanka and
in Sierra Leone of how an internally coherent approach
can meaningfully help countries recover from conflict.
With an initial commitment of $3 million from the
Peacebuilding Fund, several United Nations entities,
including the Department of Political Affairs, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the United Nations Development
Programme and the Peacebuilding Support Office,
along with the United Nations Resident Coordinator and
the United Nations country team, are working together
with the Government of Sri Lanka to promote effective
transitional justice mechanisms that are sensitive to
the different ways in which conflict has affected Sri
Lankan men and women. Importantly, local Sri Lankan
provincial councils are receiving capacity-building
so as to help them address grievances on the part of
internally displaced persons, members of minority
groups and other vulnerable populations by facilitating
their resettlement on land once occupied by the military.

In Sierra Leone, the integrative work of successive
United Nations missions, the country team and the
Sierra Leone Peacebuilding Commission country-
specific configuration have been critical to breaking
the cycle of violence and have provided space for
Sierra Leoneans to focus on prosperity, development
and democratic elections instead of war, isolation and
conflict. Sierra Leone has held three peaceful and
credible elections since the end of the civil war in
2002, and new institutions are rising to the challenge
of being responsive to its citizens. Support from the
United Nations, including the sustained engagement of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) country-specific
configuration and its admirable leadership from the
Canadian Mission, has been critical to that transition.

The United States also envisions a Peacebuilding
Commission that can broaden its reach across the United
Nations and the broader international community. We
support changes to the Peacebuilding Commission's
country-specific configurations so that they are
smaller, more flexible, informal and better tailored
groupings among Member States. The last thing we
need at the United Nations is another set of meetings in
which diplomats gather to express their concerns about
the same problems over and over. We need ideas that
translate into actions. Smaller, flexible and informal
focus groupings of Member States that are willing to
put diplomatic muscle and resources into advancing
peace in a particular country would serve us all well.

Of course, we also urge the Peacebuilding
Commission to continue to work closely with
regional and multilateral organizations, including the
international financial institutions, in peacebuilding
efforts. The recent briefing from the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank representatives
to the PBC Burundi configuration exemplifies how
the Peacebuilding Commission provides a really
crucial link between United Nations Headquarters
and the international financial institutions whose
economic expertise in the field is essential to post-
conflict contexts.

Our vision for the peacebuilding architecture
includes a continued role for the Peacebuilding Fund,
which we have long viewed as animble and effective rapid
response tool for conflict prevention and peacebuilding
support. The Peacebuilding Fund was among the first
to fund a new multipartner trust fund in Colombia to
respond to stabilitization and peacebuilding needs. With
that initiative, the Peacebuilding Fund is serving as an
effective rapid-response tool for conflict prevention
and peacebuilding support. The Peacebuilding Fund,
along with the United Nations special monitoring
and verification mission, the United Nations country
team and other multilateral donors will play a critical
role helping Colombia transition into a post-accord
environment. We believe that the Peacebuilding Fund's
work in Colombia will help generate tangible and
inclusive peace dividends to boost public confidence
in the peace process and help generate the conditions
necessary to implement the peace accords.

We know there are no easy solutions for societies
recovering from conflict. We also know that only
through coherence of effort, seriousness of purpose
and more flexibility in approach can the United Nations
system more fully seize all opportunities to continue
to build our capacity to consolidate peace. We see
the ongoing peacebuilding architecture review as a
valuable opportunity to do just that.

