Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Three months ago, on 8 November 2002, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 1441 (2002).
The adoption of that resolution was in accordance with
international legality and demonstrated the importance
of moving unanimously, under the Charter of the
United Nations, towards the peace option and the
solution of problems through the unanimity of the
Security Council to that end.

That resolution is being implemented
satisfactorily. On 14 February, we heard the reports of
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei on the inspections in Iraq.
The message received by the international community
affirmed the speedy success of the activities and
inspections and held the promise of further such
success in the near future. I wish on this occasion to
express our appreciation to Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
for their efforts in leading the inspection teams with
objectivity and professionalism.

The results of their efforts were set out in two
balanced reports that confirmed their determination to
pursue their tasks so that they may bear fruit in the near
future. This success was demonstrated in the unity of
the international community, in international legality
and in the unanimity of the Security Council in
adopting resolution 1441 (2002), which affirmed the
effectiveness of collective action by the Council, which
must be maintained.

It must be clear that Iraq's compliance with its
obligations under Security Council resolutions and its
ongoing responsiveness to the demands of the Council
and the inspectors will lead to the speedy completion
of the inspections and to an end to the dark tunnel in
which it has existed for more than a decade. If we
cannot emerge into the fresh air and light - the
assured outcome of the commitment of all parties to the
rules of international legality - that tunnel may lead
us into a deep abyss.

The threat of weapons of mass destruction, the
focus of our attention today, is not confined to Iraq. We
must bear in mind that all tasks undertaken, voluntarily
or under coercion, to disarm Iraq represent a step
towards freeing the Middle East from weapons of mass
destruction, as provided for in resolution 687 (1991).
In addressing the situation in Iraq, members of the
Security Council must never forget that the credibility
of international law is not solely dependent on
eliminating the proscribed Iraqi weapons, to the
complete neglect of applying the same criteria to all
cases. That credibility hinges on the Security Council's
achieving all its objectives and priorities in that
context. The disarmament of Iraq must be only the
beginning of the process of removing the danger of all
weapons of mass destruction from the Middle East.
That will confirm the Security Council's credibility in
the eyes of the peoples of the region and demonstrate
its commitment to justice and equality, the bases for
any proper international relations.

The Security Council is called upon today to
assume its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We must all uphold
the choice of peace in settling the current crisis. We
must commit ourselves to achieving this by collective
political action. The unity of the Security Council is
the only means of strengthening its authority and of
validating its credibility. That was demonstrated in the
adoption of resolution 1441 (2002), which represents
the approach that the Council must maintain.

Egypt wishes here to affirm the following points
in dealing with the question of Iraq.

First, we must keep in mind that our objective is
to achieve a peaceful settlement of this conflict.

Secondly, the inspection process must be fully
supported and must continue, without interruption or
rigid deadlines, so long as it can achieve positive
results. It must achieve its goal of removing all
weapons of mass destruction from Iraq.
Thirdly, through its resolutions, which represent
an integrated whole, the Security Council is the only
body entrusted by the international community to deal
with the situation.

Finally, Iraq must continue to cooperate fully
with the inspection teams and comply with the terms of
the relevant Security Council resolutions with respect
to the inspections.

The dangerous repercussions that armed conflict
would have for the Middle East and the entire world
make it incumbent on all members of the international
community to maintain international law and to work,
patiently and with determination to reach a peaceful
settlement in order to achieve peace and stability and in
order to be able to deal with other serious problems and
crises faced by the region, such as the tragic situation
in the Palestinian territories, as well as to confront the
phenomenon of international terrorism, which is a
danger to the entire world. We do not doubt at all that
war in the region can only fuel terrorism and
exacerbate its pernicious effects.

All the peoples of the world are calling for peace.
Our countries are hoping that we will be able to give
peace a further chance. We have called for an urgent
Arab summit that would help create conditions to stop
military action. As a contributor to all such forums,
Egypt, the oldest country in the world - as old as
history itself - appeals to the Council to continue to
shoulder its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It appeals to every
Member State to assume its responsibility to take
collective action to achieve that objective.

War, for all its complexities and dangers,
sometimes seems to be the easiest path. Peace requires
concerted, continued effort and self-control, which
befits States that hold the beacon of freedom. They
must maintain that beacon, not by force and fire, but by
wisdom and law. We will not lose hope of reaching a
peaceful settlement. We will all have to keep the
beacon illuminated, because it will light our way to a
stable, secure international community, which we can
all build based on the edifice of the United Nations and
its Charter.

