Mrs. Fanton (France) (spoke in French): Mr. President, I would like to first spare a thought for the group of humanitarian workers and their assistants who were the victims of a deadly attack yesterday in the Niger, approximately 50 kilometres from Niamey. I express my condolences and the support of the French nation to the families and loved ones of the victims. As the President of the Republic, Mr. Emmanuel Macron, said yesterday, in an exchange with his counterpart in the Niger, our determination to continue with the joint combat against terrorist groups in the Sahel remains undiminished, and all possible measures are being and will continue to be put in place to shed light on the circumstances surrounding this deadly attack. I also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, Ms. Rosine Sori- Coulibaly; the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly; and the Deputy Permanent Representative of Brazil, Mr. Joao Genesio de Almeida Filho, representing the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings. I wish to make three points. My first point concerns the political situation in Guinea-Bissau, which remains fragile. France has taken note of the recognition by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) of the victory of Mr. Umaro Sissoco Embalde in the presidential election. However, we deplore the fact that the political transition has taken place in defiance of the rule of law and regret that the recommendations made by ECOWAS, in particular regarding the formation of a new Government by 22 May, have still not been implemented by the President of Guinea- Bissau. We have noted with concern the occupation of the People's National Assembly and the Supreme Court by the military. Numerous acts of intimidation by the authorities against journalists, judges of the Supreme Court, as well as political opponents, have been reported. We call on all political and institutional players to pursue dialogue and to work towards the stability of the country while respecting the rule of law and human rights. The objective is to enable Guinea-Bissau's institutions to devote themselves to the country's development and economic recovery, which has been particularly upended by the coronavirus disease pandemic. The resolution of the political crisis requires fundamental work, including the implementation of the reforms recommended in the Conakry Agreement of 14 October 2016, the ECOWAS six-point road map and the constitutional review. My second point relates to international support for Guinea-Bissau. As the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau will soon conclude its activities, I reiterate our support for the Special Representative in her efforts to assist Guinea- Bissau actors and transfer tasks to the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the country team. In this critical phase, we believe that it is important for the international community to remain united and involved in order to assist the new authorities and convey to them the appropriate messages regarding our expectations. France commends the commitment of the country's partners, in particular the group of five international partners, ECOWAS, the African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union and the United Nations. I would also like to commend the work of the Peacebuilding Commission, under the leadership of Ambassador Vieira, and the role of Peacebuilding Fund projects. Ina final point, I would like to stress the importance of the fight against drug trafficking and organized crime. Progress in that area remains insufficient. We expect the Guinea-Bissau authorities to make asustained and long-term commitment to the issue. The support of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is beneficial, and several of its programmes have recently assisted in drug seizures. That cooperation must continue for the benefit of peace and security in the region as a whole.
