Ms. Stener (Norway): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the five Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.

We warmly welcome the initiative of the Netherlands
to organize this open debate on how to strengthen
United Nations peace operations. Let me also thank the
Secretary-General for outlining his vision and proposed
timeline. I am also grateful to the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and to Ms. Fatimata Toure'
for their valuable contributions today. The Nordic
countries would like to make four points.

First, the success or failure of a peace operation
is defined primarily by whether it helps to bring about
a sustainable and peaceful settlement of the conflict.
All missions must therefore be guided by a clear
political strategy. They need to have the full backing
of the Security Council, the contributing countries,
regional actors and the host nation in order to fulfil
that strategy. Consultations about when and how to
deploy an operation should involve all stakeholders,
including troop- and police-contributing countries. It is
also important to consult with regional and subregional
organizations, most notably the African Union. In
that regard, we welcome the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security as a basis for further deepening
that partnership.

Secondly, missions must be mandated, planned
and designed in response to each specific context. A
gender-sensitive and whole-of-system approach should
guide that process. Our goal should be to reduce the gap
between expectations and the ability to deliver. The new
practice of conducting independent reviews of missions
is a major step towards a more strategic approach.
Those reviews can be used by the Security Council
when drafting and revising mandates in order to ensure
that they are better prioritized and sequenced. Close
coordination among those who mandate, plan, manage
and implement operations is necessary. We welcome
this month's agreement on guidelines to improve the
existing mechanisms of triangular cooperation, and we
call on all parties to use them actively.

Thirdly, United Nations missions must be better
adapted to the increasingly complex and high-risk
environments in which they operate. The Nordic
countries fully support the Secretary-General's plan of
action to follow-up on the report authored by former
United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant General
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving
security of United Nations peacekeepers, to address
crucial safety and security concerns. Uniformed units
must have the right training, skills and equipment
to be able to protect themselves and deliver on their
mandate. We must collectively seek to measure and
improve performance at all levels and for all categories
of personnel. The zero-tolerance policy against
sexual exploitation and abuse must be fully respected
and implemented. We can reach those goals only by
working together.

Lastly, the Nordic countries are firm backers of the
Secretary-General's ambition to double the number of
women peacekeepers. We support the goal of reaching
a ratio of 15 per cent women among military officers
and 20 per cent women among police officers in United
Nations operations by 2020. We strongly believe that
an increase in the number of women peacekeepers will
have a positive effect on the ability of United Nations
operations to deliver on their mandates

