Mr. Ngoga (Rwanda): I thank the Council for the
opportunity to contribute to this debate. My delegation
wishes to thank the President and Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
the presentation of their reports. We particularly
welcome their acknowledgement and recognition of the
cooperation extended to the Tribunal by my
Government.

In the period since the last year's last briefing to
the Council, my Government has consistently extended
the cooperation and support necessary to enable the
ICTR to effectively execute its mandate. We have
continued to facilitate unfettered access to witnesses
for both the defence and the prosecution and assisted
the movement of witnesses to and from Arusha. I am
pleased to report to the Council that, in my
Government's efforts to ensure the peace and stability
of our citizens, we have continued to ensure the
security of witnesses and responded to any issues that
have arisen on a case-by-case basis. My Government
has continued to support investigations initiated by
both the prosecution and the defence, without prejudice
to either.

My Government remains committed to
continuing its support for the ICTR's completion
strategy as set out in resolution 1503 (2003). Despite
last year's disappointing decision by the Trial and
Appeals Chambers to reject the Prosecutor's request to
transfer cases to Rwanda, we remain prepared to
receive any future cases transferred to our competent
jurisdiction by the ICTR and to address all of the issues
raised in the objections by the Chambers in their
respective decisions.

In this regard, we have undertaken a review and
proposed amendments to the law governing the transfer
of cases and the law abolishing the death penalty, and
we have established a witness protection unit within
the judiciary. These reforms are resolutely based on my
Government's perspectives on the ICTR's completion
strategy, and specifically with regard to the transfer of
cases rather than the maintenance of the status quo.

The decisions by the Trial and Appeals Chambers
have severely undermined my Government's ability to
pursue and bring to justice those suspected of genocide
all over the world. Those decisions have in tone and
content diluted the efforts my Government has pursued
to reject a culture of impunity and have set back the
progress made in repairing our torn national fabric, not
only in the justice sector but in all aspects of national
reconciliation and reconstruction.

Those decisions, coupled with erroneous and
incorrect factual assessments and occasional deliberate
misrepresentations by otherwise useful human rights
organizations, such as Human Rights Watch, remain
solely responsible for the widening impunity gap that
we are currently experiencing. The challenge of
reversing the status quo is collective and has a direct
bearing on the legacy of the ICTR. However, we
remain confident that this situation will be reversed.

My Government has repeatedly and
unequivocally stated its view that the archives of the
ICTR should be transferred to Rwanda upon
completion of the Tribunal's mandate. That conviction
is premised on the fact that those records constitute an
integral part of our history, are vital to the preservation
of the memory of the genocide and will play a critical
role in educating future generations to ensure the
prevention of genocide. We recognize the ongoing
process to determine the final destination of the ICTR
archives and remain hopeful that that destination will
be Rwanda, without prejudice to wider and unrestricted
access by the international community; nor does this
position constitute a dispute over ownership of those
archives.

We have completed ratification of the agreement
between the ICTR and the Government of Rwanda
regarding the serving in Rwanda of sentences handed
down by the ICTR, and the instruments of ratification
have been deposited. We have also recently signed an
agreement with the Special Court for Sierra Leone
regarding sentences handed down by that Court. We
believe that that is essential to dispel the perceived
mistrust of Rwandan institutions and that it will,
equally, contribute to the reconciliation process in
Rwanda.

In conclusion, Mr. President, allow me to thank
you again for the opportunity to contribute to this
dialogue and to reiterate my Government's continued
commitment to supporting the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

