Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): First of all, I wish
to associate myself with the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom on behalf
of the European Union.

My authorities have carefully assessed the Secretary-
General's report. Italy fully shares and supports the
Secretary-General' 5 recommendations and conclusions. The
report goes beyond easy rhetoric to realistically address the
inextricably related problems of peace and development.
The Secretary-General's recommendations and suggestions
should be translated into concrete actions to foster full
collaboration with African countries. In addition to the
Security Council, other United Nations bodies, in particular
the Economic and Social Council, should ensure that there
is appropriate follow-up and that the significant economic
implications that this report contains are implemented.

Africa has experienced tragedies and conflicts, but the
picture is changing, however slowly, and prospects look
brighter today than in the past. The holding of free
elections, the consolidation of democratic Governments and
the increase in the growth rate contain the seeds of hope.
Africa is once again at the centre of the international
community's attention, as is proved by the initiatives of
the United Nations, the Bretton Woods institutions and
the G-8. We hope that this renewed attention leads to a
greater awareness of the potentially harmful effects of
what would be an unacceptable marginalization of the
continent in the global economic environment.

The social and human costs of poverty - the
primary cause of conflicts - are high. The recent
meeting in New York between the United Nations and the
international financial institutions in the framework of the
Economic and Social Council emphasized the idea that
we must continue to join forces to eradicate poverty and
open the road to future sustainable development. This is
particularly true for the African continent.

The international community, as the Secretary-
General has underlined, should aim to help African
Governments create an environment favourable to
investment flows and alleviating the burden of debt.
Development cooperation must aim more and more to
create economic partnerships rather than economic
dependency.

In particular, we need to promote the integration of
African countries into the flow of international trade and
investments at a time when there is a drive towards the
liberalization of exchanges and when Africa is
experiencing a decline in its export rates and in the flow
of direct investments.

On the basis of this premise, Italy's policy, outlined
in September 1996 by our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Lamberto Dini, aims to increase collaboration with
African countries at every level in the prevention and
peaceful settlement of conflicts and the promotion and
affirmation of democratic processes and development.
Pacification, economic development, the safeguarding of
human rights, respect for minorities, inter-ethnic
coexistence and the acceptance of religious and cultural
diversity are primary aspects of this programme. Our
location in the Mediterranean leads us to see the African
continent as a priority area for political and economic
commitment.

In this framework, development cooperation
represents an essential instrument. Africa receives a
prominent share of Italian aid, which is contributed both
bilaterally and through the international organizations and
also in the form of emergency relief for refugees. In its

 

latest budget, my Government included a provision for the
conversion of debt in developing countries into investments.

We support the Secretary-General's appeal to reflect
on the best response to African conflict situations. The
United Nations can also help lower tensions through
increased recourse to mediation and by facilitating
negotiation and dialogue, as provided for under Chapter VI
of the Charter, in close collaboration with the interested
regional and subregional organizations.

The Somalia and Rwanda experiences have
demonstrated the need to place the accent on prevention;
we share the Secretary-General's views on this point.

In the Horn of Africa Italy is collaborating with
countries that belong to the Inter-Governmental Authority
on Development (IGAD): Djibouti, Ethiopia, Eritrea,
Kenya, Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda. Since November
1996, Italy has chaired the IGAD Forum, aimed at bringing
together the organization's member countries and Western
donor countries. On 19 and 20 January this year the first
ministerial meeting took place in Rome to give new
impetus to negotiations on the resolution of conflicts in the
region and to the process of regional economic growth. In
this area, the most acute crisis is still Somalia. Our efforts
are aimed at contributing to the Organization of African
Unity, IGAD and all other initiatives to re-establish in
Somalia the conditions for civil coexistence and to give a
State back to the Somali people. To this end, on 4 May in
Rome the first meeting of the Committee for Somalia will
be held, established in the framework of the IGAD
Partners' Forum.

Hundreds of Italian nationals were present and active
as volunteers in the Great Lakes region, even at the most
dramatic moments. Italy also supports parallel forms of
preventive diplomacy, such as the initiative of the
Community of Sant'Egidio to bring together the parties in
Burundi, following its successful experience in
Mozambique.

We must not forget that in Africa some peacekeeping
operations have been crowned with success, such as that in
Mozambique, or are showing signs of being on the road to
success, such as that in Angola. These experiences prove
that when the right basic conditions are in place, the
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation can
be a most effective instrument.

In this respect, we also share the Secretary-General's
analysis of the usefulness of preventive peacekeeping
missions and of co-deployments of multinational and
United Nations forces, as was the case in Liberia.

Italy believes that the excessive accumulation of
conventional arms can destabilize regions in Africa or
aggravate conflicts. In other continents, the agreements on
force limitation and arms control have been a reality for
some time now. After prohibiting the manufacture of anti-
personnel landmines, Italy signed the Ottawa Convention.
Because of the serious effects of such weapons on
populations, the United Nations demining assistance
programmes must be fully supported. We support Mali's
initiative for a moratorium on the import, export and
manufacture of small arms in the Sahara-Sahel region.
Together with other countries, we are participating in the
initiative that the newly created Department for
Disarmament Affairs is coordinating in the framework of
resolution 52/38 G, and we will contribute to a seminar
on this subject in Libreville.
Finally, I wish to draw special attention to the part
of the Secretary-General's report regarding humanitarian
assistance, in particular the protection of civilians in
conflict situations and the impact of conflicts on human
rights and on children's rights. These aspects require a
strong commitment by the international community as a
whole to launch broad-based initiatives in defence of the
sectors of the population that are weakest and most
vulnerable to war-related violence.

