Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank you, Sir, for convening
this debate. We also thank Ambassador Ripert, the
Permanent Representative of France and Chairman of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
for the presentation of the Working Group's annual
report. We also thank his delegation for its work and
devotion to the issue before us, as well as for the
leadership role that France has played.

We are also grateful for the comments made by
the Secretary-General, by Ms. Coomaraswamy, the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, the Executive Director of UNICEF and
Ms. Hunt.

Armed conflicts are a fertile breeding ground for
the violation of each and every one of children's rights.
To date, we have focused on the direct consequences of
those conflicts on childhood. However, in the future we
must work just as effectively to combat other
violations of their rights. We must pay closer attention
to the indirect consequences of conflicts, the harmful
effects of which often grow into major obstacles that
thwart the promise of a better future, even in a post-
conflict period.

The timely convening of this debate allows us to
repeat our call for a review of the criteria of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism. That would
allow us to consider, in a more appropriate and
efficient manner, each of the six grave Violations
identified in resolution 1612 (2005).

The recent progress made by the Council on
issues such as sexual violence, as enshrined in the
landmark resolution 1820 (2008), should be adequately
reflected in the approach that the Working Group
applies to the issue. It is also crucial that we work very
closely with the affected States in order resolutely to
combat impunity. To that end, the Security Council
should carry out an in-depth analysis of the actions and
sanctions that it could apply to those who continue to
recruit children and to commit other crimes against
children.

Today, as we celebrate the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of the Rome Statute, the time is right to
also consider the complementary role that the
International Criminal Court can play in supporting
States in their fight against impunity.

During the debate held on this issue in February,
we expressed our commitment to addressing the
numerous consequences of armed conflict on children,
and we agreed on the need to address the root causes of
such conflict through a broad and comprehensive
preventive strategy.

Today, we agree with you, Sir, that the United
Nations should more fully tackle the problem of
children and armed conflict. It should implement a
broader protection strategy. The loss of basic services,
such as access to drinking water, sanitation, health care
and education, as well as the rise in child mortality,
illiteracy and malnutrition, to name just a few,
perpetuate the vicious circle, which then becomes the
cause and consequence of conflicts. We have
continually warned that global inequity and our neglect
of the extreme poverty in which one fifth of
humankind currently lives are factors that largely
contribute towards creating a fertile breeding ground
for conflict. That lack of equity and neglect of
situations of poverty are also factors that punish
children in particular.

The reintegration and rehabilitation of children
associated with armed groups should be an
indispensable component of that broader protection
strategy, in particular in those cases where the
marginalization of certain groups is a factor
contributing to conflict.

The reintegration process should help children to
establish new foundations in their lives and should
restore the opportunities snatched away from them by
conflict for their physical, emotional and intellectual
development. A truly effective integration and
rehabilitation process should be inclusive, community-
based and designed to help rebuild emotional trust
between children and their families and to promote
peace, security and stability in their communities,
preventing ostracism and the stigmatization of those
who have been the victims of child recruitment.

It is essential to provide educational and
vocational opportunities in order to prevent former
child soldiers from being re-recruited, as occurs with
some frequency. The new educational and vocational
opportunities must ensure greater socio-economic well-
being for the family. Particularly for children who have
been removed from armed groups, education in times

of conflict is much more than a path towards
employment, as it is aimed at normalizing their lives
and helping them to develop a new identity, separate
from that of child soldiers.

The challenge for us all is not only to put a
definitive end to child recruitment and other grave
violations, but also and above all to channel children's
energies, ideas and dreams in a positive way that can
contribute to the creation of a new post-conflict
society.

