Mr. Sutherland: I thank you, Madam President,
for the invitation to brief the Security Council.

A month ago, Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
mobilized an informal group - including High
Commissioner Antonio Guterres, High Commissioner
Zeid, Director General of the International Organization
for Migration Bill Swing and myself - to deal with
the issue of the Mediterranean crisis. We have been
meeting regularly since, and have issued a number of
joint statements that reflect the position of the United
Nations on what has been happening. In these brief
remarks, I will set out the priorities, as we see them,
for the collective response to the crisis. Those are, of
course, first: saving lives and safeguarding the human
rights of refugees and, more generally, of migrants;
secondly, law enforcement actions that are effective
against traffickers and smugglers; thirdly, radically
increased safe avenues of refugee resettlement, family
reunion and labour migration; then, greater solidarity
with countries closer to conflicts, and an intensified
effort to end conflicts and stem the development
failures that have displaced more people today than at
any point in history.

In addressing each of those challenges, the United
Nations has a crucial role to play: the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as
concerns refugees and the International Organization
for Migration (IOM) as concerns economic migrants.
That demands intensive dialogue among all of
us - the United Nations, regional organizations
and Governments, especially in source, transit and
destination countries. As the High Representative
of the European Union (EU) has emphasized, the
situation in the Mediterranean represents, first and
foremost, a crisis for the hundreds of thousands of
refugees and migrants who have been placed in harm's
way. In the first 130 days of 2015, at least 1,800
people have drowned in the Mediterranean. That total
represents a 20-fold increase over the same period last
year. Should that pace continue, between 10,000 and
20,000 migrants could perish by this autumn. That is
why it is a compelling, collective responsibility to act
immediately. Most of those crossing the Meditteranean
pay smugglers $5,000, $10,000 and perhaps, in some
cases, even $15,000 for their passage. That represents
more than the life's savings of any one individual from
many of the countries of origin. About half of those
who reach Europe, on the current evidence, qualify for
international protection as refugees.

An effective strategy to address the crisis,
including in the context of a Security Council draft
resolution, therefore begins with the immediate need to
save lives. If we do not frame our response in that way,
it would represent a moral failure that would undermine
international law and security.

Until 900 people died on a single weekend in April,
the international community was largely absent from
the Mediterranean. It was left primarily to the Italian
navy, which exerted considerable effort and activity,
to save lives, as well as to ill-equipped merchant
vessels and non-governmental organizations such as
Migrant Offshore Aid Station. Since then, the situation
has improved. I know from a visit to the European
Commission last week, and from the President of the
Commission, that an additional paper is about to be
adopted. Should it be adopted, would, in my view,
improve matters further and make a significant advance
in the European Union's position. The EU has pledged
to triple its resources in the Mediterranean. It must
commit to search-and-rescue as its first priority with
Operation Triton. But this is still limited to operating
within 35 kilometres of Italy's shore. It has just six
vessels in contrast to the 32 of Mare Nostrum, the
Italian Government and Navy programme. The Italian
and Hellenic navies and coast guards, now joined by
vessels from elsewhere, continue to stem the loss of
life. As a result, fewer refugees and migrants have died
in recent days.

In parallel, Europe and Africa have to develop
a common strategy to deal with smugglers and
traffickers, which, of course, will not be easy. That
demands better governance and coordinated law
enforcement, and there are longer-term issues at stake,
quite obviously, such as development. But others,
particularly in Africa and the Middle East as well as
the EU, have to take their responsibilities seriously in
that respect. Organized criminal gangs are active from
the greater Middle East, sub-Saharan Africa, through
North Africa, and into Europe. No single actor nor
any single tactic can ensure that they are arrested,
prosecuted, and imprisoned. The stakes for them are
high; moving people illegally across borders is today
more lucrative than the sale of illicit arms or drugs, and
it will take a coordinated, comprehensive effort built
on mutual trust and compliance with the rule of law
to counter that threat. Some draw facile comparisons
to the successful anti-piracy operations off the Horn
of Africa, but the calculus in the Mediterranean is far
more complex, with innocent refugees - including
many children - in the line of fire between smugglers
and any potential military operations. All enforcement
measures therefore have to adhere to international
human rights, humanitarian, maritime and refugee law,
and the law of nations.

Even ifthere is success in thwarting the smugglers,
we will have created a new and equally pernicious
problem: we will have trapped asylum seekers, unless
we are careful, in some countries without access to
protection, education, health care, or livelihoods. As we
ramp up anti-smuggling and counter-trafficking efforts,
we have to increase our capacity to provide protection
for those in need. The entire international community
must accept a fair share of the refugee burden. Small
countries like Lebanon and Jordan are hosting together
over 1.8 million people.

Last year, the EU gave international protection to
about 300,000 people. What should we do? Refugee
resettlement and other forms of humanitarian
admission are the safest, most organized means we
have ofproviding protection. They are underused tools.
We need more resettlement countries. We need larger
resettlement quotas. Only half of the 28 EU member
States are resettlement countries. We need to provide
other options to asylum seekers: humanitarian visas,
temporary protective status and short-term visas. For
the doctors, professors and engineers among them - as
well as for the nurses, construction workers and others
with skills our countries need - we could offer labour
visas, seasonal visas and circular migration visas.
Family reunification is another very important right to
be actively facilitated. We have barely deployed those
life-saving tools.

We have to establish safe ways for asylum seekers
to pursue those legal avenues. Meanwhile, we need to
offer far more aid to countries close to conflict zones
in order to ensure the safety of refugees and migrants,
educate their children and offer real hope for the future.
About half of the refugees, children, are currently not
being educated at all. It is also important to highlight
the responsibility of those countries where inequality,
dysfunctional governance and poverty drive people
to migrate. They need to be accountable to their own
citizens. They need to create conditions where everyone
can benefit from economic and social advancement.

In order to maintain the integrity of the international
protection system, it is essential that any comprehensive
plan include return agreements for people who are not
in need of international protection.

I understand that this week the European
Commission will approve a European agenda on
migration. From what I have been told, it will promote
many of these ideas pertaining to safer access to more
channels of legal migration. My colleagues and I
applaud such smart, progressive measures, and expect
that the EU will adopt them with due speed and at a
scale that they deserve.

Even if we achieve all of this, however, we will
not have addressed the larger problems we face. We
speak of root causes, but what we really need are root
solutions. It is easy enough to turn away from troubles
that seem intractable - conflicts that go on for years
on end, authoritarian Governments that abuse their
citizens, demographic challenges that seem to grow
exponentially - but every problem, broken down,
can at least be ameliorated. At the most basic level, we
need to engage in a systemic, intense dialogue among
countries of origin, transit and destination. We must
sit together and persist until we find a comprehensive
answer. The United Nations - the Secretary-General
in particular and the Deputy Secretary-General are
constantly emphasizing this publicly and personally
to me - stands ready to help foster, inform and guide
such a dialogue, and it should do so as it represents
in particular the interests of the most vulnerable
participants in this tragedy.

We recognize that, by expanding the legal
challenges to migrate, the real demands on our labour
markets will increase. We have to be prepared to debate
this in a constructive, rather than in a negative, way.

The United Nations system, IOM. and civil society
organizations are contributing in many ways to
mitigating the crisis, and stand ready to do much more.

