Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset I should like to join others in offering my
condolences to Japan and to the Secretary-General,
following the passing of Mr. Amano, who was an
outstanding leader of the International Atomic
Energy Agency.

I would now like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing, which provided us with a concise
update on the Israeli-Palestinian situation.

I will focus my remarks today on the threats
to the two-State solution and the urgent need for
the international community to reaffirm the agreed
parameters of the political solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. First, I wish to comment on the
worrying deterioration of the situation in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem.

France condemned yesterday the demolition by
the Israeli army of several buildings in the district of
Wadi Al-Homs, located in the south-east of Jerusalem.
Those demolitions in occupied territories are contrary
to international law, in particular international
humanitarian law and the relevant Council resolutions.
They are occurring for the first time in Areas A and
B, which fall under the jurisdiction of the Palestinian
Authority under the Oslo Accords, and they represent
a dangerous precedent that directly undermines the
two-State solution. France regrets that the Israeli
Government has not heeded the calls of the international
community to not proceed with the demolition and
solemnly calls on it to suspend the ongoing demolitions
as soon as possible.

In the same vein, the policy of colonization under
which these demolitions fall continues unabated in East
Jerusalem and the West Bank and brings us close to the
point of no return. Since the beginning of the year, more
than 4,500 new housing units have been approved in
the West Bank. In Jerusalem, colonization activities, in
particular the implementation of archaeological projects
and the increase in the number of demolitions, are
continuing and are cause for grave concern. That policy
is all the more disturbing because it is compounded by
troubling statements about the annexation of all or part
of the occupied territories.

France recalls that colonization is contrary to
international law, as reaffirmed in resolution 2334
(2016). It contributes to the agitation of tensions on the
ground and undermines the conditions for a just and
lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians, based
on the two-State solution with Jerusalem as capital.
France does not recognize any Israeli sovereignty over
any of the occupied territories. In accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, we also consider
unlawful the acquisition of territory by force, whether
in Jerusalem, the West Bank or the Golan Heights.
I would like to come back to the deteriorating
security, humanitarian and political situation in Gaza,
which continues to be a source of great concern. Clashes
at the end of last week, which left more than 100
Palestinian protesters injured, highlight the persistence
and the extent of the crisis we are facing in Gaza.
Everything must be done to provide a humanitarian and
political response and to prevent the risk of escalation.
We once again call on the parties to exercise the utmost
restraint and commend in that regard the efforts of
Egypt, Qatar and the United Nations to avoid the worst-
case scenario.

In such a precarious context, mobilizing the support
of the international community for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) is more critical than ever. The
25 June donor conference has enabled the Agency to use
recent funds to ensure the continuity of its assistance
programmes, especially in Gaza this summer.

France has already announced that it will double its
contribution to UNRWA in 2019, as it did in 2018. I urge
all donors to maintain or increase their contribution to
UNRWA to enable it to continue its programmes, in
particular to ensure the start of the school year, and to
reaffirm their support for UNRWA's three-year renewal
this fall.

In addition to the issue of humanitarian support,
lasting stability in Gaza will be achieved only through
a negotiated settlement, which involves on the one hand
the full return of the Palestinian Authority and on the
other the lifting of the blockade while ensuring credible
security guarantees for Israel.

Finally, the future of Gaza cannot be separated
from the goal of the establishment of two States, Israel
and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.

In conclusion, I once again reaffirm the validity of
the parameters agreed by the international community
for the two-State solution. As we are aware, the solution
to the conflict is fundamentally a political one, defined
by well-established parameters, while fulfilling the
legitimate aspirations of both sides - the establishment
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side
in peace and security and within secure and recognized
borders, with Jerusalem as the capital. France stands
ready to support all efforts, including economic
initiatives, as long as they adhere to the guidelines
that we have developed together and international law,
in particular in accordance with all relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The establishment of a viable and independent
Palestinian State is the key condition for Palestine's
economic take-off and also for building a stronger and
integrated regional economy. Economic peace cannot
replace the search for a political settlement. Any attempt
to deviate from those collectively defined parameters
would be doomed to failure.

Together with its European partners, France will
continue to defend the principle of a just and lasting
peace, based on parameters agreed by the international
community, and to support the Palestinian presence in
Jerusalem and in all the Palestinian territories in order
to preserve the two-State solution. In addition, France
will never compromise on ensuring Israel's security.

