Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho): Mr. President, permit me
to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of this august body for the month of October and, in that
vein, may I also express our appreciation for the able
manner in which your predecessor, Ambassador Cabral of
Guinea-Bissau, steered the ship that is this Council last
month.

Allow me also to convey Lesotho's appreciation for
the efforts that the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-
Ghali, through his able Special Representative for Angola,
Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, and the women and men
serving as part of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) continue to make in Angola
towards enabling stability and lasting peace to be forged in
that sister country. We also wish to express our gratitude
for the commendable role played by the troika countries of
the Russian Federation, Portugal and the United States of
America in facilitating the translation into reality of the
common aspirations of the Angolan people for peace,
democracy and national reconciliation.

We would be remiss if we did not mention the special
role that His Excellency President Chiluba of Zambia has
played in facilitating the Angolan peace process, which, as

 

we all know, resulted in the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol in 1994.

The Secretary-General's progress report, which is
before the Council, sends us mixed signals and casts
doubt on UNITA's commitment to the peace process. To
us, the Lusaka Protocol remains the only valid structure
through which the aspirations of the Angolan people can
be realized. Any violation of any of its provisions renders
the peace process futile. Thus, the slow progress and
apparent stalemate in the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol is of concern to us. We are pleased to note that
the ceasefire that took effect two days after the signing of
the Protocol is holding, albeit with some difficulty. Only
in a calm environment can sound negotiations take place.

Lesotho wishes to reiterate once again the principle
that the Security Council remains the only custodian of
international peace and security. N o initiative by regional
or continental organizations should be construed as
relieving the Security Council of its global responsibility.
In our statement before the General Assembly, we
recently cautioned once again against regional selectivity
in the attention paid by our Organization, through the
Security Council, to international crisis situations. While
we urge the parties to the conflict in Angola to comply
with the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol, we make a
special appeal once again to the international community
to provide UNAVEM. III with the necessary human,
material and financial resources to enable it to carry out
its mandate effectively. We again appeal to the donor
community to support the peace process in Angola by
providing the required support for demobilization and the
reintegration of ex-combatants, and by fulfilling pledges
made at the 1995 Brussels Round Table Conference on
Angola.

The United Nations remains the most important
component in the consolidation of the peace process in
Angola. As the UNAVEM. III mandate comes to an end,
and considering UNITA's intransigence, it is incumbent
upon the Security Council to adopt, as a matter of
urgency, measures within the framework of resolution 864
(1993) that should oblige UNITA fully and urgently to
respect the deadlines established by this body.

The summit meeting of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) Heads of State and
Government in Luanda earlier this month recommended
a modus operandi and put forward resolutions for
consideration by this body. The presence of the

 

distinguished Foreign Ministers from that region in our
midst today is clear testimony of the southern African

subregion's desire I'or peace and development. These
Ministers made statements this morning calling upon the
Security Council to take decisive measures to impress
upon Mr. Savimbi and UNITA the seriousness with which
the entire international community views the lack of
progress in the Angolan peace process. Those statements
enjoy the full support of the Government of the Kingdom
of Lesotho.

The people of Angola have shed their blood for far
too long. They deserve nothing less than peace, now and
forever,

