Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): First,
Mr. President, let me welcome you to your new position,
and extend to you our warmest wishes for a successful
month and our full cooperation in the endeavours of the
Security Council under your leadership. Let me also
acknowledge the capable and faithful commitment of the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda to the position of
the President of the Security Council for the previous
month, and let me finally acknowledge the presence of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy, a country that is
a neighbour and friend of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and welcome him to this Chamber.

The Security Council has before it a draft resolution,
contained in document S/ 1995/21, to extend for another
hundred days the easing of sanctions methodology
adopted under resolution 943 (1994), of 23 September
1994, with respect to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro).

 

The lessons of the last one hundred days compel us
not to repeat the same mistakes, for none of the stated
objectives behind resolution 943 (1994) have been realized.

At the same time, unfortunately, resolution 943 (1994)
has set in motion a course that today is most difficult to
reverse. Our attempt will be not to acquiesce in this course,
or the mistakes, but to maximize what can be salvaged
from what is clearly an effort that is quickly taking on
water.

Resolution 943 (1994) was adopted, by less than a
unanimous vote, to achieve at least the following stated
goals:

First, to encourage the so-called Bosnian Serbs to
accept the Contact Group peace plan by rewarding the
Belgrade regime for perceived steps to cut off and
further isolate the so-called Bosnian or Pale Serbs.

Secondly, to limit the resources available to the
so-called Bosnian Serbs to continue their military
campaigns and aggression in lieu of accepting this
peace.

Thirdly, to encourage the Belgrade regime to take
further steps to create an environment suitable for a
durable and just peace and reverse the consequences
of Belgrade's pivotal role as an aggressor against the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I am afraid that we can all agree that none of those
objectives have been realized. In fact, on the contrary, there
is evidence that there are counter-productive consequences.
The reasons for this are many.

Certainly, we can argue that the motivations of some
who supported resolution 943 (1994), and, most
importantly, the methodology established under it, were not
consistent with the stated goals and objectives.

The mechanisms established pursuant to resolution 943
(1994) to monitor the border and implement the
resolutions's stated objectives were flawed and inadequate
from their inception. These established mechanisms ensured
compliance by their inadequacy to witness and report
non-compliance.

As a consequence, the Belgrade regime could usurp
over-extended international observers to continue to echo its
claim of no responsibility, while in fact continuing to fuel
the fire that it had started in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. By the way, I do not use the word "fuel"
here just as an analogy. It was the very fuel transported
under the blind supervision of the Co-Chairmen of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
(ICFY) that allowed the allied so-called Croatian and
Bosnian Serbs to carry out their aggression against the
Bihac region, occupy its safe area and cause danger,
suffering and even death to United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) personnel.

Effectively, a Security Council resolution has been
hijacked to subvert its own stated objectives, to
undermine other Security Council resolutions and
mandates and to endanger the security of United Nations
personnel.

None the less, we do not wish to associate only
negative and subversive motives to resolution 943 (1994),
for we believe that many who supported its adoption did
so sincerely.

It is in this spirit that we welcome the elements of
the draft resolution that are designed to strengthen the
effectiveness of the border monitoring mission and its
reporting methodology.

We also welcome the most obvious - but
apparently not to all - clarification requiring that any
transshipment of goods or personnel through or to the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of
Croatia requires the approval of their respective
Governments. This would appear to be a most basic
element of respect for international law, but apparently
not for those who have placed their persona above the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the two Republics
as well as the authority of the Security Council's
resolutions, in particular resolution 820 (1993).

With respect to the language in the draft resolution,
we would like to clarify that our Republic concurs with
all shipments of essential humanitarian supplies consistent
with our territorial integrity and sovereignty.

Unfortunately, though, our endorsement of the
changes and improvements on resolution 943 (1994) must
be tempered by the following factors.

First, can the methodology of border monitoring -
or, more accurately, reporting on border monitoring - be
corrected, if in fact, there is a most basic design flaw?
Although we can endorse the stated objectives behind the
resolution, we must continue to question its application.
 

Therefore, we recommend that the next time the
methodology comes before the Council for review - on or
before 21 April 1995 - the Council should establish a new
methodology that: first, no longer monitors the Serbians
that are supposed to be monitoring the border, but actually
monitors the border; secondly, provides the international
monitoring force with adequate resources and manpower,
certainly more than the couple of hundred people now
lightly equipped to actually observe a border of
approximately 500 kilometres; and, thirdly, is properly
delegated under an appropriate command structure and
authority consistent with a mandate designed to truly seal
or monitor the border.

The current methodology established to deter
violations of the Bosnian border with Serbia is nonsensical.
It is analogous to allowing the rats to guard the cheese
from the mice while a near-sighted cat is asked to report as
to how much cheese is being taken and who is stealing it.
The logic of this methodology only becomes clear once we
understand that it is the rat who is dictating the terms to
provide an alibi and demonstrate his innocence. Although
the effectively blind cat can even smell the cheese on the
rat's breath, it cannot report that it has actually seen the rat
stealing the cheese.

The Security Council really should not be brought to
the level of being dictated to by the rat, who has already
even admitted previous treachery, and it can certainly afford
to ensure that the cat at least has glasses.

Secondly, the Security Council cannot continue 100
days hereafter to further reward the Belgrade regime with
another easing of sanctions, unless the Belgrade regime
takes the most basic step to start to reverse the perverse
ideology of a Greater Serbia, which it has initiated and still
nurtures.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) should not be allowed in the future to benefit
from the self-serving claim that it is promoting peace with
its neighbours until it recognizes the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of its neighbours - the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the other former Yugoslav
Republics.

Failure to recognize its neighbours and continue the
status quo indefinitely allows the Belgrade regime to plead
one case to the international audience, but, in fact, to
maintain its ultra-nationalist credentials and still fuel the
vision of a Greater Serbia.

Finally, the overall peace process that is in theory to
be supported by the draft resolution is moribund as long
as the so-called Croatian Serbs continue to conduct cross-
border aggression against, and to occupy parts of, the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Bihac region.
This violation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
directly facilitated by the misuse of resolution 943 (1994)
and the delusions that led to its adoption.

The so-called Croatian and Bosnian Serbs could not
have executed their coordinated assault against the Bihac
safe area and region without the fuel and other supplies
that were transported to the attackers as part of the misuse
of the monitoring mission established pursuant to
resolution 943 (1994) or, in fact, in direct avoidance of it.

Certainly, one must also wonder to what extent we
are to be led to further delusions in believing that the so-
called Croatian Serbs could have become full accomplices
in the coordinated assault on Bihac without at least the
acquiescence, if not the outright support, of Belgrade.

No matter what delusions may have been behind the
course set out by resolution 943 (1994), and no matter
what faults may endanger the very seaworthiness of the
vessel, it is a ship that has been set sailing by the
Security Council and therefore on which we are
passengers, unwitting or otherwise. We therefore do not
look to drill holes in the hull of this ship. On the
contrary, we will look, as any passenger would, to bale
out water, plug the leaks and keep the course steady.

However, the Security Council must take the
responsibility of ensuring that the objectives of resolution
943 (1994) are being advanced and that the holes are
being adequately plugged, or the ship must reverse
course, with the realization that this effort by the Council
was at least premature.

Just one final warning as we embark on the next 100
days: the rats are already abandoning ship.

