Ms. Bolanos Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation thanks Ambassador Gary Quinlan for
his informative report and the work he and his team of
collaborators carried out in the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). Since this is our
final statement on the issue in this forum, allow me to
thank him also for all of the support to my delegation
throughout the year and to wish him the best in the
coming year.

I reiterate my Government's satisfaction with the
interim agreement reached in Geneva on 24 November
among the Islamic Republic of Iran, the European Union
and the E3+3 countries on Iran's nuclear programme.
We congratulate the negotiators for having succeeded in
renewing the optimism of the international community
over a process that has at times appeared hopelessly
stalled.

With respect to the report before us today, I wish to
underscore the following.

First, my country commends the work of the
Committee, which has continued to consider requests
for information and for reports by Member States of
alleged violations. Once the Panel of Experts concludes
its investigation, it is important that the Committee
respond and act in a timely and effective manner through
new designations and/or information notes, ifnecessary.
In cases of requests for information on the sanctions
regime from States or international organizations, it is
important that the Committee respond clearly, directly
and, above all, expeditiously, pursuant to its mandate.

We note the midterm report of the Panel of Experts
and consider it appropriate. We commend its speedy
transmission to the Council after being considered by
the Committee. As for the Panel's final report, which
was delivered to the Committee almost six months ago
(see S/2013/33l, annex), we again call on all members
to redouble their efforts to reach a consensus on the
recommendations contained therein, and on possible
implementation measures.

Another issue that my delegation considers
highly important is transparency. We emphasize
the importance of holding briefing meetings that are
open to all Member States and of varying the subjects
addressed in them. The latest meeting of that kind
was the briefing on the financing of terrorism and
proliferation financing, held on 18 November. As my
delegation has stated previously, we are convinced that
greater transparency would ensure greater effectiveness
in the sanctions regimes and improved implementation
of the Council's resolutions.

Nevertheless, such an exercise is insufficient to
resolve the lack of transparency within the Security
Council. That is clearly evident in a few ofthe Council's
subsidiary organs, such as the sanctions committees on
Iran and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
That relative opacity leads to a lack of information not
only among States non-members of the Council, but
also among permanent and non-permanent Council
members.

We know that the issues dealt with are highly
sensitive political matters. However, that does not
justify the fact that a majority of the Member States
are excluded from negotiations on resolutions and
mandate renewals for groups of experts, or the lack
of comprehensive consultations in the selection of
candidates to fill vacancies in those groups. In passing,
we should say that some countries and regions are
overrepresented in those groups, which, we believe,
has a negative impact on the effectiveness of their work
and, consequently, on the efficient implementation of
resolutions and the provisions imposed by them.

It is a fact that broad geographical representation
will enhance the Council's effectiveness. It facilitates
the implementation of resolutions and ensures greater
acceptance and integration of the Committee's
decisions by all Member States. That is why over the
two years a priority of my delegation has been to work
on improving the situation by providing information
to non-member States, especially within our region,
but also within the Council machinery, in order to
achieve some improvements, such as the introduction
of language on selection criteria for candidates for
positions in subsidiary bodies, which must include,
inter alia, broad geographic representation.

In the case of the 1737 Committee, as in the case
of others, it is important that the Panel of Experts not
be perceived as representing an agenda or a specific
regional group. The Committee's task concerns every
State, and that is a vital message for ensuring its
success, legitimacy and credibility.

Finally, I would like to reiterate my Government's
support for the agreement between Iran and the E3+3,
and our hope that it will be implemented and that the
dialogue between the parties will continue. We urge the
international community to redouble efforts to make
the most of that first important step towards stability
in the region.

