Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ghassan Salame' and African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security Smai'l Chergui
for their comprehensive if very alarming briefings on
recent developments in Libya. I especially welcome
Mr. Salame's presence in the Council today and thank
him for his tireless efforts. Allow me also to thank
Ambassador Juergen Schulz for his helpful briefing
on the ongoing work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
and to congratulate him on his leadership.

Poland remains gravely concerned about prolonged
clashes in and around Tripoli, especially by the use of
airplanes, drones and rocket artillery. We condemn the
growing number of attacks on the civilian population
and civilian infrastructure and confirm our position
that all parties to the conflict must comply with their
obligations under international law, in particular
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Therefore, we call on all parties to
immediately implement a ceasefire and to engage with
the United Nations to ensure a full and comprehensive
cessation of hostilities.

We also call on all parties to fully respect the
arms embargo and refrain from taking any action that
could further undermine the United Nations-facilitated
political dialogue. In that context, we must underscore
the meaningful role of the Panel of Experts in the work
of the Sanctions Committee. Its independence and
autonomy are essential for its undisturbed work and
that of the Sanctions Committee and the Council.

The recent terrorist attack in Sebha serves as a
strong reminder that terrorist groups will exploit every
opportunity to expand their presence in Libya. In that
regard, all parties should dissociate themselves from
terrorist and criminal elements involved in the fighting.

In conclusion, we believe that the conflict in Libya
should be resolved only by peaceful means, since power
gained by force will not achieve long-lasting stability
and prosperity for Libyans. In that regard, Poland fully
supports all efforts by Special Representative Salame'
and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
under challenging circumstances, aimed at finding a
comprehensive political solution to the current crisis
and bringing security, political and economic stability
and national unity to Libya.

