Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for initiating and presiding over
this important debate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his informative briefing earlier
today.

When people are asked to rank what is most
important to them, they respond that personal safety
and security and trust in those providing that security
are the highest priorities. Today we will recognize that
fact with the adoption of the first-ever Security Council
draft resolution on security sector reform. The United
Kingdom is pleased to sponsor the draft resolution.

When citizens are safe, countries are able to recover
from conflict and to grow their economies. Sierra Leone
and Timor-Leste are successful examples of how the
patient work of reforming a country's security sector
as part of a broader effort to strengthen the rule of law
is fundamental to countries' growth. Conversely, in
many of the countries in which we have seen a relapse
into conflict, such as the Central African Republic
and South Sudan, the collapse or mismanagement of
the security sector is often a major contributor to the
violence.

One of the most acute challenges facing the United
Nations on security sector reform is how to take forward
such reform when there has been a complete collapse
in State authority, where political legitimacy remains
contested and where serious violence persists. In
places such as Libya, Somalia and the Central African
Republic, United Nations missions are grappling with
security sector reform challenges in extremely fragile
contexts.

Our end goal should be to build capable, accountable
and responsible security sectors with full national
ownership. But in the early stages of a reform process,
we need to be realistic about what is achievable and
to prioritize and sequence interventions accordingly.
In Violent and unstable contexts, security cannot wait
for security sector reform. The immediate focus must
be on reducing violence and protecting civilians. We
must seek to stabilize the situation in the short term
while working to create the conditions for sustainable
political settlement and the longer-term reform of the
security sector.

Too often, we embark on wholesale reform of the
security sector when the requisite political preconditions
do not exist. We train, man and equip security forces
without considering how that will impact the fragile
political balance in the country or how those security
forces are perceived by the citizens they are entrusted to
protect. At times, our eagerness to get something done
means that we do more harm than good and contribute
to further instability. We can avoid those mistakes.

First, as a Council we have a responsibility to
provide missions with clearer, more credible mandates
that are better sequenced and prioritized by the most
urgent security-related needs. In the early phases of a
mission's deployment, we should not aim for expansive
security sector reform activities. We must focus on the
most urgent issues to stabilize the situation.

Secondly, missions cannot afford to de-link their
good offices and political functions from their security
sector reform tasks. The two are intimately linked.
The Secretary-General's Special Representatives
should work to generate the political space for security
sector reform and gain commitments from leaders to
drive forward that reform. Similarly, swift action in
the security sector to reduce violence, protect citizens
and build trust between citizens and State authorities
can help reinforce ongoing political processes and
national dialogues. If managed well, those efforts can
be mutually reinforcing.

Thirdly, United Nations missions cannot
successfully take forward security sector reform alone.
Effective interventions in the security sector must
employ the full United Nations toolbox f political,
security, peacebuilding and development. To do that,
we must strengthen the internal mechanisms within the
United Nations, both in the field and at Headquarters, to
coordinate security sector reform activities. In addition,
the United Nations needs to deepen its partnerships
with regional organizations, such as the African Union
and European Union, which can play an important role
in delivering key security sector reform tasks.

The United Kingdom will continue to support
security sector reform around the world. We have kept
our promise to spend 0.7 per cent of our gross national
income on overseas aid. We are the only Group of 20
country to do so. At least 30 per cent of that aid will
be spent in conflict-affected States. Over the past
decade, we committed $278 million to support security
and justice programmes in 25 countries across various
regions of the world. For example, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a United Kingdom programme
has helped to improve the capacity and accountability
of the Congolese national Police and of the internal
security sector with a particular focus on the needs of
women and girls.

The United Kingdom treats security and access
to justice as a basic service on a par with health and
education and a fundamental right as recognized in the
Universal Declaration on Human Rights. In all of the
United Kingdom's security and justice activities, we
take a people-centred approach, focusing not only on
State security but also on how individuals experience
insecurity and access justice.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for convening this
debate and for submitting the important draft resolution
to be adopted this afternoon. Building accountable and
responsive security services in countries recovering
from conflict should remain a priority for the Council
so that everyone everywhere can live safely and free
from violence.

