Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to say to all present what an honour it is that
they are participating with us in this important Security
Council debate on our commitment to the vital topic of
children in armed conflict.

In adopting resolution 1261 (1999), the Security
Council formally recognized that the protection of
children in armed conflict was crucial to peace and
security. The Security Council thus included specific
and very precise provisions on the protection of
children in several mandates of peacekeeping
operations and has consistently demanded that the
protection of the rights and well-being of children
affected by armed conflict be taken into account in all
peace processes and peace agreements as well as in
post-conflict and reconstruction phases.

For the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), the protection of children affected by armed
conflict is therefore a fundamental element both of our
strategy and of our daily commitment. For that reason,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has
already put a large number of measures in place.
09-31649
(spoke in English)

As a first step, DPKO established in-house
capacity for child protection in the form of child
protection advisers in 2001. The Council's sustained
support for the role of child protection advisers in
relevant peacekeeping operations has enabled us to
deploy advisers to the eight most significant
peacekeeping operations to date, with the most recent
deployment, at the beginning of 2009, to the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
mission and to the United Nations Mission of
Assistance in Afghanistan. We have also built up a
supporting capacity of child-protection expertise
composed of both international and national staff. The
latter, comprising over 40 per cent of the total staffing
for child protection, serve as a key resource for our
work due to their knowledge of local norms and
communities. They also remain as an important
national capacity when the United Nations and the
peacekeeping operation ultimately wind up. This
investment has yielded concrete outcomes and
enhanced the mainstreaming of concern for children
affected by conflict in our operation.

First, child protection advisers support heads of
mission in integrating key child protection concerns
into all stages of the peace process and the overall
strategy of the peacekeeping operation, including, of
course, negotiation with Governments, armed groups
and parties to a conflict. In Burundi, for example, the
release of former child combatants associated with the
Parti pour la liberation du peuple hutu-Forces
nationales de liberation was placed at the heart of the
negotiation as a priority item on the agenda of the Joint
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, resulting in
the release of 340 such combatants in Burundi this
month alone.

Verification efforts to identify children in
assembly areas are ongoing. The significant
developments are the result of concerted and sustained
advocacy and the engagement of the facilitator, the
Political Directorate and the United Nations system,
including, of course, the United Nations Mission in
Burundi and UNICEF, with the support of the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations are now
increasingly able to leverage their political resources
and offer means to promote the protection of children

in armed conflict and to address violations of
children's rights. Regarding the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, I have just clearly heard the legitimate
concern expressed by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, but I can also say that significant
progress on the release of children in North Kivu was
registered after a lengthy peace process following an
extensive and high-level sensitization campaign that
targeted local communities, armed forces and armed
groups on national and international standards
prohibiting the use of children by armed groups and
armed forces, implemented by MONUC jointly with
UNICEF in June 2008. At the first point of contact
with armed groups in the field, MONUC military units
and military observers, deployed in remote and
otherwise inaccessible areas, have contributed to the
release of children by signalling the presence of
children in armed groups and by providing
information, security and critical logistic support for
their release.

While there was a significant setback during the
crisis in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and increased reports of re-recruitment of children
during this period, MONUC and UNICEF have
continued to tap into military resources in their work to
secure the release of children from armed forces and
from armed groups. Child protection focal points have
been established in military contingents across various
missions in places such as the Sudan, Haiti and Cote
d'Ivoire. Mainstreaming child protection concerns in
the activities of peacekeeping operations has been
further enhanced through close cooperation between
child protection staff and other mission components,
particularly those concerned with human rights,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the rule
of law and justice, security sector reform, gender,
conduct and discipline - all the different units within
our peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, and most important, our peacekeeping
operations have increasingly engaged in the
implementation of important child protection priorities
spelled out in the relevant Security Council resolutions.
These include training all peacekeeping personnel on
child protection and child rights, dialogue with parties
to end the recruitment and use of children by armed
forces and armed groups and the implementation of the

monitoring and reporting mechanisms established
under resolution 1612 (2005).

The training of peacekeeping personnel in child
protection and child rights is a continuing priority for
us and is now included as an integral part of the
pre-deployment curriculum for civilians. Training
material on child protection and child rights have been
developed in various missions and have been used in
induction training for all incoming force contingents
and civilian components. The training is aimed at
creating awareness of course, on the impact of armed
conflict on children and knowledge of the international
legal norms and standards that govern the protection
and promotion of children's rights.

In Cote d'Ivoire, the Mission has partnered with
Save the Children to implement a training-of-trainers
programme for United Nations military and police
representatives. That training equips them with
information and tools to deliver training on child
protection within their teams, thereby widening our
reach through the military. The impact of in-mission
training on the work of missions is bearing fruit and
has promoted a child-conscious approach in the work
of United Nations police and military. For example, in
the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Haiti, training in child rights and child protection has
now been fully integrated into the capacity-building
activities provided by the United Nations police for
national police units.

The monitoring and reporting mechanism is an
important tool for holding perpetrators of violations of
child rights accountable, in order to prevent further
violation and to enhance the protection of children
affected by armed conflict. As the Council knows,
DPKO co-chairs the United Nations country task force
on monitoring and reporting, along with UNICEF, in
seven peacekeeping operations in the Sudan, Chad,
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Cote d'Ivoire.

Within the area of a mission, our child protection
teams conduct systematic monitoring and reporting and
support the preparation of specific reports in
collaboration with UNICEF, United Nations country
task forces and other units of the mission, especially
those concerned with human rights.

Integrated with the implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism is systematic
follow-up to the conclusions and recommendations of
the Security Council. In Cote d'Ivoire, following the
de-listing of parties to conflict from the annexes to the
Secretary-General's reports, the mission has turned its
attention to its tasks. In January this year, the mission
received a programme of action from the Forces de
defense et de securite des Forces nouvelles undertaking
to combat sexual violence, as requested by the Security
Council Working Group in its recent conclusions on
C6te d'Ivoire.

(spoke in French)

In order to consolidate and further institutionalize
our commitment to children in armed conflict within
the framework of our missions, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has established a programme
in all departments to make protecting children in armed
conflicts a benchmark for all our operations. That
policy has been formulated on the basis of broad
consultations among our missions in the field;
Headquarters, of course, here in New York; UNICEF;
and the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, as
well as many other key actors. We are also working to
harmonize all elements of our protection activities,
particularly within the framework of resolution 1612
(2005) on children and armed conflict; resolution 1820
(2008) on sexual violence against women; and
resolution 1674 (2006).

Finally, I should like to assure members of the
tireless commitment of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to supporting this issue in all
our activities. My Department has committed itself to
ensuring very close follow-up to the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council so that we can
continue to help to ensure that children have prospects
for tangible and lasting peace. To that end, we are
obviously continuing our close collaboration and full
cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and the United Nations
country teams. Of course, we are, as always, counting
on the support of the Security Council to back us in
this essential task.

