Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
congratulate Azerbaijan on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of May. I appreciate
Azerbaijan's initiative in convening this high-level
briefing on counter-terrorism. I welcome President
Aliyev's leadership of today's meeting.

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of
Azerbaijan's accession to United Nations membership.
Azerbaijan is also serving as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council this year. Over the past 20
years, Azerbaijan has made tremendous efforts and
scored tremendous achievements in national
development, and it is playing an increasingly
important role in United Nations affairs. It has
contributed positively to the realization of the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter. China
would like to express its warm appreciation. I also
welcome today's briefing by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.

Terrorism is a common threat to the international
community. China condemns terrorism and resolutely
supports efforts to combat it in all its forms and
manifestations. The international community has made
tremendous efforts in combating terrorism, but
terrorism is far from having been eradicated. It still
seriously threatens international peace and security and
it has evolved in form and means. With regard to
strengthening international counter-terrorism
cooperation, I would like to stress four points.

First, Member States should uphold unified
standards on the issue of counter-terrorism. Terrorist
acts, regardless of their motives, wherever and by
whomever they are committed, should be unequivocally
opposed and addressed with firm measures. Double
standards must be rejected in the effort to combat
terrorism. The international community should oppose
any form of incitation to or support for terrorism.
Adopting inconsistent positions on the basis of one's
own interest will serve only to shield or connive with
terrorism, defeating the purpose of counter-terrorism
and undermining international cooperation in that
regard.

Secondly, we must address both the symptoms
and the root causes of terrorism through integrated
measures. Terrorism emanates from a complicated set
of political, economic and social factors. Measures to
combat it should focus on promoting development,
eliminating polarization and social injustice, and
appropriately resolving regional conflicts. Terrorism is
often accompanied by the spread of separatism,
extremism, violent hatred and intolerance. It should
therefore be addressed in a holistic manner. Relying
solely on military means may very well prove to be
counter-productive.

Thirdly, to strengthen international cooperation
on counter-terrorism, the United Nations and the
Security Council should play a leading role. In the
effort to combat terrorism, we must abide by the
United Nations Charter and the basic norms of
international law and respect the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States. China
supports the full and effective implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as
well as relevant Security Council resolutions and
presidential statements. Coordination among various
United Nations counter-terrorism bodies should also be
strengthened. Counter-terrorism assistance to Member
States should be based on respect for the will and
choices of those States. China welcomes the
establishment of the United Nations Centre for
Counter-Terrorism and hopes that it will provide
important assistance to Member States in terms of
capacity-building and technical assistance.

Fourthly, counter-terrorism efforts must be based
on dialogue among civilizations and on the promotion
of mutual understanding and tolerance. International
cooperation on counter-terrorism should serve to
promote dialogue and exchange among various
civilizations, religions and ethnicities, as well as
mutual respect and harmonious coexistence. We must
not draw ideological lines in our counter-terrorism
efforts, and we oppose linking terrorism with certain
States, Governments, ethnicities or religions. We also
oppose shielding or conniving with terrorism on the
basis of any political, ethnic or religious pretexts.

China is the victim of terrorism and is facing
various terrorist threats, primarily from elements of the
East Turkistan Islamic Movement at home and abroad,
as well as from other international terrorist groups and
individuals. China is ready to participate actively in
cooperation on counter-terrorism within the framework
of the United Nations, and we will work untiringly to
that end.

