Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. Minister, for convening and presiding over
today's important meeting. I also thank Mr. Wane,
Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Antonio and Mr. Kaberuka for
their briefings.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) on peace and security has evolved
markedly in recent years. Indeed, the international
challenges we face today demand that our organizations
develop an ever-closer strategic partnership.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the annual
joint consultative meeting between the United Nations
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council. Our dialogue and partnership will only
continue to grow.

We are encouraged by AU commitments to make
the AU more self-reliant, including via financial
arrangements on peace-support operations through
the African Peace Fund. Not only the United Nations
Secretariat but also States Members of the United
Nations themselves should respond to this progress
by engaging in discussions on financial issues, as
expressed in the draft resolution (S/2016/977) to be
voted on later.

In discussing peacekeeping, we should recall that
the true aim of the United Nations-AU partnership is
sustaining peace. Strengthened peace operations are
an important tool to that end, but not our final goal.
I believe this is the essence of the AU aspiration
to "silence the guns by 2020, through enhanced
dialogue-centred conflict prevention and resolution".
And as the Council recognized through its presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/12, adopted under the Japanese
presidency in July, we believe that peacebuilding is the
key.

The AU has a comparative advantage in its
contextual knowledge and mediation abilities in
support of political solutions, including through the
Panel of the Wise. Japan strongly believes in political
solutions and has supported AU mediation efforts
and good offices since 1996. Strengthened United
Nations-AU partnerships in conflict management and
peacebuilding will be key success factors in creating
more effective peace operations and more sustainable
peace in the long term.

Ultimately, it is Africa's socioeconomic
development that will lead to sustainable peace and
the AU's self-reliance. The AU Policy on Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development reminds us that
security and development are closely linked.

As we considerhow to strengthenUnitedNations-AU
cooperation, we should focus on Agenda 2063's call for
economic and human development, conflict prevention
and institutions. The Tokyo International Conference
on African Development also complements United
Nations-AU cooperation and is based on the principles
of African ownership and international partnership.

More than anything, the United Nations-AU
partnership is about empowering African States,
societies and people to play an active role in creating a
safer and more prosperous future. Japan looks forward
to supporting continued collaboration that employs the
comparative advantages of each organization in pursuit
of our common goal.

