Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): We would like to thank
the Permanent Representative of Spain for his briefing
on the work of the Security Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) during the reporting
period, as well as for his stewardship of the Committee.

Malaysia is of the view that all States must adhere
to the fundamental principles concerning the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. In order to ensure that those
principles are not abused, States must exhibit full
transparency in their nuclear programmes, subject
those programmes to the full scope of the safeguards
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
comply with the provisions of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and gain the
international community's confidence and trust in
the peaceful nature of their nuclear programmes. In
that regard, Malaysia welcomes the progress in the
negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran regarding the
Joint Plan of Action. We recognize the complexity of
the discussions and the contentious issues involved. We
also commend the serious and sustained commitment
ofthe parties concerned to moving the process forward.

Malaysia hopes that all sides will be able to show
flexibility so that the negotiations can culminate in a
positive outcome. We look forward to a comprehensive
agreement on the basis of realistic and achievable
goals that meet the core requirements of all parties,
particularly reaching a political agreement by the
end of March and completing the technical annexes
by the 30 June deadline. Malaysia also acknowledges
the measures Iran has taken to build the international
community's confidence through its cooperation with
the IAEA. We note that it remains engaged in dialogue
with the IAEA and has continued to provide access
to its facilities, allowing the Agency to conduct its
verification work under the Joint Programme of Action.

Against that backdrop, the 1737 Committee has
continued to conduct its work in accordance with its
mandate, as we heard in the Chair's briefing on its recent
activities. Given that the P5+l negotiations with Iran are
still under way, we share the view that the Committee
should remain committed to implementing all the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Accordingly,
it should continue its important role of assisting the
Member States and international organizations that
seek its guidance. We trust that it will continue its work
on implementation and compliance with a prudent and
judicious approach, based on the mandate derived from
the relevant resolutions.

At the same time, we are seeing heightened
levels of anticipation, and perhaps a certain degree
of uncertainty, among Member States and the private
sector regarding the ongoing negotiations between Iran
and the P5+1. There is clearly strong interest on the part
of various stakeholders in the immediate implications
of the Council's sanctions on Iran, depending on the
outcome of the talks. Looking ahead, we expect there
will be a pressing demand for more clarity on the
matter in the coming weeks. We recognize the need for
greater outreach concerning the continuing validity of
the Council's measures on Iran. At the same time, we
also feel that the Committee is reaching a stage where
it will narrow its focus in order to deal with a potential
political agreement as an outcome to the discussions
between the P5+1 and Iran. Malaysia looks forward to
working constructively within the framework of the
Committee on that important process.

I would also like to take this opportunity to briefly
touch on the work of the Panel of Experts. We are
pleased that the Panel is now back at work with a full
complement of experts, and we hope that will be useful,
given the expectations that lie ahead. We note that the
deadline for the submission of the Panel's final report
will come a few weeks after the P5+l and Iran are
expected to conclude their talks on a political agreement.
Given that, we hope the Panel will intensify its work
on the final report in the weeks to come by focusing
on producing a fact-based assessment and analysis that
takes into consideration the implications of the outcome
of the talks. Since the Panel's mandate will expire in
July, we also believe that at the appropriate juncture
the Committee should consider how to approach the
renewal of its mandate in the event of a comprehensive
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.

Malaysia, like other Committee members, and
indeed the rest of the international community,
looks forward to positive developments in the P5+l
negotiations with Iran on its nuclear programme. We
anticipate that Member States will soon be referring to
the 1737 Committee for guidance on the implementation
of the relevant resolutions, based on the outcome of the
talks. In that regard, I wish to conclude by underscoring
our confidence that the Committee will be able to
respond expeditiously and decisively to such scenarios.

