Mr. Lovald (Norway): Norway welcomes the
debate on cooperation between the Security Council
and international organizations in the implementation
of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006). Those
resolutions address the most pressing proliferation
challenges of today. We are therefore firmly committed
to their implementation.

Resolution 1540 (2004) constitutes an essential
element of the global counter-proliferation and
counter-terrorism regime. It is imperative that
individual States implement and enforce national
export control regulations called for in the resolution
on the basis of high international standards. Only in
that way can we develop a no-go area for proliferators
and illicit procurement activities.

Although resolution 1540 (2004) recognizes that
national Governments are responsible for establishing
effective domestic controls to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery, it is absolutely essential that their efforts be
coordinated through international cooperation. In that
regard, we attach great importance to paragraph 7 of
the resolution, which recognizes that some States may
require assistance in implementing the provisions of
the resolution and invites States that are in a position to
do so to offer assistance in response to specific
requests.
Norway has for many years supported various
activities in the field of nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament. Financial support has been channelled
through the United Nations system and to various
Norwegian and international research institutions. We
have also provided funding for seminars on
implementing resolution 1540 (2004).

Through regional seminars and outreach
programmes, the Committee and Member States have
commendably focused on increasing the quantity and
quality of reporting. Ongoing work with that focus is
necessary and welcome. The debate here today is
particularly welcome because there is also a need to
improve the form and quality of outreach and
assistance in that regard. Not only do States have a
responsibility for reporting, but those States and
organizations which provide assistance also have a
duty to ensure that, to the fullest extent possible, it is
effective, efficient and well coordinated.

Because the obligations under resolution 1540
(2004) overlap and interlock with numerous
international agreements and regimes, as well as
bilateral programmes, that requires understanding the
full scope and content of the assistance that is already
provided by States and international and regional
organizations, sharing lessons learned and, where
possible, developing common and realistic
expectations of information-sharing, cooperation and
coordination. Norway hopes that this debate will move
us in that direction.

My Government is also pleased to announce that
it is co-hosting, with the Governments of Germany and
Chile, an upcoming workshop on national
non-proliferation controls, a topic which reflects the
diverse obligations, mechanisms and actors that must
work in concert to achieve effective implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and, more broadly, for a
strengthened non-proliferation regime.

The main items to be discussed at the workshop
this coming spring include implementation challenges,
assistance and enhanced cooperation. Norway and its
co-organizers expect that the workshop will produce
recommendations to help donors, organizations and
States seeking assistance to better focus and coordinate
their own efforts, taking into account existing
programmes and their comparative advantages.
Workshop recommendations should account for
common challenges and lessons learned, and donors
07-24825
and providers of assistance would benefit from the
participation of a select number of countries receiving
such assistance. We also hope that the
recommendations which emerge from the workshop
will contribute to the aims proposed by the Committee
Chairman in his opening remarks here today and in the
proposed presidential statement.

