Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I want to thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate to discuss one of the
most pressing issues on the Security Council's agenda.

Ukraine condemns the phenomenon of terrorism
unreservedly in all its forms and manifestations. We
support the central role of the United Nations and the
Security Council in promoting international cooperation
in fighting terrorism, including in the framework
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. Ensuring its effective implementation
requires closer cooperation among Member States, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and other United Nations
family agencies and bodies.
Ukraine is a party to all counter-terrorism treaties
and is closely engaged in this endeavor with relevant
international and regional organizations, including
the United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe, the
Financial Action Task Force, and the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
Al-Qaida, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and others are
not just a regional menace but a global challenge
whose violent ideologies constitute a threat to the
entire international community. My country strongly
condemns the crimes and acts of mass violence that
these terrorist groups are committing against civilians
from Syria and Iraq to France and Belgium. We are
fully committed to the international coalition's efforts
to combat this global threat.

The escalation of conflicts nowadays is directly
influenced by the influx of foreign terrorist fighters.
We believe that the primary obligation to prevent the
movements of foreign terrorist fighters lies primarily
with the source countries, which have to spot and
stop them at the earliest stages. Ukraine is actively
contributing to global and regional efforts aimed
at stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters by
countering the recruitment and transit of terrorists, in
line with the relevant resolutions.

During the past year alone, eight ISIL transit
points have been identified in Ukraine and shut down
by the national security services. Twenty-one ISIL
supporters have been detained and deported to their
source countries. Over the past two years, about 600
foreign citizens have been denied entry into Ukraine
on the basis of information about their involvement in
ISIL activities.

International terrorism and violent extremism
threaten our core values and principles, including
human rights, the rule of law, democracy, equal
opportunity and freedom. It goes without saying that
fighting these threats only through military means does
not have a long-lasting effect. Eliminating their visible
manifestations without removing their root causes
propagates continuous outbreaks of terrorist attacks all
over the world. In this regard, Ukraine would like to
extend its full support for the Secretary-General's Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which has
capped international endeavours in this field.

Combating the activities of individual terrorists
and terrorist groups will be insufficient if the problem
of terrorist financing, including of State-sponsored
terrorism, is not properly addressed. We underline
the particular importance of effective efforts at
both the international and national levels to prevent
and counteract the financing of terrorist activities
and terrorist organizations, as well as to ensure the
ultimate prosecution and punishment of individuals or
organizations that provide such funding in any form
and by any methods. These efforts should be based on
relevant United Nations legal instruments and those
elaborated within the framework of the Financial
Action Task Force.

Ensuring the genuine - and not merely
declarative - cooperation of States and the mutual
assistance of their law enforcement agencies in
preventing the financing of terrorism is the key to
overcoming this phenomenon, which has become
rampant at the regional and global levels. Any link
between this crime and Government agencies or
officials must trigger the international responsibility of
States to prosecute the crime of financing terrorism.

In this very context, I cannot fail to mention the
topicality of this issue for Ukraine, which has been
dealing with the challenge of terrorist activities in the
Donbas region, carried out with the direct support of
the Russian Federation, since 2014. The policy of terror
against Ukrainian civilians in the Donbas is one of
the dreadful hallmarks of Russian aggression against
Ukraine. The terrorist component in the undeclared
war against Ukraine is clearly visible and has become
a fact of life of the occupied areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions of Ukraine.

During the past two years, Ukraine has received
irrefutable evidence of the terrorist nature of the
organizations known as the Donetsk People's Republic
and the Luhansk People's Republic, and of the direct
involvement of the Russian Federation in the fmancing,
support and coordination of these terrorist groups,
which have perpetrated numerous crimes and carried
out terrorist activities against civilians, in particular in
Mariupol, Volnovakha, Kramatorsk, Donetsk. Kharkiv
and many other Ukrainian cities. The shocking reality
is that foreign terrorist fighters, primarily from Russia,
constitute a significant part of the approximately
40,000-strong illegal armed group fighting against the
Government of Ukraine in the Donbas.

Weapons and manpower continue to flow from
Russia to Ukraine's east through uncontrolled sections
of the Ukrainian-Russian border. The observer mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe at the Russian checkpoints on the border has
continuously reported high numbers of persons in
military-style clothing crossing the border in both
directions. In particular, since the beginning of the
Mission's operation in July 2014, over 26,000 crossings
of this category have been reported by the mission
from only two border crossing points. The Russian
military continues to train terrorists and the fighters
of illegal armed groups at the military camps set up in
the occupied Crimea and parts of the Donbas, as well
as in the Rostov, Belgorod and Tambov regions of the
Russian Federation.

Having been directly involved in all these terrorist
activities, the Russian Federation is clearly violating
its commitments undertaken in accordance with
a set of legally binding international instruments
on the prevention of and combating international
terrorism, including the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism
and the International Convention for the Suppression
of Terrorist Bombings, as well as relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Apart from that, Russia has launched a mass-
media campaign aimed at the radicalization of the
population in the occupied territories of the Donbas,
which creates fertile ground for the spread of terrorist
narratives. Moreover, the Russian media and nationalist
circles glorify the Russian terrorist fighters as they
depart to Ukraine and return to Russia, instead of
being prosecuted.

As for Crimea, yesterday the Russian occupation
authorities adopted a decision to suspend altogether, and
with immediate effect, the activities of the Majlis of the
Crimean Tatars - their only legislative body. This is
not just one more crime in the genocidal spree launched
by Russia against the Crimean Tatars. This outrageous
act by the aggressor country has a direct bearing on
our debate today, for it will but further radicalize the
already desperate and highly charged fabric of Crimean
Tatars - the youth first of all - with consequences
that are hard to predict. We call on the Security Council
and the Secretary-General to unequivocally condemn
this lawless act. We therefore consistently urge the
international community to put additional pressure on
the Russian Federation to stop war and terrorism in the
heart of Europe.

In recent decades, the international community
has registered remarkable achievements in adopting
legally binding instruments to counter terrorism.
However, more should be done to prevent and combat
this scourge. Our major task is to conclude the work on
a comprehensive convention on international terrorism,
which would supplement the existing international
legal counterterrorism framework and provide States
with a useful tool.

One of the major obstacles on this course is finding
a clear definition for the act of terrorism. Resolving
that problem would allow the international community
to address more efficiently some outstanding issues
related to bringing to account not only individual
terrorists and organizations but also those States
responsible for organizing, financing, encouraging,
providing training or otherwise directly or indirectly
supporting terrorist activities. Our view is that certain
principles of the Geneva Declaration on Terrorism,
adopted in 1987 by the International Conference on
the Question of Terrorism, as well as the proposal put
forward in 2007 in the Sixth Committee of the General
Assembly, could be taken as the bases for a new legally
binding instrument.

Another aspect that increasingly warrants
our close attention is the protection of critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks capable of
disrupting the functioning of banking and finance,
telecommunications, emergency services, air and
rail transportation, energy and water supplies, and of
causing numerous civilian casualties. Ukraine is of the
opinion that the Security Council should expeditiously
address this problem by mobilizing international
efforts aimed at diminishing the mere possibility of
such attacks.

Ukraine strongly believes that one of the most
important aspects of countering international terrorism
is to commemorate its victims. Unless it remembers
the lessons of the past and educates the generations
to come about them, humankind will be doomed to
repeat the dark chapters of its history. In this vein, I
would like to recall the initiative of Ukraine with
regard to the establishment of the international day
of commemoration of the memory of the victims of
terrorist acts.

Finally, we see great merit in having the Council
address the issue of the terrorism scourge on a regular
and systematic basis, including this coming September
at the highest possible level.

