The President (spoke in French): I would now
like to make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Republic of Congo.

First of all, I would like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Deputy Secretary-General
Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro for their personal involvement,
and also commend Ambassador Merores and
Ambassador Christian for their statements as
representatives of the President of the General
Assembly and the Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission, respectively.

Nowadays, we see human distress on too many
faces around the world, marking the anguish of
aftermath which reflects a lack of security that is
unworthy of our times. We live, in fact, in a world
drenched in consumption, intoxicated by scientific and
technological prowess and stunned by economic
performance.

On the other hand, we are rightly revolted by
what is happening in Darfur, the situation in Somalia is
of concern to us, and we are very anxious at the turn of
events in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to give just a few examples.

This contrasting picture brings us up against the
purposes of the United Nations which, according to the
Charter, are to be a centre for harmonizing the actions
of nations in the attainment of the common ends of
peace and security, development and fundamental
freedoms.

Furthermore, maintaining international peace and
security, the main responsibility for which lies with the
Security Council, cannot be validly accomplished
except if being coupled with a process to lessen the
relative inability of nations to deal with the phenomena
that bring about insecurity.

Equipping ourselves with tools capable of making
such an investment in human security represents, in the
view of my country, an attitude and culture of
prevention that is well understood and seriously
undertaken.

Until recently, the balance of terror rested upon
the well-known adage, "if you want peace, prepare for
war", which excused the international community from
taking any bold initiative directed at the protagonists of
an imminent conflict. Today, we do not read conflicts
in the same way. There are many variables involved -
disputes among States, obviously, but also and
increasingly disagreements within States, as well as
cross-border insecurity due to phenomena such as
terrorism or illicit trafficking in conventional arms or
natural resources.

Our debate is therefore valuable because it brings
us up to date on a topic that is certainly familiar but
that, given the diversity of approaches involved, risks
forever remaining a noble idea, inspiring in theory, that
is difficult to carry out in practice.

In proposing this item, the Congo wished to raise
awareness of the multidimensional character of any
approach to conflict prevention - to the extent that a
peacekeeping operation can be multidimensional. Even
the formula for hybrid operations has an identical
approach, in that such operations, by definition,
involve active cooperation among local, subregional or
regional organizations.

Through its resolution 1625 (2005), the Security
Council gave itself a solid foundation enabling it to
play the effective role that it assumed during its 5261st
meeting, at the level of heads of State and Government,

on 14 September 2005. Nonetheless, peacekeeping
operations have always taken precedence over
prevention. That is confirmed by the thematic debates
organized by the Council on issues as varied as the
protection of civilians, the role of women, natural
resources and even energy and climate change. The
Council could not provide better evidence of the
inclusive nature of its mission in this area.

The Council is thus gradually including the
underlying causes of conflicts in its field of research
for better ways to address issues related to peace and
security. The emergence of non-State actors and the
multiplicity of risk factors compel us to resort to new
initiatives to better adapt Council action to the
challenges that they pose.

Strengthening the role of the Security Council -
the terms of reference of this debate - can therefore
be seen at three levels of intervention.

The first level deals with institutions of the
United Nations system or organs directly involved,
such as the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Human Rights Council and humanitarian organizations,
which could do more to join forces with the Security
Council in an appropriate forum to show a spirit of
coherence, which the United Nations needs in the area
of conflict prevention.

The second level concerns States or groups of
States expected to establish, at the local level, national
mechanisms open to civil society to serve as an
interface with the international community in their
partnership relationships.

The third level deals with the relations between
the United Nations and regional organizations, under
Chapter VIII of the Charter. The United Nations
reaffirmed its commitment to those relations by
signing, on 16 November 2006, the Declaration on
Enhancing UN-AU cooperation: Framework for the
Ten-year Capacity-building Programme for the African
Union.

We are convinced that, in its practical modalities,
such cooperation will draw on the channels of existing
subregional mechanisms. Currently, the most
developed are those of the Economic Community of
West African States, supported by the United Nations
Office for West Africa - the first decentralized
regional office of the Department of Political Affairs;
the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region; and the Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa, which is eagerly awaiting
technical assistance from the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, managed by the Department for Disarmament
Affairs.

With regard to the framework for the Ten-year
Capacity-building Programme for the African Union,
its strategic nature means that it will also target African
subregional organizations. That will make it possible to
focus the efforts of the United Nations and the African
Union, "with priority on conflict prevention, mediation
and good offices, peacekeeping", given the heavy
losses inflicted by conflicts on populations of many
regions of the continent.

The concept of collective security, thus
reconsidered, is supported by my country. That is why
President Denis Sassou Nguesso is one of its most
resolute defenders, as attested by the Congo's
endorsement of two pacts - the Great Lakes pact and
the Economic Community of West African States
pact - whose complementarity is shown in the
similarity of their mechanisms. Indeed, they are based
on the principles of non-aggression, mutual assistance,
democracy, good governance and co-development so as
to make the needs and aspirations of peoples the
components of a normalized rule of law.

So that the Security Council can soon make good
use of such political and legal instruments, the working
group that we chair wishes to be able to draw from
them the elements of a coherent comprehensive
strategy that will benefit the Council. To that end, in
November we plan to hold a seminar to explore in
greater depth the views expressed during this debate
and emphasized in the presidential statement to be
adopted.

Finally, an African thinker who died recently,
Professor Joseph Ki-Zerbo, said of Africa that it must
not remain lying down, under pain of death, but should
stand up. That is an attitude of vigilance that endows
the duty of mobilization with its raison d'etre - that is
to say, prevention and betting on the future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of Portugal.

