Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me to thank
the Russian President of the Security Council for
organizing this quarterly debate on the situation in the
Middle East, which includes the question of Palestine.

The region of the Middle East faces massive
challenges amid conflict and crisis. The epicentres
of conflict 4 Syria, Yemen, Libya 4 have a severe
impact on their neighbouring countries. The fallout
from the conflicts attests to the staggering cost that the
whole world incurs when there is a failure in conflict
prevention and conflict resolution. Of course, the costs
are most brutal for the civilians living in the zones
of conflict. The continued targeting of civilians and
civilians infrastructure, particularly medical facilities,
is completely unacceptable. Impunity must not be
allowed to stand.

Yet there is one conflict in the region that should
be amenable to resolution - where preventing further
conflict should be possible. Indeed, the outline of a
viable peace plan has been on the table for years. The
two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
the only viable peace plan that will allow both nations
to live side by side in peace. Yet at times both parties to
the conflict seem hell-bent on tearing the plan up.

Of great concern is the Israeli Government's
continuing settlement policy. At the Arria Formula
meeting on settlements last week, we again heard
convincing evidence that Israeli Government policy
has had the effect 4 intended or not 4 of making it
impossible for a contiguous Palestinian State to emerge.
Settlement expansion and the destruction of Palestinian
structures undermine the basis for peace. We would
encourage Palestinian leaders to do everything in their
power to reduce tension and avoid provocation. Violent
acts against Israeli citizens and the firing of rockets
into Israel are totally unacceptable. We urge Palestinian
leaders to work to unite the people of Palestine under a
democratic Government. Elections need to be held and
the different factions need to come together.

The two-State solution is in danger of slipping
from our grasp. Right now, damage control is a priority.
The Quartet report issued earlier this year (S/2016/595, annex) is clear on the minimum actions required of
both parties to safeguard the two-State solution. It is
time the Security Council gave some real weight to its
exhortations.

Leaders on both sides bear the heaviest
responsibility in guiding their people in the direction
of peace. At the same time, we welcome the effort of
France to establish an international forum in which
peace can be discussed.

The Israeli-Palestinian situation is bad, but it
could get much worse. We urge the Council to bring its
powers of encouragement and coercion to bear on the
two parties to the conflict. The Council needs to act to
protect the two-State solution

