Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): Today's deliberations
on the situation in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina represent a new twist in the course of events
in that region. The latest escalation of attacks by the
Bosnian Serbs on the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR), ranging from sniping to detention and
including the use of United Nations personnel as human
shields, is clearly a blatant violation of international
humanitarian law and norms. This new defiance
demonstrated by the Bosnian Serbs is clearly yet another
challenge to the will of the international community,
whose credibility is thus tested once again.

 

We extend our condolences to all those countries that
have lost citizens serving with UNPROFOR, and we
reaffirm our position that these unprovoked attacks on
UNPROFOR are unacceptable and cannot be tolerated.
Oman fully supports all measures taken to prevent the
recurrence of similar attacks.

Based on this understanding, we would like to reiterate
our objection to the use of force as a means to settle
differences. It is our opinion that dialogue and negotiation
are not only a civilized mechanism, but the most suitable
and acceptable way of reconciling differences, leading
ultimately to a comprehensive political settlement.

We agree with the Secretary-General's opinion, as
expressed in his latest report to the Security Council, on the
necessity of reassessing the role of the United Nations in
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina in a manner that
will strengthen security for United Nations peace-keepers
and enhance the protection of the civilian population within
a mandate that is to be fully implemented.

In this context, we view the proposal to establish a
rapid reaction force as an option that deserves our utmost
attention. It is our hope that this additional capacity will be
capable of discharging its duties and functions and provide
additional security to UNPROFOR personnel under the
command of the United Nations. We see no problem with
the mandate itself. We know that the mandate is there; the
main problem lies in its implementation.

On the question of the safe areas established in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina by the relevant
Security Council resolutions, my delegation believes that
United Nations protection should not be confined to those
isolated and scattered pockets, the so-called safe areas, but
that it must be extended to all territories of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We fully share the views
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report that the
safe areas are not safe and that they need to be made safe.
Therefore, it is our hope that the international community
will be able to establish very clear modalities on how to
protect the safe areas and their inhabitants, especially when
they are under attack or siege or when humanitarian
convoys are prevented from reaching them.

We welcome the provisions contained in the resolution
that has just been adopted by the Council. At the same
time, we would like to emphasize the right of the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to defend itself in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, and the need for
this Member State to be consulted on all matters, in
particular those pertaining to its territorial integrity. In
View of the latest developments in the region and in the
light of the Bosnian Serbs' continued rejection of the
Contact Group peace plan, my delegation believes it is
imperative for the Security Council to reconsider the
question of lifting the imposed arms embargo.

In conclusion, my delegation, recognizing the vital
role that this rapid reaction force will play, co-sponsored
the draft resolution just adopted as Security Council
resolution 998 (1995) and fully supports its objectives.

