Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank the heads of both
Tribunals for the briefings they have given us and for
the reports submitted to the Security Council pursuant
to resolution 1534 (2004) on the progress made in
implementing their completion strategies. The Russian
Federation continues to believe in the need for strict
compliance by both Tribunals with their completion
strategies within the time frames set out by the
Security Council.

We note with satisfaction that since the last
discussion by the Council, in June of this year,
progress in the completion strategy has been quite
tangible. We believe that the transfer of a number of
accused, especially General Gotovina, to the ICTY
makes the timely conclusion of the trial proceedings
entirely possible.

We proceed from the premise that one of the most
important components in the process is the referral of
cases of intermediate and lower-level accused to
domestic courts. In this connection, we would like to
point out the growing efforts to strengthen the potential
of judicial bodies in the Governments of the former
republics of Yugoslavia, first and foremost, Bosnia and
Herzegovina. At the same time, we understand the
difficulties encountered in this regard by the ICTR.

We deem useful the activities of the leadership of
the ICTY in the joinder of cases, in particular the
multiple accused cases mentioned by the Tribunal
President, Mr. Pocar, beginning in February next year.
It would be interesting to consider possible options for
the use of stand-by judges in the aforementioned three
trials with a view to ensuring continuous consideration
of these cases. We hope that other Council members
also have an interest in this idea on the whole design to
comply with the time frame for the completion strategy
in the Tribunals' work.

One important element that enhances the
effectiveness of the work of the ICTY and the ICTR is
their uninterrupted financing and staffing. In this
connection, I would like to call attention to the election
of ad litem judges for the ICTY in August of last year,
for which we needed to have some changes in the
Tribunal's statute. Another useful personnel decision
was the appointment, at the request of the leadership of
the ICTY, of Christine Van Den Wyngaert as a judge
for the Mrksic et al trial. She began her duties as a
permanent judge earlier than scheduled.

We believe that the exceptional measures taken
by the Security Council and by the General Assembly
will help to maintain the rapid pace of the ICTY's
work and the timely implementation of the completion
strategy.

We are convinced of the need to apprehend and to
try those who are accused of committing the most
serious crimes that come within the purview of the
ICTY and the ICTR. We note with satisfaction that the
Yugoslav Tribunal has managed significantly to
increase its cooperation with the States of the region in
this sphere.

We believe it appropriate to say, once again, that
the competent Russian bodies currently are conducting
consultations with ICTY representatives for a
definition of the modalities for transfer of a detainee on
the territory of the Russian Federation, Mr. Dragan
Zelenovic, to The Hague.

We believe that the recently observed waning of
interest in the work of the Tribunals, reflected
particularly by the difficulty in finding candidates for
ad litem judges, shows the importance of the timely
implementation of the tasks incumbent upon the ICTY
and the ICTR.

