Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Our hearts go out to
those who are mourning their loved ones after the latest
terrorist attacks.

I thank the presidency of the United Kingdom
for convening this Security Council briefing. I also
thank the briefers for their statements - reports of
unvarnished quality on the harrowing consequences
of the nearly five years of brutal war on the people of
Syria. As we consider the positive signals emerging
from Vienna, all those people have is more bloodshed
and displacement.

Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey are approaching a
dangerous saturation point as refugees continue to
spill out of Syria. While criminals, smugglers and
traffickers are profiting, gaining millions from tragedy,
refugees are literally dying to escape. According to the
Syrian Network for Human Rights, Government forces
dropped nearly 1,500 barrel bombs in October alone.
Indiscriminate attacks against, and abuse of, civilians
continue from all sides of the conflict. Starvation and
siege are used as a tool of war. Daesh butchers keep
committing gruesome atrocities - public executions,
stonings, beheadings and rapes. It is unthinkable that
in the twenty-first century slave markets are up and
running, with women and girls paraded and sold like
cattle.

Humanitarian access remains a huge problem, due to
insecurity, as well as artificial hurdles. Administrative
visa procedures continue to delay and limit the delivery
of assistance by United Nations agencies and their
partners, including humanitarian non-governmental
organizations. It is immoral and criminal to obstruct
humanitarian access. Every minute counts. Every day
means more lives lost.

All those acts constitute glaring violations of the
provisions contained in resolution 2139 (2014) and
subsequent resolutions. The Council's inability to
enforce its own resolutions in the face of the biggest
humanitarian crisis of the twenty-first century
undercuts its relevance and credibility. The Council
should use all the tools at its disposal to ensure that the
parties to this conflict allow rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access for United Nations humanitarian
agencies and their implementing partners, including
across conflict lines. We need to increase and expand
access to the millions of people living in all hard-to-
reach areas, also in view of the coming winter, which
will further aggravate the immense suffering of the
people in need.

The ongoing conflict has deprived the Syrian people
of even basic medical care. Physicians for Human Rights
documented 307 attacks on medical facilities and the
deaths of 670 medical personnel in Syria since the
start of the conflict in March 2011, with Syrian forces
responsible for 90 per cent of those attacks. Concerns
about the safety and security of humanitarian personnel
too remain high, with United Nations vehicles attacked
and humanitarian workers kidnapped and killed. We
condemn the continued attacks on health-care and
humanitarian facilities, transportation and personnel,
and we reiterate that they hold a special protected
status under international humanitarian law, which
must be respected in all circumstances. Furthermore,
such attacks may constitute war crimes. They have to
be taken most seriously.

Impunity runs rampant in Syria. A much-needed
referral of the country's situation to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) was blocked by a veto last
year - one of the four vetos that have allowed
this crisis to deepen and expand by protecting the
perpetrators, not the victims. We support the recent
calls of the Secretary-General to refer Syria to the
ICC, and we urge the international community not to
let accountability become yet another victim of Syria's
war. We commend the work done by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and human rights organizations to
register the atrocities and human rights violations in
Syria. We urge them to continue their important work
with a hope that one day, hopefully sooner than later,
the testimonies they collected will help to bring the
perpetrators to account.

Syria remains one of the most dangerous places in
the world to be a child - and a veritable hell in which to
be born a girl. Seven and a half million Syrian children
have lost their parents, their homes and their schools
and suffered immense emotional and physical traumas.
According to the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, more than 140,000 Syrian children
are stateless. What future do they have - illiterate,
orphaned, malnourished and maimed? What future
does a country have where its entire next generation is a
lost generation? We applaud all those who shine a light
on the plight of Syria's children and do their best to
provide them with protection, support and sustenance.
They too demand justice. Those children do not have
the luxury of waiting for Geneva or Vienna or any
other format to succeed. By then, many of them will
have succumbed, will have been exchanged for food,
recruited and ordered to kill, or will have succumbed
to the shelling, the aerial attacks and the barrel bombs.
The Council can and should at least act on the barrel
bombs to protect those children and the remaining
Syrian population.

To conclude, let me reiterate our long-standing
position that there is no military solution to the Syrian
conflict. The sides must choose the negotiation table
over violence and proceed on the basis of the 2012
Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex) building on
the glimmer of hope that Vienna now offers. But that
road will be long and full of hurdles. It requires time,
which the people of Syria do not have. This Council
must do all within its power to make sure that those for
whom the peace is being built will see it alive.
