Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, it gives me pleasure to express our
sincere thanks for your prompt response to the request
of the delegation of South Africa, in its capacity as
chair of the Non-Aligned Movement, to hold this
public meeting to discuss the question of Iraq and
related developments.

Allow me, Sir, to take this opportunity to express
Lebanon's condolences to the countries whose
nationals perished in the tragedy that took place in
Indonesia as a result of the terrorist act in Bali.

Resort to the United Nations and implementation
of its resolutions, in particular those of the Security
Council concerning any question, ensures the peaceful
settlement of such questions and prevents States from
resorting to unilateral military action that could result
in tragedy and danger that might not be confined to the
geographical location of the problem. This fact applies
to Iraq.

The Beirut Summit of the League of Arab States
reaffirmed the unanimous View of the Arab leaders that
the solution to the problem of Iraq can only be
achieved through dialogue between Iraq and the United
Nations, without exposing it to a war that would
increase the suffering of its people.

Using the logic of dialogue during the Beirut
Summit, the Republic of Iraq undertook steps to
respect the independence, sovereignty, security and
territorial integrity of the State of Kuwait, and to avert
anything that might lead to a repetition of the actions
of 1990. Those undertakings were warmly welcomed
by the Arab leaders and also constitute a preliminary
step towards Iraq's cooperation in reaching a prompt
and final solution to the question of the Kuwaiti
prisoners-of-war and the return of Kuwaiti property in
accordance with relevant international resolutions.

Within that atmosphere of cooperation, the Arab
leaders at the Beirut Summit adopted a number of
positions that support Iraq and that called for the
following: first, respect for the independence,
sovereignty, security, unity and territorial integrity of
Iraq. Secondly, the resumption of dialogue between the
United Nations and Iraq, which began in a constructive
and positive atmosphere, in order to complete
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. Thirdly, they called for the lifting of
the sanctions imposed on Iraq and an end to the
suffering of its brotherly people in a manner that
ensures security and stability in the region.

In addition, the Arab leaders expressed their total
rejection of an attack on Iraq and noted that a threat to
the peace and security of any Arab State is a threat to
the national security of all Arab States.

Since the Beirut Summit, Iraq adopted a number
of additional constructive steps that proved its
commitment to addressing the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In the 16 September 2002 letter,
from the Foreign Minister of Iraq to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, Iraq responded to the
appeals of the United Nations Secretary-General and
those of the Member States. The letter contained Iraq's
decision to allow the unconditional and unrestricted
return of United Nations weapons inspectors. It
constituted a first step towards a comprehension
solution that would ensure implementation of the other
provisions of the Security Council resolutions.

Once again, the logic of dialogue proved that it
alone can ensure implementation of the Security
Council resolutions on Iraq. The consultations held
between Iraq, Mr. Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei led to the conclusion of an agreement with
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Vienna
on 1 October 2002, on the practical arrangements for
the return of the United Nations weapons inspectors, in
accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

The urgent task now is the return of United
Nations weapons inspectors to ascertain that Iraq no
longer possesses weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Hans Blix expressed the readiness of his team to
return to Iraq on the basis of existing resolutions.
Therefore, the adoption of any new resolution would
create complications that have no legal justification.

The transformation of the Middle East region into
a zone free of weapons of mass destruction, in
particular of nuclear weapons, and the implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
those relating to the conflict in the Middle East,
without any distinctions between States, is an essential
precondition for the establishment of lasting peace and
security in the region.

However, what we see in reality is that Israel has
consistently defied internationally binding resolutions.
It has ignored Security Council resolution 687 (1991),
which calls for the establishment of a zone free from
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East. It has
refused to implement resolution 487 (1981), which was
adopted following the Israeli act of aggression against
Iraq in 1981. That resolution called upon Israel to place
its nuclear facilities under the comprehensive
safeguards regime of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA).

Israel has continued to stockpile weapons of mass
destruction in its arsenal, particularly nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons, without any international
deterrent. Israel has also ignored, indeed even
challenged, the 29 Security Council resolutions
adopted on the question of Palestine, the latest of
which was resolution 1435 (2002), which demanded
that Israel withdraw from the recently reoccupied
Palestinian territories and towns.

Israel has resorted to Violence, aggression and the
perpetration of crimes against humanity in order to
implement its expansionist and settlement policies. It
continues to reject all the efforts made for the
achievement of a comprehensive, just and peaceful
settlement of the Middle East question, the latest of
which was the Arab peace initiative, which was
endorsed by the Beirut Summit. Israel responded to
that initiative, which enjoyed unanimous Arab and
international support and was welcomed by the
Security Council in its resolutions 1397 (2002) and
1435 (2002), by reoccupying the West Bank, killing
people and destroying property.

Despite all of this, the Security Council has thus
far taken no steps to ensure Israel's implementation of
its resolutions; thus it seems that Israel has impunity in
this respect. This situation can only reinforce the View
of the Governments and the peoples of the region that
double standards do exist in international relations. The
application of international law is limited to Iraq while
Israel is allowed to remain above the law.

This View that a double standard exists in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions has
also been expressed by anti-war demonstrators in
Europe and in America. An article entitled "Double
Standards", which appeared in the latest issue of The
Economist, on 12 October 2002, stated:

(spoke in English)

"It is no longer being asked by Arabs alone.
'No war against Iraq, free Palestine' has become
the slogan of anti-war demonstrators in Europe
and America. The two conflicts have become
entwined in the public mind in a way that the
West's politicians cannot ignore. When he sought
last week to talk a sceptical Labour Party into
supporting action against Iraq, Tony Blair,
Britain's Prime Minister, got his biggest cheer for
the bit of his speech that said that United Nations
resolutions should apply in Palestine as much as
in Iraq."

(spoke in Arabic)

This is a further reaffirmation of the need for the
Security Council to adopt a single standard in dealing
with its own resolutions in order to ensure that justice
prevails.

In conclusion, in its capacity as Chairman of the
Arab Summit, Lebanon hopes that Iraq's positive
response to the international will and its readiness to
accept the return of international inspectors will help to
put an end to the suffering of its people and lead to a
comprehensive solution that would lead to the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and most importantly to the lifting of the
sanctions on Iraq. Those sanctions have killed 1.8
million Iraqis thus far, most of them women, children
and the elderly.

Lebanon also looks forward to the creation in the
Middle East of a zone free from weapons of mass
destruction and to an end to the threats to use force
against Iraq, and to respect its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.

