Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would
like to express my appreciation to the United States
presidency for convening this open debate. My thanks
also go to United Nations Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his informative briefing.

Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Together with people all over the world, Viet Nam
is deeply concerned about the current critical situation
in the Middle East. The outbreak of terror caused
by terrorism and extremism, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, the protracted conflict in Syria and Yemen,
tension and violence in Iraq and other places in the
region have led to the vast loss of lives, the widespread
violation of human rights, unprecedented displacement,
a refugee crisis and mass destruction, even of cultural
heritage, causing misery and suffering to millions
of people and posing a grave threat to regional and
international peace and security.

Despite the tireless efforts of the international
community, international cooperation and response
to the complex issues in the region are still not up to
the level of the danger posed. It is regrettable that the
Security Council, the United Nations powerful body
with primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, still lacks unity and
political will in seeking a peaceful and comprehensive
solution to the conflicts that rage across the region.

The Palestinian question remains at the heart of the
instability in the Middle East. The continuing cycle of
violence, military and settlement activities, and land
confiscation have cast a shadow over the ever fragile
Israeli-Palestinian peace process. Thousands offamilies
have been displaced and homeless. The Palestinian
people continue to endure pains and hardships. We call
for the cessation of Israeli settlement activities. We urge
all parties concerned to immediately stop actions that
may further escalate tensions, refrain from any action
of hostility, incitement or violence and strictly abide by
international law, especially international humanitarian
and human rights laws.

Viet Nam has always supported the legitimate
struggle of the Palestinian people for their fundamental
rights, especially the sacred right of self-determination
and the establishment of an independent State. We
advocate a peaceful settlement of the decades-long

Israeli-Palestinian conflict through constructive
dialogue and diplomatic negotiations, in accordance
with relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016) and the Arab Peace Initiative,
aimed at achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution and ensuring the legitimate interests of all
parties concerned. We call for an early resumption of
negotiations and welcome all intensified efforts by the
United Nations, the Quartet, the League of Arab States
and regional countries to achieve a two-State solution
on the 1967 lines with a vision of two States - Israel
and Palestine - living side by side in peace, security
and mutual recognition.

Viet Nam has been following recent developments
in Syria with great concern. We strongly condemn the
use of chemical weapons and are opposed to any action
against innocent civilians. We urge all the parties
concerned to refrain from any actions that could escalate
tensions, swiftly implement resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) and work together to seek a political solution to
the Syrian conflict through negotiation. We believe that
only a peaceful settlement based on the fundamental
principles of international law, particularly as outlined
in the Charter of the United Nations and the Chemical
Weapons Convention, including no use or threat of
use of force and respect for Syria's independence,
national sovereignty and territorial integrity, can bring
sustainable peace and stability to Syria and end the
suffering of the Syrian people.

Having endured tremendous hardships and losses
as a result of wars in their own country, the Vietnamese
people sympathize deeply with the people of the Middle
East. I would like to conclude by stressing that it is
high time for the Security Council to spare no effort to
shoulder its responsibilities and respond collectively to
the serious security challenges confronting the region
and the whole world. We are only as strong as we are
united and as weak as we are divided.

