Mr. Cabral (Guineau-Bissau) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank you and through you all of your
distinguished colleagues for the opportunity that you
have afforded my delegation to take part in this debate.

Everyone agrees in their recognition of the
creation of the Peacebuilding Commission as one of
the major achievements of the 2005 World Summit.
The facts are clear and point to both the
appropriateness and the timeliness of that long-awaited
decision. As indicated a short while ago by our
colleagues the representatives of Italy and the Russian
Federation, the results have largely been positive.
There are many reasons for the positive results we
welcome today.

First, for reasons the Security Council is well
aware of and which have been widely referred to here
today and in the General Assembly a few days ago, it
was altogether necessary that we establish the
Peacebuilding Commission. However, we must
recognize above all that we have been fortunate to have
two Chairpersons whose indisputably effective and
devoted efforts have provided unequalled dynamism to
this new undertaking in which we are involved. I
should like to take this opportunity to once again thank
Ambassador Gaspar Martins, the representative of
Angola, who was Chair of the Commission in its first
year. Above all, I would also like to emphasize how
much Ambassador Takasu of Japan has been
responsible for promoting the operationalization of
such an important process.

I should also like to say that we have had the
good fortune to work very closely with the
Peacebuilding Support Office under the leadership of
the very competent Carolyn McCaskie, who has
contributed her experience, dedication and
commitment to a cause that we should, and in fact do,
support so honourably. On behalf of my delegation, I
should like to say how very pleased we are to note how
admirably she has been replaced by Ms. Jane Holl
Lute. I wish to congratulate her on her appointment
and to express how very much we appreciate her
experience and personal commitment to the same
values. I would like her to know that we are quite
prepared to work with her to ensure the success of this
very important Commission.

In the briefing by Ambassador Takasu, who is the
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission, it has
become clear that the Commission is doing excellent
work. I say "excellent" work because it is sending a
new message and, as the Ambassador of Costa Rica has
just said, the Commission is demonstrating greater
creativity and flexibility. That is because Chairman
Ambassador Takasu is attempting to ensure that the
Commission can make a difference - not just to send
a message of hope to people who are suffering, like my
people, those of Guinea-Bissau, but also to attest to the
solidarity that was just referred to by my colleague
from Burkina Faso. We are in fact talking about
solidarity - international solidarity with people who
are suffering, people emerging from conflict, but
people who nevertheless believe that they are not
facing a hopeless situation and that they can overcome
that situation through determination and the support of
the international community. That is precisely the
support that the Peacebuilding Commission provides.
Allow me therefore to say that we truly owe an
enormous debt of gratitude to all the Chairs of the
various configurations, each of whom is giving his or
her best.

In addition, I should also like to pay tribute to the
Ambassador of El Salvador, who, as we know, presides
over the working group on the lessons that should be
learned - lessons that I hope will indeed be learned
and remembered in the future. Of course, the Council
will also understand that I must also pay very special
tribute to Ambassador Viotti, the representative of
Brazil, for her excellent work as Chair of the Guinea-
Bissau configuration.

In Guinea-Bissau we have every reason to be
pleased with the results we have achieved, which are
clear and demonstrate not just the solidarity of the
international community but also the fact that we in
Guinea-Bissau, my fellow citizens, are indeed able to
emerge from the situation. It is not insurmountable. As
indicated by the Chairman in his briefing, we recently
adopted a comprehensive strategy that was the result of
thorough work that was carried out in an inclusive
manner, with all actors, all interested persons, everyone
with a stake in the life of Guinea-Bissau. That included
Government officials, but above all, members of civil
society, young people, and women, who make up the
driving force of all development, as well as politicians
from the various political parties. That has resulted in
an inclusive process. The strategic framework has been
the culmination of all that work. That should be the
approach for the future, which is to say, an approach
that is results-oriented and based on inclusive
democracy.

I should therefore like to say to the members of
the Security Council that the Peacebuilding
Commission is a major component of peacebuilding in
countries emerging from conflicts. I cannot say enough
how satisfied we are with the growing cooperation
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council in a matter as fundamental as the future of
peoples who are suffering, emerging from conflict and
determined to establish the conditions for a democracy
based on respect for human rights, the
acknowledgement of and the pre-eminence of the rule
of law and the participation of all men and women in
the national affairs of a country.

Before I conclude, I should wish to say that there
is a major problem in Guinea-Bissau, namely, drug
trafficking. We are determined to combat that scourge
with the help of the international community. In a few
days, we will be present at Praia, Cape Verde, to
participate in a ministerial conference of the countries
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Regional and subregional cooperation is a
crucial element, as the Ambassador of Burkina Faso
has just said. We in ECOWAS have decided to provide
a comprehensive solution to a generalized problem.
Allow me to say that we are quite satisfied with the
adoption of the strategy, for it will enable us to bring
about major reforms in the areas of defence, security
and public administration. We will also be able to
establish a credible system of justice, which is
necessary for the strengthening of the rule of law.
Through such a system, we will be able to ensure that
those who commit crimes are punished by a well-
established judicial system that meets universally
recognized standards.

Finally, allow me to say that we agree with the
notion of ownership that was referred to just now by
the representative of South Africa. Such ownership, as
we understand it, is first and foremost a responsibility
to be assumed by the country concerned and, secondly,
a shared responsibility, because we are all in this surge
of solidarity together. We are all moved by the same
desire to ensure that the countries concerned will be
able to see new democracies born through free and
credible elections, such as we plan to hold on
16 November. Therefore, through Viable democratic
institutions, we must ensure that the people who are
suffering are finally able to hope for a better day.

