Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Russian
presidency for convening today's open debate on the
situation in the Middle East. We also thank the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Stephen O'Brien, and the
Special Coordinator, Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, for their
briefings and efforts to bring peace to the region.

Kazakhstan attaches great importance to the
Middle East region and has consistently pursued a
political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue. We
are seriously concerned about the lack of real progress
in resolving the conflict, which impacts regional and
international security. In his latest report, entitled
"Assistance to the Palestinian People" (A/71/87), the
Secretary-General points out the negative trends on the
ground, which, according to him, made the two-State
solution more distant.

My delegation is particularly concerned about the
gravity of the Palestinian situation and calls on the
international community to take urgent action to resolve
it in order to mitigate the suffering of Palestinians
in all aspects of their existence. The blockades in
Gaza, along with a beleaguered economy, exacerbate
the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation of the
Palestinian population, deteriorate relations between
the parties and diminish prospects for peace.

The settlement process and its rapid expansion in
the occupied territories not only aggravate the conflict
but also militate against all peace processes. As the
Middle East Quartet's report (S/2016/595, annex) points
out, Israel's continued construction of settlements is a
serious threat to peace.

We see the two-State solution as the only viable
option for a durable peace to be reached by dialogue,
in keeping with the Charter of the United Nations
and relevant Security Council resolutions. We must
avail ourselves of other mechanisms and initiatives
at the bilateral and multilateral levels, such as the
road map for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative. My
delegation urges the Middle East Quartet to pursue its
mediation efforts and calls on Israeli and Palestinian
leaders to demonstrate political responsibility towards
the long-cherished peace. Kazakhstan fully supports
international efforts in that regard and recognizes the
legitimate right of the Palestinian people to become a
full-fledged member of the United Nations. We also
recognize Palestine as an independent State.

The situation in Syria requires urgent attention
and we hope that the Council finds a viable solution
by resuming negotiations, as stipulated in the final
communique of the Action Group for Syria (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). We particularly
commend the untiring efforts of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We call on all parties to put
an end to civilian deaths and suffering and to provide
access to food, water and health services. Of special
importance is allowing much-needed humanitarian aid
into the besieged areas. Neighbouring Lebanon, Jordan
and Turkey have opened their borders, are struggling to
cope with one of the largest refugee exoduses in recent
history, and need international support.

The situation in Yemen continues to deteriorate and
the peace talks in Kuwait, ongoing for more than three
months, should continue through the good offices of
the Secretary-General and the United Nations Special
Envoy for Yemen, Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed. We
welcome the latter's announcement to resume his plan
for a comprehensive cessation of hostilities, with the
diplomatic engagement of many Member States. It is
essential that all parties allow unhindered humanitarian
access and ensure the safety of humanitarian personnel.
It is critical that all parties adhere to international
human rights and international humanitarian law, and
take all necessary actions to avoid civilian casualties.

Finally, we reiterate Kazakhstan's commitment
to join the multilateral effort to ensure peace in the
Middle East.

