Mr. Evans: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council and to
present a few remarks on the situation in Afghanistan
and prospects for the future from the perspective of
NATO.

The first point I wish to make is that the NATO-led
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) is
operating under Security Council authorization and to
fulfil United Nations purposes. NATO's decisions in
relation to ISAF are based on that fundamental principle.
In NATO's quarterly reports to the Security Council, the
latest of which was submitted by the NATO Secretary
General on 31 May, we set out in detail the issues of
interest to the Security Council. Our conclusions on
the security situation are consistent with those of the
United Nations. There has been a marked reduction
in the number of security incidents in the first half of
this year, compared to 2011, and the Afghan National
Security Forces have made substantial progress in
terms of numbers and quality. ISAF has integrated
into its structures and operations the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, and taken measures on the protection of
children from the damaging effects of armed conflict.

Last month, on 21 May, the NATO Summit in
Chicago dedicated a full session to Afghanistan. It was
attended by all 50 contributors to the ISAF mission,
President Karzai, President Zardari and representatives
of Russia, Central Asian States and Japan. The United
Nations Secretary-General participated, as did the
European Union. The presence of States involved in
regional processes was a sign of their significance
not only to the ISAF operation but also to the broader
international effort to stabilize Afghanistan.

Allow me to sum up the key points of the Chicago
summit. First, we assessed progress on the transition
of security to Afghan responsibility. With the third
tranche of transition starting now in Afghanistan,
Afghan soldiers and police will be taking the lead for
the security of 75 per cent of the population within the
next few months. The Afghan National Security Forces
are on schedule to take full responsibility for security
by the end of 2014, and that is when we will complete
our ISAF mission.

The Summit also looked beyond the end ofthe ISAF
mission. At the international conference on Afghanistan
in Bonn in December 2011, the international community
recognized that Afghanistan would continue to need
strong support and help after 2014. Against that
background, at Chicago, NATO, along with our ISAF
partners, confirmed that we will see our ISAF mission
through and that we will then begin a new mission after
2014 to train, advise and assist the Afghan security
forces. The Afghan Government reaffirmed NATO's
crucial role beyond 2014 and invited NATO to continue
its support.

Finally, Chicago provided the opportunity for NATO
allies and partners to confirm their broader support
to Afghanistan and assistance to the Afghan National
Security Forces after 2014. Chicago was not a pledging
conference, but a number of allies and partners came
forward with significant commitments of financial
support both before and at the summit. Financing the
Afghan national security forces is not a responsibility
for NATO members and ISAF contributors alone.
Nevertheless, Chicago added significant momentum to
international efforts to secure the necessary financial
support for the Afghan National Security Forces after
the ISAF mission has ended.

The Afghan Government was closely consulted in
the preparation of the Summit. President Karzai restated
in Chicago the commitment of the Afghan authorities
to face up to the challenges of good governance and
promote human rights. As noted in the Chicago joint
declaration issued with the Government ofAfghanistan,
continued progress on governance and human rights
would encourage ISAF contributors to further provide
their support up to 2014 and beyond.

We have studied the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2012/462) and we note his concerns on civilian
casualties. I have also taken note of Under-Secretary
Ladsous's comments on that point today. Nevertheless,
it is important to remember that 85 per cent of civilian
casualties in 2012 have been caused by anti-Government
elements. The reductions in the number attributable to
ISAF and to the Afghan National Security Forces are
well documented. We have seen a reduction of some
70 per cent from 1 February to 30 April 2012 compared
with the same period in 2011.

As the NATO Secretary General has emphasized
publicly, any civilian casualty is one too many. ISAF
efforts to reduce civilian casualties are continuous and
rigorous. We are also working very closely with the
Afghan National Security Forces to strengthen their
ability to prevent civilian casualties.

In conclusion, we have a clear strategy for
completing the transition of full security responsibility
to the Afghan National Security Forces by 31 December
2014. We are starting the process of planning our new
mission to train, advise and assist those Afghan forces
after 2014. More generally, NATO recognizes that its
contribution to the stability of Afghanistan is just part
of a much wider effort by the Afghans themselves, and
by the international community, to tackle the broad
spectrum of security, governance and development
challenges faced by Afghanistan. In that context, much
depends on the continued close cooperation between the
United Nations and NATO, and specifically between
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and ISAF. It is only by working together in the spirit
of the comprehensive approach that we can achieve
in Afghanistan the aims which are set out clearly
in Security Council resolutions and which meet the
aspirations of the Afghan people.

