Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our appreciation and
thanks to the United Kingdom for convening this
meeting and for the good preparation of the concept
note (S/2018/586, annex). I would like also to thank
the Secretary-General of the United Nations for his
briefing, and I welcome The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ms. Qadeem and thank them for participating in
this meeting and for their extensive briefings on the
role of mediation and settlement of disputes.

I would like to quote the Holy Qur'an on the
role of mediation, which emphasizes the importance
of mediation and urges to undertake it since 1,400
years ago.

"If two parties among the believers fall into a
fight, make ye peace between them. But if one of
them transgresses beyond bounds against the other,
then fight ye against the one that transgresses until
he complies with the command of Allah. But if
he complies, then make peace between them with
justice and be fair, for Allah loves those who are
fair and just." (The Holy Qur'an, XLIX'Q)

It is unfortunate that we are currently grappling
with a great number of wars and conflicts even after
the creation of the United Nations, which was founded
in the first place to prevent the recurrence of conflicts.
However, we are unfortunately seeing an increase in
the number of conflicts with a difference in nature
and severity.

There is no doubt that the settlement of disputes
through mediation is a civilized means to settle
international conflicts through targeted and constructive
dialogue sponsored by the mediators. If the parties
agree to participate in such a beneficial and constructive
dialogue, it is a sign of their civilized nature.

Considering the history of international mediation,
we can notice that mediation has gone through different
stages and was institutionalized in the twentieth
century through The Hague Convention of 1907. With
the creation of the United Nations, Chapter VI, Article
33, of the Charter has enabled the United Nations to set
a clear definition of mediation, especially through the
mediation guidelines issued in 2012. The Council must

focus more on the issue of mediation. It is unfortunate
that the Council is yet to give more attention to one of
the best means for the peaceful settlement of conflicts,
especially that the last time the Council discussed
mediation, its successes, failures and shortcomings was
in 2009 (see S/PV.6108). The only outcome back then
was a single presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/8).

Kuwait welcomes the call by the Secretary-General
for the Council to use and resort to Chapter VI of
the Charter in a better way. Since coming to office
in January 2017, the Secretary-General has focused
on preventive diplomacy through good offices and
building mediation capacity. He has underscored the
importance of mediation and its promotion in order to
reach the ultimate goal, namely, either to contain and
end conflicts or to settle conflicts before they break out.

The Secretary-General translated his words into
action by creating the High-level Advisory Board
on Mediation to employ good offices and to reach
peaceful settlement of disputes. We agree with what
the Secretary-General said in his briefing today that
prevention must be a priority. That is in line with a
famous and common proverb that holds that an ounce
of prevention is worth a pound of cure.

It is unacceptable for the United Nations to spend
billions ofdollars on containing and managing conflicts
by deploying peacekeeping operations, while spending
too little on mediation and prevention means. Logic and
the Charter call on us to focus on Chapter VI before
resorting to Chapter VII. Therefore, we welcome the
good offices of the Secretary-General and the efforts of
the United Nations Secretariat.

We call on the Secretary-General to pursue his
good offices in line with the Charter and the Council's
resolutions, and to provide support as appropriate to
his special envoys and representatives in the field of
mediation as well as to Member States and regional
and subregional organizations upon their request, with
emphasis on the content of the Secretary-General's
reports on the prevention of armed conflict.

Conflict prevention and strengthening mediation
are dependent on a number of factors, including building
the capacity of regional partners, promoting national
capacity in the field ofmediation and dialogue, women's
participation and ensuring funds and resources.

In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of the
Security Council paying more attention to mediation
in the area of conflict settlement, while also giving
regional and subregional organizations a greater role
in mediation, in line with their mandate and according
to Chapter VIII of the Charter. That can be done by
strengthening strategic partnerships and ensuring
synergy, coordination and complementarity in
mediation. In order to ensure successful and effective
mediation, a number of elements have to be in place,
most important of which is admitting that mediation
requires concerted efforts and coordination so as to
be effective.

