Mr. Wetland (Norway): As members of the
Council know, Norway chairs the donor support group
for the Palestinian territory. We are taking the floor
today to underline the serious dangers threatening the
foundations ofa viable Palestinian State.

First, the Palestinian Authority (PA) is facing a
grave financial crisis. This is due to decline in economic
growth and a reduction of donor contributions. It could
push the PA into a full financial crisis within the
coming months. The PA has accumulated significant
debt and faces difficulties in paying salaries. Since the
establishment of the PA, and in particular since the Paris
Conference in 2007, the Palestinians have achieved
tremendous institutional progress towards building a
viable Palestinian State. Today these achievements are
in jeopardy.

Secondly, peace negotiations are at an impasse.
The expansion of Israeli settlements in the West Bank
persists, in grave violation of international law. That
illegal activity undermines efforts to resume peace
negotiations and threatens the two-State solution. The
scope and scale of settlements and the encirclement
of East Jerusalem are the most severe impediments to
peace. Those unlawful and unilateral acts, aiming at
changing the situation on the ground and pre-empting the
outcome of negotiations must stop. There is a grave risk
that further expansion of the settlements could trigger
waves of uncontrolled unrest in the neighbourhoods and
lead to a breakdown of current security mechanisms.

When the donor support group for the Palestinian
territory meets on 23 September here in New York, it
will be against that backdrop. The main topic of the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee meeting will be to address the
key challenges of the Palestinian economy and how to
avoid an aggravated financial crisis in the short term.
Immediate budgetary needs must be met as soon as
possible.

But beyond that, stimulating sustainable economic
growth is key. The Palestinian private sector must be
allowed to develop and engage in trade internally in
the Palestinian territory, as well as with its neighbours.
Many restrictions on the movement of goods in and
out of the West Bank and Gaza are crippling economic
activity and must be lifted. Opportunities for private
sector development also in Area C must be stimulated.

Norway commends those donors that have
contributed to covering the PA's recurrent deficit. The
European Union's front-loading of its aid was pivotal
and has helped to keep the PA's budget somehow afloat.
Also, recent contributions from Saudi Arabia enabled
the PA to pay, albeit with a delay, full salaries prior to
the holy month of Ramadan.

However, the outlook for the remainder of the
budget year looks grim, unless further contributions
are made. This is not the time to hold back funds
and to jeopardize financial stability in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Too much is at stake.

