Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank His Royal Highness Crown
Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II for his statement
at the opening of this meeting on the role of youth in
countering violent extremism and promoting peace.

The young people of today also make up the future
generation. If they are healthy, the entire generation
and society will be healthy. It is unfortunate that many
young people in many countries are being influenced
and recruited by Violent groups, for example in Somalia
and elsewhere. Who is responsible for that? Who is
responsible for violent extremism, which is the main
obstacle to global peace and security? We must all
stand against that threat. We must not forget that young
people are being targeted by such terrorist groups via
all means, including financial, advanced technology,
social networking and the Internet, whereby many
young people have been recruited. Many families, not
only in the Arab countries but throughout the world,
have discovered that their children have been recruited
by terrorist groups. It is indeed a nightmare and a deadly
virus. How can we stand against that phenomenon?

First of all, the responsibility lies with the State,
society and the family. Educational curricula should
promote tolerance and openness towards others. I
therefore call for obligatory education for both girls
and boys. It may be surprising to those here present
that I should raise this issue, but I do so because
certain countries in the world have not yet achieved
that Millennium Development Goal. Many families
deprive their young girls of an education because they
believe that a woman's place is in the home as a mother.
However, there is a saying in Arabic that a mother is a
school. If the mother is healthy, then the entire family
and society as a whole will be healthy. We must protect
our children from the ideas of the extremists.

I also wish to highlight the accelerating rate ofyoung
people dropping out of school. In such conditions, they
can become easy targets for criminal groups involved
with drug trafficking and other aspects of organized
crime. We have seen members of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham originating from over 80 countries,
according to the most recent reports.

In 2013, the Arab Thought Foundation published a
report showing that the most serious challenge facing
the Arab countries is the need to provide approximately
80 million employment opportunities by the year 2020.
The Director-General of the International Labour
Organization has also referred to that challenge, which
threatens the security of the entire region. There are
many reasons for this phenomenon, including political,
economic and social shortcomings in the region that
have led many young people to migrate, many of
whom have fallen Victim to the sea while seeking a
lost paradise. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees recently announced the
drowning of 800 migrants.

The Kingdom of Morocco has welcomed the
initiative of King Mohammed VI to establish a
centre for the training of religious leaders and the
promotion of tolerant and moderate discourse. The
centre has provided appropriate training to religious
leaders from Africa and Europe in the framework of
a cooperation agreement among the Governments of
many African countries. Another forum involving
young parliamentarians is also a useful tool, in
addition to a television station with the main objective

of enlightening young people in identifying hatred-

based discourse. I believe that it is possible to combat

extremism by providing young people with open-

minded, proper education, including enlightened ideas.

Miracles can occur because, when people are motivated

and empowered, they will certainly succeed.

To conclude, I wish to reiterate Morocco's support
for this morning's youth initiative. I believe that its
content will prove to be as important as it is timely.
Moreover, I support the proposal of Brazil and Spain for
the creation of the post of Assistant Secretary-General
for matters affecting young people.

