Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to begin by thanking you
and the delegation of the Russian Federation for having
organized today's debate on Haiti.

We are having this debate at a time when, more than
three years after the devastating earthquake that struck
Haiti, the country is facing important choices for its
future. In 2012, we were once again reminded that Haiti
remains vulnerable to natural disasters when Hurricane
Sandy and Tropical Storm Isaac hit the country. Canada
responded by providing emergency humanitarian
assistance to those most in need in Haiti. The past
year also brought some progress in reconstruction and
development.

However, the ongoing stalemate in the organization
of the long-overdue senatorial and municipal elections
raises serious questions about the capacity of Haiti's
democratic institutions. By encouraging a legitimate
and credible electoral council to organize those
elections, Haitian leaders have the opportunity to
reaffirm their commitment and demonstrate their
respect for democratic principles. If elections are not
held in 2013, it will become increasingly difficult for
the international community to accept excuses and
delays. The long-awaited elections must be held in
2013, and as soon as possible.

Canada's partnership with Haiti has been in place
for decades, and we are one of that country's most
generous backers. Canada has provided the country
with more than $1 billion in support since 2006. Canada
has contributed to Haitian development priorities in
a wide variety of areas - such as economic growth,
food security and maternal and child health - through
Canada's Muskoka initiative. Canada has also provided
substantial humanitarian assistance following natural
disasters to alleviate suffering of the Haitian people
and meet their immediate needs.

Since February 2012, for example, we have been
pleased to assist over 5,500 Haitian families displaced
by the 2010 earthquake in relocating from the Champs
de Mars camp, with the help of case workers, and in
moving into safe accommodations. Likewise, our
development assistance is helping women and children
who cannot afford health-care services to gain access
to health facilities and thus enjoy a better quality of
life. Those are the kinds of results we want to continue
seeing in Haiti.

Members of the Canadian Government have
recently made several high-level visits to Haiti.
In November 2012, our Minister of International
Cooperation, Mr. Julian Fantino, and in February this
year, our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. John Baird,
and Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Diane
Ablonczy, visited Haiti to see the country's development
first-hand. They met with President Martelly and Prime
Minister Lamothe to discuss both the successes achieved
and the existing challenges in the areas of the rule of
law, security, governance and sustainable development,
as well as the need to strengthen accountability and
transparency.

During their visit, the ministers reiterated Canada's
determination to support the Haitian Government in
its resolve to better coordinate the efforts made by
non-governmental organizations, donors and those
partners that are present in the country. Canada is
currently reviewing its long-term commitment in
Haiti, as is the case with governmental programmes
as a whole, so as to achieve sustainable results for the
Haitian people, especially those most in need.

(spoke in English)

Canada continues to support the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). In the
coming months, Canada will be closely involved in
the discussions regarding MINUSTAH's conditions-
based consolidation plan, which entails a narrowing
of MINUSTAH's activities to a core set of mandated
tasks in the areas of security and stability, democratic
governance and State legitimacy, and the rule of law,
with respect for human rights.

This year again, we would like to commend
MINUSTAH on its efforts to improve the security
situation in Haiti and on its work to ensure that Haiti's
security institutions are well equipped, so that they can
play a greater role in standing up for the freedom and
security of Haitians themselves. In that regard, efforts
must, in our judgement, continue seriously to focus
on the capacity of the Haitian National Police as the
primary security force in Haiti. We are pleased that
the current Government has adopted its new police
development plan for the 2012-2016 period. We urge the
Haitian authorities to make all necessary efforts for its
implementation, and we stand with them.

(spoke in French)

The Government of Haiti has repeatedly asserted
that Haiti is open for business. Canada welcomes this
spirit and underlines that realizing that intent and
achieving concrete outcomes will require a series of
actions. To make that openness for business clear to
the international community, steadfast political will is
needed to establish a true rule of law in Haiti. Actions
leading to further gains in economic development
will also help provide the bedrock for future growth.
A stronger rule of law will promote not only investor
confidence but also the ability of small and medium-
sized Haitian entrepreneurs to succeed.

Haiti's leaders must devote themselves to delivering
the reforms that they have promised. Haitians expect
a Government where the public interest is respected,
the rule of law prevails, human rights are protected,
the economy grows stronger and development is
sustainable. The Haitian people and their partners in
Canada expect no less.

