Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Mark Lowcock for his briefing. We appreciate
his efforts and understand the challenges he faces.

We are deeply concerned about the military
escalation in eastern Ghouta and its devastating
impact on civilians. We are also equally concerned
about escalating conflict in other parts of Syria. The
continued reports of attacks against medical facilities,
resulting in a number of civilian deaths and injuries,
is indeed extremely worrying. We stress that it is
absolutely imperative to protect civilians in eastern
Ghouta and other affected areas.

Nonetheless, we should never overlook the fact
that the capital, Damascus, is being shelled from
eastern Ghouta - one of its suburbs. All the same, it
is impossible to deny the fact that life-saving aid must
reach all Syrians in need of urgent assistance. In that
regard, while we welcome the fact that the United
Nations inter-agency convoy delivered life-saving
assistance to more than 7,000 persons on 14 February,
we acknowledge that, given the severity of the
humanitarian situation, it is obviously not enough.

To address humanitarian needs, the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners should be allowed safe,
improved and unhindered humanitarian access. As
the Secretary-General recalled in his statement on
20 February and through his strong appeal yesterday in
the Chamber (see S/PV.8185), a cessation of hostilities
is desirable to enable humanitarian aid deliveries and
medical evacuation. We see no problem with reaching
a consensus on the matter. In that connection, members
of the Council have been engaged in constructive
discussions on how to ensure the implementation of a
cessation of hostilities.

As the situation on the ground becomes increasingly
complex, we understand that implementing a
humanitarian pause will not be easy. We understand
the concerns of some in that regard. We do not ignore
the possibility that terrorist elements might exploit that
tool to advance their goals. It will require the political
will and tangible cooperation, in good faith, of all
Syrian actors, as well as of all States with influence
over the parties. Let us not forget that the situation in
Syria is becoming extremely complicated and that the
humanitarian situation has not remained unaffected.
We are extremely worried about the current trajectory.

As a human tragedy unfolds before our very eyes,
it is expected that the Council will take meaningful,
collective action that could help save lives on the ground.
That is why we have reiterated that the Council should
extend its unified support for the humanitarian work of
the United Nations and its partners. Only by working
together will the Council convey a strong and unified
message that could help facilitate the much-needed
humanitarian work of the United Nations and alleviate
the continued suffering of the Syrians. In that regard,
the humanitarian draft resolution will perhaps provide
us with a good opportunity to demonstrate our resolve
for concrete action. It may not be a perfect text but we
believe it paves the way for all parties to coordinate
their existing efforts to halt hostilities for the sake of
civilians who are in an extremely difficult situation.

Let me take this opportunity to thank the two
penholders Kuwait and Sweden, which have been
working tirelessly to achieve a consensus outcome. We
hope they will continue their much-appreciated efforts
until the last minute to address the concerns - real,
legitimate concerns - of all delegations.

Let me conclude by reiterating that the escalating
violence in eastern Ghouta and other parts of Syria
should reinforce the importance and urgency of finding
a comprehensive political solution, without which the
suffering of Syrians will continue unabated.

