Ms. Power (United States of America): The United
States abstained in the voting because we believe that the
concerns raised by Kenya regarding the International
Criminal Court (ICC) proceedings against President
Kenyatta and Deputy President Ruto are best addressed
within the framework of the Court and its Assembly of
State Parties, and not through a deferral mandated by
the Security Council. This position is consistent with
the View that we shared with the African Union Contact
Group at the Council's informal interactive dialogue at
the end of October.

Furthermore, the families of the victims of the
2008 post-election violence in Kenya have already
waited more than five years for a judicial weighing of
the evidence to commence. We believe that justice for
the Victims of that Violence is critical to the country's
long-term peace and security. It is incumbent on us
all to support accountability for those responsible for
crimes against humanity.
At the same time, we want to emphasize our
deep respect for the people of Kenya. We share their
horror and outrage at the recent Westgate Mall terror
attacks and understand their desire both for effective
governance and for accountability under the law. We
are mindful as well of the importance of those issue
to the States members of the African Union that have
raised similar concerns. We recognize that the situation
the Court is confronting in those cases is a new one.
The ICC has never before had a trial ofa defendant who
is also a sitting Head of State or a person who may act
in such a capacity, and who has appeared voluntarily
subject to a summons. Accordingly, we are encouraged
that Kenya is continuing to pursue its concerns through
an ongoing ICC process.

We are also encouraged that the Assembly of States
Parties, which includes the Government of Kenya, is
working to enable trial proceedings to be conducted in
a manner that will not force the defendants to choose
between mounting a vigorous legal defence, on the
one hand, and continuing to do their jobs, on the other.
The Assembly, which under the Rome Statute has
responsibility for overseeing the Court's administration,
will meet next week and have the chance to engage in
dialogue and consider amendments that could help
address outstanding issues.

Because of our respect for Kenya and the African
Union (AU), and because we believe that the Court
and its Assembly of State Parties are the right venue
for considering the issues that Kenya and some AU
members have raised, we decided to abstain rather
than vote against on the draft resolution before us. The
United States and Kenya have been friends and strong
partners for half a century. We value the friendship and
will continue working with the Government and the
people of Kenya on issues of shared concern, including
security against terror, economic development,
environmental protection, the promotion of human
rights and justice. We also continue to recognize the
important role that the ICC can play in achieving
accountability, and are steadfast in our belief that
justice for the innocent victims of the post-election
Violence in Kenya is essential to lasting peace.

