Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would first like to thank
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his
briefing. The United Nations and its agencies deserve
to be commended for the increasingly challenging work
they are undertaking in the field across the Middle
East. I would like to start with three issues relating to
the Middle East peace process.

First, the Palestinian question has been on the
agenda of the United Nations since the Organization
was founded. Today, 70 years later, after decades of
violence and suffering affecting both sides, and after
50 years of occupation, it seems clear to all that the
parties by themselves are unable to resolve the matter
and reach the solution that the Security Council is
striving for - two States, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security.

Reaching that final-status agreement would have
several positive regional side effects. It would enhance
regional cooperation, diminish regional tensions and
remove some of the arguments used to recruit and
radicalize youth in the region and beyond. If the Arab
Peace Initiative were part of the solution, those positive
side-effects would be multiplied, creating a whole new
regional dynamic that would benefit all constructive
actors. That highlights the importance of maintaining
the Middle East peace process and the Palestinian
question on the agenda of the Council. Together with
Israelis and Palestinians, the international community
and the Council have a responsibility to remain engaged
in order to find a just, comprehensive and sustainable
resolution to the conflict, and regional partners have a
key role to play.

Secondly, there is now a real sense of urgency
regarding the issue of settlements. Developments on the
ground continue to take us further away from the two-
State solution. The idea ofa status quo is an illusion. The
increased number of settlement units and the growing
incidence of the demolition of Palestinian homes and
infrastructure will only lead to further suffering.
That will spark continued and recurring outbursts of
violence, which must, of course, be condemned. It
will also have severe repercussions for regional peace
and stability. The settlements, the separation barrier
built on occupied land, the demolition of homes and
the evictions are illegal under international law. They
negatively impact the human rights of Palestinians and
seriously threaten the two-State solution. Indeed, the
viability of the two-State solution could soon move
beyond our reach. Israeli settlement expansion in the
West Bank must, therefore, come to an end.

In line with European Union policy, Sweden strongly
condemns the so-called regularisation law, which seeks
to allow the confiscation ofprivately owned Palestinian
land. That law, as well as the Israeli announcements
regarding thousands of new illegal settlements units
on occupied land and the decision to establish the first
new settlement on the West Bank in over 20 years,
constitute flagrant violations of international law, as
stated in resolution 2334 (2016). They also undermine
peace and the viability of the State of Palestine.
Resolution 2334 (2016) on settlements, violence and the
distinction between Israel and occupied land was also
in line with the important recommendations made in
the report of July 2016 by the Quartet (see S/2016/595).
The resolution has clear messages for both parties, and
both parties have a duty to implement its provisions.

Thirdly, the situation in Gaza remains tense
and unsustainable. All parties must act responsibly
and in the interests of the inhabitants of Gaza. Steps
must be taken to produce a fundamental change in
the political, security and economic situation. That
includes intra-Palestinian reconciliation, accelerated
reconstruction and an end to the Israeli closure policy.
The full and sustainable opening of the crossing
points for humanitarian organizations and State
representatives, with due consideration given to both
Israeli and Palestinian security needs, is key.

I would now like to say a few words on Syria
and Lebanon.

The conflict in Syria has entered its seventh year,
with devastating human suffering. The repeated use of
chemical weapons in the conflict is appalling and must
stop immediately. We support the full investigation of
the attack on Khan Shaykhun on 4 April and the work
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons in that regard. We condemn in the strongest
terms the horrific attack in Rashidin on 15 April,
which killed 126 people, including many children. We
welcome the readiness of the United Nations to scale up
support for evacuees and call on all parties to protect
civilians, which is their obligation under international
humanitarian law.

Intensified efforts to achieve a real nationwide
ceasefire are urgently needed. A political agreement on
the basis of resolution 2254 (2015), including a credible
political transition, is the only path to sustainable
peace in Syria. Key stakeholders must intensify efforts
to facilitate progress on launching the next round of
United Nations-led intra-Syrian talks in Geneva under
the leadership of Secretary-General Guterres and his
Special Envoy, Staffan de Mistura.

We welcome recent progress in Lebanon. It is now
important to reach an agreement on a new electoral
framework and to hold timely parliamentary elections.

In conclusion, settling the Middle East peace
process and realizing the two-State solution is, first and
foremost, in the interest of Israel and Palestine, but also
in the interest of wider regional peace and security, as
it will create better conditions for dealing with other
regional conflicts and tensions. A two-State solution
must meet the security needs of both parties and
Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty,
and it must end the occupation and resolve permanent
status issues. The two-State solution is seriously at risk,
and we must now avoid any prejudging of the outcome
of future negotiations, such as the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of the two States.

The parties hold the key to finding a final status
solution, but the international community, including
regional actors, must also meet their responsibilities
by supporting the parties in their efforts to break
the current deadlock. We welcome the efforts by the
United States of America to move the issue forward.
The Council, too, has an obvious role in shouldering
that responsibility and in moving forward with concrete
and constructive ideas on how to solve the conflict. We
have a very important task ahead of us.

