The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
welcome this opportunity to brief the Security Council
on the deeply troubling situation in Mali.

Since the start of the crisis, a few months ago,
the situation has only worsened, seemingly reaching
new heights of severity every week. A regional pillar
of democracy has completely fallen away from the
constitutional path, undermining years of progress.
An already terrible food and nutrition emergency has
grown even worse, exposing thousands more people
to severe shortages of food, water and basic services.
In areas where there was previously stability and
peaceful coexistence, extremism, criminal activity and
violations of human rights have gained ground.
Those grave developments have caused the people
of Mali enormous suffering. They also pose a growing
threat to international peace and security. In adopting
resolution 2056 (2012) last month, the Security Council
showed its concern. Today, in view of the latest events,
it is clear that the Council may be required to go further.

(spoke in English)

Limited progress has been made in restoring
constitutional order in Bamako. Mali's socio-political
forces remain divided over support for the transitional
arrangements and, more broadly, over future prospects
for the country. The military junta reportedly maintains
a strong influence over the transitional process. It
has retained control over the security and defence
forces, and continues to violently repress fellow
soldiers suspected of having supported the attempted
counter-coup of 30 April.

The heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
have called for a more inclusive Government, and
mandated the ECOWAS mediator to urgently engage
in consultations with Malian stakeholders. They also
decided to deploy the ECOWAS Standby Force to Mali
and to send a technical assessment mission to Bamako
to prepare for its deployment. I understand that the
President of the ECOWAS Commission, Mr. Kadre
Desire Ouedraogo, has submitted the mission's report
and other relevant documents to the Council.

One positive development has been the return
of President Dioncounda Traore to Bamako. His
presence enhances the constitutional legitimacy of the
transitional arrangements and can ensure that Malians
play a central role in leading the transitional process. I
commend the steps that the President is taking to ensure
the formation of a Government of national unity. I also
welcome his announcement of the establishment of the
National Transition Committee, the National Dialogue
Committee, and the High Council of State, which he
plans to chair.

Let me turn now to the situation in the north,
where the security situation remains volatile and
unpredictable. The Ansar Dine and the Movement for
Unity and Jihad in West Africa, which are reportedly
linked to Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, took
control after pushing out the National Movement for
the Liberation of Azawad (MNLA), and have illegally
imposed Sharia law on the residents. With the influx of
regional and international jihadists, there is reason to
be concerned that the north is becoming a safe haven
for terrorists and criminal elements.

The ECOWAS mediator, President Blaise Compaore',
has taken initial steps to meet with representatives of
the MNLA and Ansar Dine. After travelling to northern
Mali yesterday, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Burkina Faso, Mr. Djibrill Bassole, met with the leaders
of Ansar Dine and requested that they cut ties with
terrorist movements before any peace talks could begin.
However, no meaningful dialogue has commenced
between the Government of Mali and any of the groups
in the north. With the establishment of President
Traore's national commission for negotiations, it is
expected that a Malian-owned dialogue process, with
the assistance of ECOWAS and neighbouring countries,
will commence shortly.

For my part, I have used my good offices to help
address the crisis through my Special Representative
for West Africa, Mr. Said Djinnit. From the outset of
the mediation process led by ECOWAS, Mr. Djinnit
has been in close contact with the mediation team. He
has conducted good offices missions to Mauritania and
Algeria and participated in ECOWAS summits and
other meetings on Mali.

Here at Headquarters, the Department of
Political Affairs is consulting with the Permanent
Representatives of ECOWAS member States, the core
countries and other partners. United Nations military
planners have participated, in an advisory capacity,
in the ECOWAS technical assessment mission. As
the Malian transitional authorities prepare to initiate
a national dialogue, the United Nations stands ready
to offer its considerable expertise in designing such
processes and in facilitating such a dialogue.

The conflict in Mali has exacerbated a perilous
humanitarian situation. More than 174,000 people have
been internally displaced and more than 253,000 have
sought refuge in neighbouring countries. A severe food
security and nutrition crisis is now affecting 4.6 million
people in Mali and more than 18 million people across
the Sahel region.

I am also extremely concerned about reports that
armed groups in the north are committing serious
human rights violations, including summary executions
of civilians, rapes and torture. Moreover, the Ansar
Dine group deliberately destroyed nine of the 16
mausoleums in Timbuktu, in callous disregard of
sites that had been classified by UNESCO as part of
the indivisible heritage of humankind. I encourage the
Security Council to give serious consideration to the
imposition of targeted travel and financial sanctions
against individuals or groups in Mali engaged in
terrorist, religious extremist or criminal activities.

The crisis in Mali is complex and multidimensional.
Its resolution requires a holistic and comprehensive
approach, rather than partial and disconnected
measures. I strongly encourage the Government ofMali
to develop an overarching political strategy to return the
country to constitutional order and re-establish State
authority in the north. The strategy should clearly spell
out responses to genuine socio-economic and political
grievances, the modalities for political dialogue and
negotiations, and the aims of eventual military action
against extremist forces in the north.

(spoke in French)

Looking ahead, it is essential for Malians to take
ownership and show leadership. ECOWAS, the African
Union, the European Union, key regional countries and
bilateral partners should all assist in this endeavour.
Many challenges lie ahead. If we are to succeed in
restoring peace in Mali and the wider Sahel region,
there must be unity of vision and close coordination.
The United Nations will continue to do its part.

