Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my condolences to the families and
friends of the victims of terrorism today.

The recent tripartite summit in Tehran took place
at a critical juncture. The Presidents of Iran, Russia and
Turkey, pleased with the contribution that the Astana
format has made to peace, security and stability in
Syria, discussed the way forward to durable peace in
the country. They conveyed a clear message through
theirjoint statement, reaffirming their continued strong
commitment to Syria's sovereignty, independence,

unity and territorial integrity, which are every State's
inherent right, and Syria is no exception to that. They
should be strictly respected by all. The three Presidents
rejected all attempts to create a new reality on the
ground under the pretext of combating terrorism. That
explicit and clear-cut message must be heard. As a
victim of chemical weapons itself, Iran condemns in
the strongest possible terms any use of such weapons by
anyone, any time and anywhere. At the same time, we
warn against any attacks, including under the pretext
of the alleged use of such weapons by the Syrian
Government. At a time when Syria has destroyed all of
its chemical weapons under international supervision,
such allegations are mere fabrications in an attempt to
use force against it, and any such attempt would only
further complicate the situation.

Another clear and strong message from the summit
is that the Presidents are determined to continue their
cooperation in eliminating all terrorists, including
Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and all other individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities associated with
Al-Qaida or Da'esh, which have been designated
as terrorists by the Council. Of course, that must be
done while preventing civilian casualties. That is why
the Presidents reaffirmed their determination to work
towards protecting civilians. As President Rouhani
stressed at the Tehran summit, combating terrorism
requires a comprehensive approach by taking into
account all aspects of this unpleasant phenomenon.
From that perspective, the fight against terrorism in
Idlib is an integral part of the mission of restoring
peace and stability to Syria, but that fight must not
hurt civilians.

Likewise, improving the humanitarian situation by
facilitating rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to all Syrians in need was highlighted.

Those will be guiding principles with respect to
ongoing efforts to combat terrorists in Idlib.

Precisely for that reason, the Presidents underlined
the utmost importance of separating terrorists and the
armed opposition groups that joined, or will join, the
ceasefire regime.

Another concrete message of the Tehran summit
was that the Syrian conflict can end only through a
negotiated political process.

Against that backdrop, the Presidents stressed the
need for, and their resolve to cooperate in, advancing
a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process.
The right to determine the future of Syria belongs
exclusively to Syrians. To that end, cooperation towards
establishing and launching the work of a constitutional
committee is critical.

Parallel to such efforts, conducive conditions
should be prepared for the safe and voluntary return of
all refugees and internally displaced persons. That will
undoubtedly contribute to the ceasefire and national
dialogue and accelerate the reconciliation process.
To that end, convening an international conference
on Syrian refugees and internally displaced persons
is important.

While Syria is passing through a critical stage
in defeating terrorists and regaining its unity and
territorial integrity, the international community should
stand firm in breathing new life into the country. As
the Islamic Republic of Iran supported Syria to defeat
terrorists, so will it play its constructive role in bringing
peace and prosperity to the country.

Finally, with regard to the references made to my
country by the representative of the United States,
I should reiterate that Iran was invited by Syria to
fight terrorists. However, the United States military
operations in Syria are illegal and an act of aggression.
They are against the Charter of the United Nations and
should come to an end.

