Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura
and Mr. Thomas Markram for their briefings this
afternoon. I would also like to thank you, Mr. President,
for acceding to our request for an emergency meeting.

We are dismayed by the general escalation of
violence in Syria, as described today by Staffan de
Mistura, in clear violation of the various resolutions,
including resolution 2401 (2018). In that regard, I want
to plea with the Syrian authorities represented in the
Chamber and with the Astana guarantors to live up to
the Security Council's resolutions.

We asked for this meeting today because over
the weekend we were yet again faced with horrifying
allegations of chemical-weapons attacks in Syria,
this time in Douma, just outside Damascus. There
are worrying reports of a large number of civilian
casualties, including women and children. The graphic
material that has been shared is beyond repugnant. We
are alarmed by those extremely serious allegations.
There must now be an immediate, independent and
thorough investigation.

Let me reiterate that Sweden supports all
international efforts to combat the use and proliferation
of chemical weapons by State or non-State actors
anywhere in the world. We unequivocally condemn in the
strongest terms the use of chemical weapons, including
in Syria. It is a serious violation of international law and
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
The use of chemical weapons in armed conflict is
always prohibited and amounts to a war crime. Those
responsible must be held accountable. We cannot
accept impunity.

Addressing the use of chemical weapons in Syria
has become a central test of the credibility of the
Council. How we respond to the most recent reports
from Douma is therefore decisive. Despite the odds, we
must put aside our differences and come together. Now
is the time to show unity. In our view, the following
needs to happen.

First, we must condemn in the strongest terms the
continued use of chemical weapons in Syria.

Secondly, our immediate priority must be to
investigate the worrying reports from Douma. In that
context, we welcome the announcement by the Director-
General of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) that the Fact-finding
Mission for Syria 4 to which we reiterate our full
support - is in the process of gathering information
from all available sources. We express our hope that the
Fact-finding Mission can be urgently deployed to Syria.

Thirdly, all States, as well as the parties to the
conflict, including the Syrian authorities, must fully
cooperate with the Fact-finding Mission. What is
particularly needed is safe and unhindered access to the
site in Douma, as well as any information and evidence
deemed relevant by the Fact-finding Mission to conduct
its independent investigation.

Fourthly, we need to urgently redouble our efforts
in the Council to agree on a new independent and
impartial attributive mechanism to identify those
responsible for chemical-weapons use.
Finally, if the allegations of chemical-weapons
use are indeed confirmed and those responsible are
eventually identified, the perpetrators must be held
to account.

We are ready to work actively and constructively
with other members for urgent Council action. To
that end, we have circulated elements as input to
our discussions. We must immediately engage in
consultations in order to break the current deadlock and
to shoulder our responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations. We owe that to the many victims of the
crimes committed in this conflict.

