Mr. Dah (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Today
is a particularly sad day for my country, Cote d'Ivoire,
which has just lost its Permanent Representative to
the United Nations, Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-
Boutchoue, who died yesterday afternoon. I would like
to thank all United Nations delegations for the many
messages of support and solidarity they have conveyed
to my country and to my delegation in particular,
which continues to be deeply affected by this sudden
passing. Bernard, as his Security Council colleagues
affectionately called him, was passionate about his
work. He was a kind man who was always smiling and
attentive to his colleagues and co-workers. I am sure
that the Security Council will miss him. As co-workers,
we already miss him.

As the poet has said, there are tears that never stop
flowing, voids that are never filled, memories that
nothing can take away and people who can never be
replaced. Smiles return, but only to cover the grief.
Everything has been said but words can change nothing.

The sun has set over a fulfilled life but it will continue
to shine in the garden of our memories.

Returning to today's meeting, my delegation thanks
the Peruvian presidency for holding this briefing on
the peace process in Colombia. We would also like to
commend Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his excellent briefing. On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to welcome the
Vice-President of Colombia, who has been kind enough
to grace today's meeting with his presence.
Cote d'Ivoire has been following the evolving
sociopolitical situation in Colombia with great
interest since the start of an intra-Colombian peace
process two years ago. Our statement will focus on
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
the challenges in implementing it and the role of the
international community, particularly the United
Nations, in supporting the peace process. With regard
to the implementation of the Peace Agreement, Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the significant progress that has
been made at various levels.

On the political front, my delegation welcomed
the peaceful holding on 11 March of the first inclusive
Colombian legislative elections, in which 73 candidates
from the political party of the former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) participated. Beyond their results, the
legislative elections represent an important step in the
intra-Colombian reconciliation and peace process. My
delegation hopes that the presidential election scheduled
for May will further strengthen such achievements. In
that context, C6te d'Ivoire also welcomes the decision
of President Juan Manuel Santos Calderon to resume
the negotiations with the Ejercito de Liberacion
Nacional that were suspended in the wake of several
attacks perpetrated by that group. Their resumption
could clearly help to de-escalate the conflict.

On the judicial front, it is important to welcome the
effective start of the work of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, which continues to be an essential component
of the transitional justice system, to implement of the
Peace Agreement of November 2016.

With regard to security, my country welcomes
the establishment by the Colombian authorities of
appropriate mechanisms to provide an institutional
response to the deterioration of the security situation.
My delegation also notes with satisfaction the
emergence ofa national consensus between Colombian
institutions and civil society with regard to the
protection of the lives and roles of the social leaders
who are working to promote land restitution and to
protect resources and the environment. My delegation
congratulates the Colombian Government on the work
it has accomplished and encourages it to continue to
strive to remove all obstacles. Despite the that progress,
the implementation of the Peace Agreement faces many
challenges, including in the areas of socioeconomic
reintegration, security and justice.

At the socioeconomic level, my country calls on
the Government of Colombia to continue the reforms
initiated by taking concrete measures to reintegrate
former FARC-EP members and allowing access to land
ownership and the development of productive projects
and cooperatives. We urge the Government to take all
the measures likely to improve the living conditions in
ex-combatant assembly centres and to facilitate their
successful socioeconomic integration.

In terms of security, Cote d'Ivoire remains
concerned about the resurgence of violence, as well as
by the killings of some former FARC-EP leaders. We
welcome the determination of the Colombian authorities
to pay close attention to these issues in order to ensure
the safety of all Colombians without exception.

In view of the complexity of the ongoing peace
process, my delegation reiterates the need for the
Security Council to fully support the peace and
reconciliation efforts of the Government of Colombia.
My country commends the commitment and work done
in Colombia by the Verification Mission and the United
Nations country team. We welcome in particular the
actions undertaken in the areas of peacebuilding,
gender equality, child protection and ethnic and
cultural integration. My delegation also welcomes the
close cooperation between the Verification Mission and
the United Nations country team, which was deemed
necessary in consolidating and sustaining the efforts of
the Colombian authorities for lasting peace.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire would like to assure the
Colombian authorities of its support and determination
to work with them to ensure the success of the peace
and reconciliation process in Colombia.

