Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, let me also
express our appreciation to the Chinese presidency for
convening this debate.

Undoubtedly, we are confronted with a crisis of
multilateralism in today's globalized and interdependent
world. The alternative to the rules-based order is chaos.
Hence our common duty to strengthen the multilateral
system through relevant reforms and making multilateral
institutions more fit for purpose. The United Nations
is at the core of this and, in that context, we welcome
the United Nations reforms launched by the Secretary-
General, within the three pillars of the Organization.

When we talk about disruption of the rules-
based order, the region I come from is no exception.
Unfortunately, it was shattered by destructive role of
one of the permanent members of the Security Council.
This year marks the tenth anniversary since Georgia
experienced full-scale military aggression by Russia,
which resulted in the illegal occupation of 20 per cent
of my country's territory. A few years later, Ukraine
also fell Victim to the very same aggressor. These
blatant violations of fundamental norms and principles
of international law, in disregard for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of States, was a massive blow
to European security and the entire international order.

The Government of Georgia remains firmly
committed to pursuing a peaceful conflict resolution
policy directed towards the de-occupation of the two
Georgian regions, on the one hand, and reconciliation
and confidence-building between the communities
divided by war and the occupation line, on the other. Yet
we are confronted with often asymmetrical challenges
countering our peace initiatives.

As we speak, the Russian occupation regime in
Tskhinvali continues to fortify the occupation line
adjacent to the village of Atotsi, in Kareli municipality,
by installing one-kilometre-long artificial barriers.
Razor wire fences and other artificial barriers erected
along the occupation line have already reached 100
kilometres, dividing families, depriving them of the
right to free movement and access to their property,
agricultural lands, religious sites and cemeteries,
as well as to health care, emergency services and
education in their native tongue. I previously informed
the Council about abductions, tortures and killings
based on ethnic origin that have taken place against the
civilian population living along the occupation line. For
the past 10 years, the occupying Power has continued its
military build-up, instead of abiding by the agreement
it signed - the European Union-mandated ceasefire
agreement of 12 August 2008.
Clearly there is a need for the immediate creation
of international security mechanisms on the ground,
as well as for unimpeded access of international
human rights monitors to the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali
regions of Georgia. What we see instead is deliberate
targeting on the part of Russian of these negotiation
formats through undermining the Incident Prevention
and Response Mechanisms (IPRMs) established under
the Geneva International Discussions. We do not need
to emphasize the crucial importance of the Geneva
International Discussions and IPRMs. - unique
negotiation formats to address and resolve security and
humanitarian issues experienced by the people affected
by the unresolved conflict between Georgia and
Russia. The formats have been essential in preventing
the large-scale escalation of conflict in the light of
increased provocations on the ground.

I would like to recall that the Security Council was
actively engaged with Georgia from 1993 to 2009, until
the brazen use of the veto power by Russia blocked
the prolongation of the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). By vetoing
its extension when it was needed most 4 shortly after
the August 2008 war - a dangerous precedent in the
history of United Nations peacekeeping was created.
Being party to the conflict, using its veto power to
block the extension of the UNOMIG mandate came
in direct contradiction with Chapter V, Article 27 of
the Charter of the United Nations. Paragraph 3 clearly
stipulates that "a party to a dispute shall abstain from
voting".

Misuse of the veto power has resulted in tragic
consequences in other parts of the world as well, with a
record high numbers of vetoes cast in the past two years.
Therefore, we consider it crucial to reform the Security
Council 4 and the United Nations in general 4 to
increase effectiveness in addressing global challenges,
be they conflicts, humanitarian and economic crises,
forced displacement or climate change. That will enable
us to achieve cohesion, inclusivity and the development
of societies, with respect for international law and the
rules-based order at heart.

