Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
appreciates the holding of this debate. We hope that it
will enhance understanding of various issues related to
collective security and armament regulation.

We have always stressed the imperative of
evolving a new consensus on the whole range of
disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation
issues. This new consensus should be based on the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, with
full recognition of the role of the United Nations,
reflecting the security interests of all States and guided
by the principle of equal security for all.

The architecture of a global consensus on
disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation
should rest on a solid foundation comprising the
following elements.
There must be a renewed commitment on the part
all States to general and complete disarmament under
effective international control. Transparency,

verifiability and irreversibility should be the
fundamental principles applied to all disarmament
measures. Pending general and complete nuclear
disarmament, there should be a universal,
non-discriminatory and legally binding instruments on
negative security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon
States.

There must be international agreement on
universal and non-discriminatory criteria for
international cooperation in the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, including nuclear power generation.
Policies of selectively granting or denying access to
civilian nuclear technology in disregard of any
generally applicable criteria detract from the credibility
and legitimacy of the non-proliferation regime.

Commitment is needed to evolving a universal
and non-discriminatory agreement for addressing
concerns arising from the development, deployment
and proliferation of missiles and anti-ballistic missile
systems, which are inherently destabilizing. The need
for strengthening the international legal regime to
prevent the militarization of outer space must be
recognized.

In parallel with negotiations on nuclear
disarmament, there is an urgent need for negotiations
on the balanced reduction of armed forces and
conventional armaments. As laid out in the Final
Document of the first special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament, these negotiations
should be conducted with a particular emphasis on
militarily significant States. The disturbing trend of
escalation in the number and sophistication of
conventional weapons has to be arrested, as it has a
causal relationship with the continuing reliance on
nuclear weapons.

Cooperation in matters having strategic
implications for a region should be pursued in such a
manner as to ensure the right of each State to
undiminished security, guaranteeing that no individual
State or group of States may obtain advantage over
others. Armament regulations should not only be aimed
at transfer controls, but should also take into account
existing asymmetries and military imbalances and
stockpiles, as well as production and manufacturing.
Nevertheless, armament regulations alone cannot
facilitate the objective of international peace and
security unless pursued in parallel with efforts towards
the peaceful settlement of disputes and to remove
underlying security concerns of States.

Regional tensions contribute to the arms race, not
only endangering international peace and security, but
also undermining efforts aimed at arms control and
disarmament. Conflict resolution and the maintenance
of strategic and conventional stability at the regional
and global levels should therefore be at the core of
efforts to strengthen international peace and security.

The principle of equal security for all necessitates
open consultations and dialogue among States without
preconditions. The best venue to pursue such
consultations and negotiations is the General
Assembly, in which all Member States are represented.

Entrusting the responsibility for collective
security to the Security Council and the tendency of the
Security Council to legislate on behalf of Member
States on matters of armaments control are bound to
raise security concerns among the overwhelming
majority of developing countries that are not
represented in the Council.

The existing export control arrangements, such as
the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR), are exclusive.
The restricted nature of certain export control
arrangements is an impediment to the global
implementation of non-proliferation standards. If
States are required to meet the standards set by those
arrangements, they should be given the opportunity to
participate in them and benefit by sharing the best
practices and experiences of the founding members of
those arrangements in the area of export controls. That
would also enable States to keep abreast of technical
advancements.

Moreover, members of those exclusive
arrangements have been creating discriminatory
exceptions to their own rules, thus undermining the
objective of international stability. Non criteria-based
civil nuclear cooperation based on commercial
consideration does nothing to promote international
non-proliferation objectives. Similarly, the MTCR is
undermined by international cooperation in the
development of anti-ballistic missiles, which involves
cooperation in dual-use technologies, such as solid fuel
propulsion systems, missile targeting and guidance
systems, and other systems that can be used to develop
offensive weaponry and missiles.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the need to
evolve multilaterally negotiated, non-discriminatory
and universal regulations on armaments.

