Mr. Voronkov: On behalf of the Secretary
General, I would like to start by expressing my sincere
condolences to and solidarity with Member States where
terrorist attacks have recently taken place, namely,
the Philippines, Mali, Colombia, Kenya, Afghanistan
and Pakistan, to name but a few. I would also like
to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the eighth report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/103) on the threat posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat, as requested by resolutions 2253
(2015) and 2368 (2017).

The report was prepared by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, and in close collaboration with the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and other United
Nations entities and international organizations. The
report highlights that ISIL remains a threat as a global
organization with a centralized leadership despite
the decrease in the number international attacks and
plots in 2018. The threat is increased by returning,
relocating or released foreign terrorist fighters. The
report illustrates how the United Nations has continued
to support Member States in their efforts to address the
threat since the Secretary-General's most recent report
(S/2018/770), which was published on 16 August 2018.
Let me illustrate some key aspects of the new report.

With its centre of gravity in Iraq and the Syrian
Arab Republic, where it is reported to control between
14,000 and 18,000 militants, including up to 3,000
foreign terrorist fighters, ISIL has continued to evolve
into a covert network that operates at the local level
and organizes itself at the provincial level, with the
stated intent of undermining any form of stabilization
on the ground. Despite the more concealed or locally
embedded activities of ISIL cells, its central leadership
retains an influence and continues to seek to generate
internationally directed attacks, thereby still playing
an important role in advancing the group's objectives.
That is exacerbated by the challenge of foreign terrorist
fighters who are leaving conflict zones, returning
or about to be released from prison. In this context,
radicalization in prison settings is seen as a particular
challenge in Europe and Iraq.

The report also notes that so-called frustrated
travellers - namely, those who have failed to reach the
core conflict zone or have been redirected elsewhere
either by ISIL or at their own initiative - may
contribute to increasing the threat, which has already
been observed in Europe and South-East Asia. Likewise,
the handling of dependents, radicalized women and
traumatized minors is pointed out as a challenge and
potential serious threat.

In terms of ISIL's financial strength, the report
notes that despite some loss of revenue due to territorial
setbacks, ISIL could sustain its operations through
accessible reserves, in cash or investment in businesses,
ranging between $50 and $300 million. ISIL cells are
also reported to generate revenue through criminal
activities. The report accounts for the evolving threat
and ISIL's activities in different regions of the world,
from the Middle East and Africa - particularly North,
West and East Africa - to Europe, Central and South
Asia, and South-East Asia.

In the Middle East, the residual threat in Iraq is
reported to emanate both from local ISIL remnants and
from fighters crossing the border from the Syrian Arab
Republic. Equipment has been retained from the time
when its regime was intact. The report also highlights
a threat posed by unarmed aircraft systems within the
conflict zone. For Africa, the report highlights the
threat posed by ISIL in Libya, where police stations in
various locations and oil facilities have been targeted.
In Europe, the number of returnees reaching the region
in the period under review is reported to be relatively
low. Approximately 1,000 foreign terrorist fighters are
reported to have travelled from the Western Balkans
to the conflict zone in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic; of those, 100 have been reported killed and
300 returned, with the remainder unaccounted for. In
Afghanistan, ISIL is reported to control some training
camps and to have created a network of cells in various
Afghan cities, including Kabul. Furthermore, a close
link between the local ISIL leadership and its core in
the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq is reported. ISIL
also carried out several high-profile attacks throughout
last year against a wide range of targets. ISIL has
continued its attempts to expand its area of activity in
Central Asia. For South-East Asia, the report observes
an increasing role being played by young people and
women in terrorist operations in the region.

Against this background of continuously evolving
challenges and the importance of the prevention of
radicalization in light of an upcoming wave of released
foreign terrorist fighters, the United Nations system
has received a framework from the Council and the
General Assembly for how to support Member States
in their efforts to effectively counter the rapidly
evolving and transnational threat from ISIL. The
report of the Secretary-General outlines work done
by the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact entities - including CTED,
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
United Nations Development Programme, UNESCO,
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the International Civil Aviation Organization,
INTERPOL and others - in the fields of prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration; international judicial
cooperation; countering the financing of terrorism;
border management and law enforcement; countering
terrorist narratives and engaging communities in
preventing and countering violent extremism when
conducive to terrorism. Assistant Secretary-General
Coninsx, in her intervention, will highlight some of
these activities in a more detailed manner.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
highlight the fact that the Secretary-General, in this
report, has encouraged my Office - the Office of
Counter-Terrorism - to provide a forum in which
relevant expertise and good practices can be shared
in order to strengthen coordinated action to meet the
ongoing needs of Member States. This is especially
important in the area of addressing the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters, including relocators and returnees.
These efforts will be strengthened by a clearer and more
logical United Nations counter-terrorism architecture,
put in place through the launch of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact by
the Secretary-General in December last year. That is a
major step forward in enhancing overall coordination
and coherence across the United Nations system.

My office is also working, jointly with Member
States, to implement the outcomes of the United Nations
High-level Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism
Agencies, held in June last year, and organizing
thematic regional events on countering and preventing
terrorism. One such event, being planned with the
Government of Switzerland, will focus on the foreign
terrorist fighters phenomenon.

The Secretary-General has stressed that despite
recent successes against ISIL/Da'esh and its affiliates,
the threat posed by returning and relocating fighters, as
well as from individuals inspired by them, remains high
and has a global reach. I would therefore emphasize that
the recent ISIL losses should not lead to complacency at
any level. The threat of terrorism is a global challenge.
It has grown in magnitude and impact over the past
several decades. It does not recognize any geographical
or perceived borders. Given that complexity, it is only
through a well-coordinated, multilateral response that
we can address this challenge. I therefore, through the
Council, request the continued support of Member
States for the United Nations counter-terrorism work.

