Mrs. Orellana Alvarado (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I have asked for the floor to respond to the
statement just made by the representative of the United
States with respect to Cuba's intervention in this
debate. The United States authorities have limited
themselves once again to reiterating their justification
for their position in this case - that Posada Carriles is
being subjected to criminal proceedings in their
country. What they do not say is that at no time have
they prosecuted Posada for his well-known terrorist
acts. Instead, this issue continues to be treated merely
as a case of illegal immigration.

The Government of the United States has all the
evidence and information showing that Posada Carriles
is guilty of committing the in-flight bombing of a
Cuban aircraft that cost the lives of 73 innocent people.
That Government also knows that Posada Carriles
planned and directed a series of terrorist acts in 1997
using explosive devices against hotels in Havana,
among many other repulsive acts in his long career.

The terrorist himself has publicly confessed to his
horrible crimes. We therefore wonder what more is
needed before action will be taken. Cuba once again
urges the United States authorities to try Posada
Carriles as a terrorist or to deliver him to the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which has requested
his extradition for more than five years.

Cuba is convinced that the only effective way to
prevent and combat terrorism is through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation among all States on the basis
of mutual respect, non-interference in the internal
affairs of States and the equal sovereignty of States.
Double standards cannot prevail. It will be impossible
to eliminate terrorism if certain acts are condemned
while others are met with silence and acceptance.

We reiterate that, if the Government of the United
States genuinely wants to show its commitment to the
fight against terrorism, it now has an opportunity to
take firm action, without double standards, against
several terrorist organizations that, from territory here
within the United States, have displayed continued
aggression against Cuba for many years.
It is up to the new Government of the United
States to stop using the topic of terrorism for political
ends and to bring an end to the unjust and groundless
inclusion of Cuba on the list of countries that
supposedly sponsor terrorism. It is up to the new
Government of the United States to try Posada Carriles
because he is a terrorist, to free the five young Cuban
counter-terrorist fighters being unfairly detained in
United States prisons, and to make progress through
cooperation instead of the prevailing confrontation.

