Mr. Chergui: First of all, I would like to commend
the Peruvian presidency for convening this timely and
very important meeting on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. The presence of the honourable Minister for
Foreign Affairs, as well as the high-level participation
bears witness to the importance of the meeting, in
addition to the Council's commitment to advancing the
agenda of sustaining peace. I also wish to express our
gratitude for the kind invitation extended to me to share
the perspective of the African Union on that strategic
discussion in View of our growing partnership with the
United Nations.

In that regard, it gives me great pleasure and honour
to speak in the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, to whom I would like to reiterate
our recognition, as well as our strong support for his
inspiring and tireless efforts to promote peace and
stability in Africa, in close partnership with the African
Union. Only one week ago, I had the opportunity to
brief the Council on one of the most visible parts of
that strategic partnership, illustrated by the recent
successful field mission that I undertook, jointly with
my friend, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, respectively to the
Sudan and the Central African Republic. I thank the
Secretary-General for his support.

Let me start by recalling that the very idea
of peacebuilding and sustaining peace is strongly
grounded in the long-enshrined principle that peace
cannot be achieved without development, and
vice-versa, and that neither peace nor development can
thrive without human rights and good governance. It is
indeed that firm conviction that underpins the African
Union's approach to fulfilling its central mandate
to achieve a peaceful and prosperous Africa. In line
with the provisions of its Constitutive Act and the
Protocol relating to the Establishment of the Peace and
Security Council, the African Union has, over the past
decade, assumed greater responsibilities on conflict
prevention, management, resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction and development.

In the area of peacebuilding, the implementation
of the African Union Policy on Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development has progressively
enabled the Commission to take concrete actions to
consolidate peace and prevent relapse into violence. At
the core of the African Union's interventions is the need
to build sustainable resilience with a view to enhancing
structural transformation, thereby preventing relapse.
In short, the African Union's approach to peacebuilding
has preventive and stabilization dimensions.

Therefore, our engagement has been geared
towards developing and implementing quick-impact and
peace-strengthening projects in areas of deployment of
African Union peace support operations, and through the
African Union liaison offices. To date, the Commission
has provided support to the Central African Republic,
Liberia, Madagascar, Guinea-Bissau, the Lake Chad
basin, the Sahelo-Saharan region and Somalia in a
broad range of areas, including the strengthening of
human rights institutions, the scaling-up of health
facilities, capacitating educational institutions, and
security sector reform, as well as rule of law reforms.

Currently, the African Union is in the process of
deploying technical advisers to support the security
sector reform as well as transitional justice processes
in The Gambia. That is being done in furtherance of
a Peace and Security Council decision that mandated
the Commission to provide support to The Gambia,
following a request by the new authorities of the country.

Going forward, the African Union plans to scale up
its stabilization efforts on the continent. Our objective
is to manage transitions from initial stabilization,
which often carries a heavy military footprint, to
long-term peacebuilding, focusing on reconstruction,
revitalization of public service institutions, and
short- to medium-term socioeconomic and political
development. In the Lake Chad basin, the African
Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission are now in
the process of finalizing a strategy that will rationalize
the various initiatives aimed at stabilizing the areas
affected by Boko Haram's activities. In the same vein,
we are in the process of strengthening our stabilization
efforts in Somalia within the framework of the African
Union Mission in Somalia, and in the Sudan through
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, respectively.

The recent relapses of several post-conflict
countries into violence and instability highlight the
need to do more to address, in a coherent manner, the
structures, attitudes and processes that perpetuate
conflict and instability. In that regard, allow me to
share some of the critical lessons learned, on which
today's meeting can build to enhance our joint efforts
towards achieving sustainable peace in Africa.

First, there is an urgent need to strengthen
our cooperation in the area of prevention. Conflict
prevention remains the most cost-effective tool, yet it is
the least resourced. The African Union has developed
a continental structural conflict prevention framework
that allows its Member States to engage in a voluntary
process with the Commission to enhance their capacity
to identify vulnerabilities to conflict at the very early
stage and, on this basis, work out a mitigation strategy.
With the support of the African Union Commission,
Ghana has just finalized its report as the first country to
volunteer for the exercise. I believe that this mechanism
could present an additional opportunity for cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations, in
the light of the joint framework signed last year.

Secondly, there is a need to shift from the current
top-down approach to a more people-centred paradigm
with a specific focus on peace dividends, especially for
women andyouth. That entails in particular incorporating
local perspectives and empowering marginalized
communities. It also requires taking into consideration
the regional dimension and the transnational nature
of conflicts in Africa. The African Union has already
started incorporating this dimension in its joint efforts
with the different regional mechanisms.

Thirdly, the importance of establishing close
cooperation and working relationships among
national, regional and international actors cannot be
overemphasized. In that context, given that Africa
remains the major regional focus of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations is crucial. The
African Union, through its post-conflict reconstruction
and development, and the United Nations, through its
peacebuilding architecture, have much to learn from each
other's approaches and experiences, and from seeking
greater cooperation and collaboration. The recently
signed Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security and
the subsequent memorandum of understanding between
the African Union Commission and the Peacebuilding
Support Office provide a solid framework to strengthen
cooperation in support of peacebuilding and sustaining
peace efforts in Africa. We welcome the commitment
of the Secretary-General to consolidate and further
promote our partnership in this area, as outlined in his
recent report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
(S/20l8/43).

Fourthly, throughout the sustaining peace process,
our collective endeavours will amount to little if
there is no corresponding effort to mobilize adequate
resources for the implementation of the defined
priorities. No significant progress can be made without
adequate financial resources and technical assistance
to support concerned countries in sustaining peace.
The main challenges that post-conflict reconstruction
and development implementation has been facing are
related to the amount of resources and expertise it
demands and the high-level political and diplomatic
engagement it requires to be successful.

As Council members already know, the African
Union continues to make considerable efforts to assume
greater responsibility for funding its peace activities.
The progress achieved over the past 24 months in the
operationalization ofthe Peace Fund, which has already
received two-thirds of the planned contribution for
2018, serves as a demonstration of the African Union's
commitment. It should be recalled that the Peace Fund
is organized around three windows. The first should
fund preventive diplomacy and mediation, the second
should fund institutional capacity, and the third should
fund peace support operations. It is our hope that
the ongoing efforts of the African Union will help to
convince the Security Council to respond positively to
Africa's demands in this regard. Those demands are
all the more legitimate because sustainable funding
for peace efforts in Africa should not be considered
only as an African priority, but also as an international
strategic imperative to respond to the complex and
interconnected nature of threats to international peace
and security.

That brings me to the end of my briefing. I wish
to conclude by stressing again the strategic importance
of the African Union-United Nations partnership. The
challenging and increasingly complex situations on the
ground emphasize the need to enhance and to properly
calibrate our concerted efforts to achieve sustainable
peace in Africa.

