Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the Deputy Secretary-General
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for their comprehensive briefings.

Jordan regrets the fact that the draft resolution
(S/2015/508) was not adopted today. As we
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the greatest
massacre Europe has known since the Second World
War, we cannot, as the United Nations, forget this
bloody tragedy and the crimes that followed against
the survivors. The tragedy and the calls for help from
defenceless towns will remain etched in our memories.
It could have been avoided if the United Nations had
acted effectively to confront the dangers surrounding
Srebrenica. We all know that on the eve of the massacre
there were neither combatants nor weapons in the town.
The inhabitants were only children, women, elderly
people and unarmed men, who were killed in cold
blood with the full knowledge of the United Nations
peacekeeping forces. Twenty years after the massacre,
we must ask ourselves what lessons the United Nations
can learn to prevent such a tragedy from being repeated
and what it can do for the families of the victims.

One of the most important lessons that the
Organization can learn and must develop from the
massacre is that a genocide early-warning system must
be established so that such events can be monitored and
preventive diplomatic efforts intensified. We therefore
welcomed the establishment of the Office of the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide, whose work must continue as part of an
overarching early warning system. But the efforts of
the Office of the Special Adviser will be useless unless
the Security Council works together to implement in a
timely manner the necessary resolutions when national
Governments are unable to protect their citizens under
imminent threat. Furthermore, States Members of the
United Nations must make available the resources to
support the early-warning system, its various offices
and the United Nations peacekeeping missions so that
those operations can properly and nobly discharge their
mandate.

We would like to encourage all States that have
not yet signed or ratified the relevant international
instruments, particularly the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
and the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1997
Additional Protocols, to do so. We should all have
signed all of those instruments.

Moreover, we must ensure the adoption of national
laws and legislation to ensure the robustness of the rule
of law and the full participation and involvement of
civil society in governance, so as to prevent incitement
to violence through hatred and calls to target given
groups in society. Incitement to hatred can pave the way
to violence, thus leading to reprehensible acts such as
the massacre that the Council is commemorating today.

A massacre is not frozen in time. Its aftermath
remains present in the survivors, as we have seen in
the faces of the survivors of Srebrenica 20 years later.
Deliveringjustice requires us to ensure the upholding of
justice and the absence ofimpunity, so that the families
of the victims can receive the justice they deserve,
thereby becoming part of the reconciliation process in
the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Jordan appeals to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) to continue
its work. We call upon all partners to continue to
support the ICTY to ensure the necessary political will
to support the efforts of the international community to
successfully deliver justice.

We recognize the improvement in the Organization's
working methods since the Srebrenica massacre in order
to prevent similar massacres or genocides in conflict
areas. Nevertheless, we must continue to shoulder our
responsibilities boldly and judiciously to rectify the
errors of the past and not to repeat them and to properly
meet today's challenges in order to ensure that tragedies
and massacres of this nature never happen again in any
region of the world.

