Mr. Adom (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would first like to extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Joao Ribeiro Butiam Co, Minister
for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and
Communities of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau.

In its capacity as a penholder, Cote d'Ivoire
welcomes the Security Council's unanimous adoption
ofresolution 2458 (2019), which renews for one year the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). My delegation
would like to thank the States members of the Security
Council that participated, in a constructive spirit,
in the consultations and negotiations on the text.
They constantly bore in mind developments in the
situation on the ground, which were characterized
by the preparations for the holding of the legislative
elections scheduled for 10 March, in the wake of the
Security Council's mission to Guinea-Bissau on 15 and
16 February.

The resolution reflects both the Council's strong
consensus and its shared concerns about the situation
in Guinea-Bissau. On closer look, beyond certain no
less important questions, the resolution is distinct in
emphasizing four maj or points, namely, the restructuring
of UNIOGBIS, the importance of implementing the
electoral cycle, support from international partners and
the urgent need for Guinea-Bissau stakeholders to take
their country's destiny into their own hands.

With regard to the reform of UNIOGBIS, the
Security Council endorses the Secretary-General's
recommendations on the restructuring of the United
Nations presence in Guinea-Bissau and a new hierarchy
of tasks, as set out in his special report published in
document S/2018/1086, on the UNIOGBIS strategic
assessment requested by the Council in its previous
resolution 2404 (2018).

Through this new resolution, the Council endorses
the principle of a reconfiguration of UNIOGBIS
to be carried out in three stages. The first phase,
referred to as the electoral phase, essentially aims at
maintaining the current UNIOGBIS structure with
a view to concretely supporting the organization of
the legislative elections scheduled for 10 March and
the presidential election later on in the year. As part
of the second phase, UNIOGBIS is responsible for
ensuring the proper conditions for the implementation
of the reform programme, including the preparation of
its transition plan, in coordination with the national
authorities. The third phase will focus on implementing
the transition plan for a gradual withdrawal and hand-
over to the United Nations country team and the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel. It should
be emphasized, however, that the Council has refrained
from imposing a strict and rigid timetable for carrying
out the restructuring, so as to give it real flexibility to
take into account developments on the ground.

Moreover, in relation to the second track of the
resolution, on the decisive nature of the organization
of elections, the Security Council clearly underlines
that the process of reconfiguring UNIOGBIS should
take place after the completion of the 2019 electoral
cycle, thereby highlighting the importance of the
elections. In that regard, the Council urges Guinea-
Bissau stakeholders to adhere strictly to the Conakry
Agreement on the Implementation of the Economic
Community of West African States Road Map for the
Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea-Bissau,
while also stressing the importance of holding truly
free and fair parliamentary elections on 10 March, as
well as the presidential election this year.

Along those lines, and to signal the Council's
resolute commitment, were that necessary, the
resolution reaffirms the central role of international
partners - the United Nations, the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the European Union and other
countries - in the search for a peaceful way out of
the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. In particular, it encourages
them to strengthen cooperation with the Government
of Guinea-Bissau and continue to work together for the
stabilization of the country.

In the same vein, the resolution particularly
commends the effective leadership of ECOWAS
and reiterates the support of the Security Council
with regard to the determination of the West African
subregional organization to take firm measures when
it comes to the people whose acts would tend to
disrupt the smooth conduct of the upcoming elections.
Specifically with regard to national stakeholders, the
resolution urges them once again to work to safeguard
the still fragile gains along the path to stability and put
the interests of the people of Guinea-Bissau before any
other consideration.

Finally, it is also important to recall the resolution's
emphasis on the crucial issue of combating drug
trafficking and transnational crime. In that regard, the
Council makes an urgent appeal to donors to ensure
sufficient contributions for the implementation of the
programmes of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in Guinea-Bissau.

In conclusion, on its part, my delegation would
like to solemnly appeal to the Security Council and
bilateral and multilateral partners to continue to
support Guinea-Bissau in the ultimate interests of the
civilian population.

