Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada is deeply concerned by the serious
humanitarian crisis resulting from the continuation of
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The conflict has caused unspeakable suffering to the
population of the Congo as well as enormous loss of
life and material damage. The fact that this situation
has lasted now for more than three years is intolerable.

At the present time, the major obstacle to
humanitarian access for those people who need
emergency assistance is the non-implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement by the parties and the lack of zeal
of those parties in cooperating with the United Nations.

(spoke in English)

We join our colleagues in condemning all
violations of the ceasefire. We urge all parties
concerned in the region to cease immediately military
activity and to implement fully the Lusaka Agreement
and the Kampala disengagement plan. We call on all
parties to the conflict, and in particular the
Government, to respect their obligations, particularly in
ensuring the safety and freedom of movement of
United Nations and humanitarian personnel. We join
the United Kingdom in saluting those heroes who are
working in the Congo on our behalf in the most
difficult of conditions.

We encourage all United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations present in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to work closely together in
developing an effective and holistic strategy to address
the urgent humanitarian needs of civilians.

Canada condemns all violations of human rights
and humanitarian law committed in both Government
and rebel-controlled areas. Those responsible for
violations, including serious crimes such as crimes of
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
other grave violations of humanitarian law, must be
brought to justice. There cannot be peace or
reconciliation if we do not put an end to the culture of
impunity.
On a further issue, Canada is greatly concerned
with continuing official infringement on the right of
free expression, in violation of the Lusaka Agreement.
We are particularly concerned by the recent
announcement by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that "to criticize the State is to
be an enemy of the State". Freedom of opinion and
expression are essential as peace- and confidence-
building measures.

(spoke in French)

We have been informed that, apparently, certain
non-governmental organizations believe that a
significant deployment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) might further hamper
humanitarian access by provoking hostile forces to
oppose any international presence.

We would be grateful to the Bureau of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for
sharing their assessment of this view.

