Mr. Holliday (United States of America): I thank
Chairman Mufioz for his insightful briefing and his
critical contribution to the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) on Al
Qaeda and the Taliban over these past two years.

The recent terrorist attacks in Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia, are a sharp reminder that our collective effort
against the threat to international peace and security
posed by Al Qaeda and the Taliban must be
unrelenting. I have no doubt that there is not a single
one of us around this table who has not received
information from their respective security services
about an Al Qaeda threat against their interests. The
global terrorist threat remains an ongoing challenge for
all States. We are all in this fight together. This is a
battle that none of us can afford to lose.

Identifying, tracing and freezing Al Qaeda assets
is not going to get easier. Existing measures contained
in resolution 1526 (2004) must be strengthened,
tightened and further refined. Resolution 1526 (2004),
in paragraph 1, targets those associated with Al Qaeda
and the Taliban. Member States' efforts need to be
redoubled to identify those associations and, quite
simply, to bring more nominations for listing before the
Committee.

My Government has another concern that has
been raised before in this forum. When this solemn
body invokes Chapter VII of the Charter in response to
threats against international peace and security, there
can be no satisfactory outcome by member States other
than complete compliance in implementing the
measures authorized by the Security Council. The
monitoring team's analytic efforts continue to show
that not all States are fulfilling their obligations under
resolution 1526 (2004), nor are they adhering to
mandated reporting requirements. In addition, the team
has noted that the quality of reports is wide-ranging
and, in the most extreme cases, unhelpful.

In cases in which States are capable of but appear
to be unwilling to press the fight and cause discomfort
to Al Qaeda, further Committee investigation and,
quite possibly, Council action are warranted. I am
referring to cases in which States are both non-
compliant or insufficiently compliant with resolution
1455 (2003) and are also listed by the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development's Financial
Action Task Force as being non-cooperative. While
those are not the only candidates for further careful
review by the Committee, they represent an obvious
focus for additional attention. To get that far in
deliberations, however, we will need even more work
from the Monitoring Team and very clear outcomes
from its analysis. Additional intensified Committee
efforts need to move in that direction. The delegation
of the United States is committed to achieving concrete
results.

We are about to bid farewell to an extremely
competent, committed and dynamic Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). We highly commend Ambassador Mufioz for
his dynamic leadership and tireless efforts to support
the work of the Committee. The entire delegation of
Chile has been equally deserving of our praise and
commendation in advancing the work of the
Committee, in particular Mrs. Carla Serrazi. Her
professionalism, persistence and dedication were key
factors in moving a number of Committee projects to
completion.

The synergy of coordinated efforts between
Chairman Mufioz and his delegation, the professional
and comprehensive work of the Monitoring Team -
particularly as reflected in its recently circulated
report - and the tireless contribution of the Secretariat
now provide us with a support mechanism to ensure
oversight and close monitoring of the Council's
decisions. We look forward to working collectively,
imaginatively and effectively with the Committee's
new Chairman, whom the Council will designate in
January, as we proceed toward summer and a new
resolution to strengthen and refine the current
measures, and perhaps add new ones, directed against
as virulent a threat to peace and security as we have
known in our lifetimes. I again thank Ambassador
Mufioz for his invaluable contribution to the work of
the Committee.

