Mr. Matturi (Sierra Leone): My delegation
congratulates you, Madam President, on assuming once
again the presidency of the Security Council. We will
no doubt have the opportunity at a later date to pay
tribute to the Jamaican delegation under your
leadership for its distinctive contribution to the work of
the Security Council during the past 22 months. For
now, we can only say that we did not expect less. We
also thank Ambassador Ryan of Ireland for directing
the Council's loaded agenda during October.

The report of the Panel of Experts established
under resolution 1343 (2001) is not just another report
or a document prepared for archival purposes. In our
View, it is a silent but important contribution to the side
of peace and stability in Sierra Leone and the entire
West African subregion. We have arrived at this
conclusion because we still believe that the measures
imposed by the Council on Liberia last March -
measures that the Panel has been monitoring - are
preferable to launching a multinational military action
against Liberia. Sanctions in our region are a peaceful
means of resolving armed conflicts.

As we review the work of the Panel, we should
remind ourselves of the reason behind Security Council
sanctions against Liberia. We recall that the Council
had determined that the active support provided by the
Government of Liberia for armed rebel groups in
neighbouring countries 4 in particular, its support for
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) in Sierra
Leone - constitutes a threat to international peace and
security in the region. This is why the Council, among
other things, demanded in resolution 1343 (2001) last
March that the Government of Liberia immediately
cease its support for the RUF in Sierra Leone and for
other armed rebel groups in the region. This is why my
delegation commends the Chairman and the other
members of the Panel for their detailed account of its
investigation, in particular, of the role of non-State
actors in the subregion and the proliferation of arms, as
well as the relationship between the RUF and the
Government of Liberia. We also draw attention to the
executive summary in its report concerning this
relationship. These are the two core elements of the
entire report, which in our view should be the basis on
which the Council takes its next decision concerning
sanctions against Liberia.

The Panel has already given an indication of the
course of action that the Council should take. In this
connection, we welcome the statement by the President
of the Council last Friday that after the briefing by the
Chairman of the Liberia sanctions Committee,
members of the Council expressed their commitment to
the continued monitoring of the implementation of
resolution 1343 (2001) and reaffirmed the need for
early and full compliance with the measures imposed
on Liberia under the resolution. We look forward to the
proposed further discussion to be undertaken by the
sanctions Committee on the Panel's recommendations.
While studying other aspects of the Panel's report, the
Sierra Leone delegation looks forward to appropriate
action by the Council.

In closing, we thank Ambassador Kishore
Mahbubani of Singapore, Chairman of the sanctions
Committee, for his concise introduction of the Panel's
report.

Finally, I express some concern over recent
revelations - and if further investigations revealed
this, it would be appreciated by my Government - of
Al Qaeda's connection with the RUF in Sierra Leone.

