Mr. Lacroix: I would like to thank all Member
States for the comments and I will be brief, because we
would also like to hear from the Force Commanders in
answer to the questions raised.

There were a number of mentions of what I think is a
key expectation for our peacekeeping operations - that
is, adaptability and responsiveness. I would like to
highlight a few points in that regard that I believe are
key to achieving that.

The first is the issue ofrules and procedures, which
were mentioned by some of the Force Commanders.
The Council is aware that the Secretary-General has
launched an effort for reform in this area aimed at
making it much simpler for operations to discharge
their mandates. That is a key issue in responding to the
serious expectations of those on the ground.

The second, which was also mentioned by several
Force Commanders and Member States, is the need
for an appropriate framework within which troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) operate and that can
be affected by statements of unit requirements and
memorandums of understanding that in some cases are
not adequate to Force Commanders' needs. Those we
simply have to review and revise where necessary in
order to give Force Commanders the flexibility they
need where the use of resources is concerned.

The third element in this is mindset, for which
all of us are responsible - Headquarters, Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, Force
Commanders and troop-contributing countries. It is
a willingness and determination to fully implement
mandates and see that everyone interprets a mandate in
the same way, as well as to ensure that the caveats and
dual chains of command that have had negative effects
on our operations are gradually terminated. In that
regard, we are emphasizing and definitely expecting
that we should be stricter and more demanding in our
evaluations of operations.

The fourth element is capacities. As has been
repeatedly pointed out, in order to be more agile,
responsive and flexible, we need the necessary training
and the necessary capacity. Someone mentioned new
technology, and that is indeed being gradually brought
into our operations, particularly with regard to having
better situational awareness. And we are working very
hard to attain the specific types of capacity that we
need for many of our operations. Just before today's
meeting, in fact, we had a force-generation meeting
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, and I am grateful to the
Member States that have committed to providing very
important new capacities that I believe will make a
difference to the force's ability to fulfil its mandate.
In that regard, I would like to specifically point to our
contingents' ability to use that capacity for training
and the importance of bilateral cooperation for our
TCCs, which need this kind of assistance in order
to be better prepared to use the equipment that the
operation requires.

I will touch briefly on the robust use of force.
(spoke in French)

Lieutenant General Keita alluded at length and
very interestingly in his briefing to the use of robust
and legitimate force as provided for in our mandates.
Implementing a mandate is also about implementing
the political processes that our operations support, and
therefore a reaction to those who try to interfere with
or prevent the implementation of those processes, in
which case the use of force can be entirely legitimate.
However, using robust force is not enough, and the
Central African Republic is particularly instructive in
that regard. It must be accompanied by similarly robust
efforts in the political arena. I think the same is true
for the Security Council - just as our operations have
robust mandates, they need the robust support of the
Council at all levels, so as to hold accountable those
who try to prevent us from fulfilling our missions.

I also want to touch upon the periodic performance
reviews of missions, an expectation that has been
expressed by everyone - Member States, the Secretariat
and, above all, the Security Council. In expecting more
from the missions, we should not hesitate to call into
question certain truths or demands that have hitherto
been accepted as fundamental but are, perhaps, not quite
so. The reference to troop numbers is a case in point,
since the number ofpeacekeepers is less important than
their ability to fulfil their mandate. In that regard, I
believe we must also review our assessment criteria.

I want to briefly address the issue of transition.
Although Major General Uba's statement was very
enlightening in that respect, the support of the Security
Council at all stages has been crucial. The inclusiveness
of the transition process, in which host countries,
stakeholders, civil society, agencies and bilateral and
multilateral donors participated, was key to its success.

Finally, to endorse what Major General Menon said
about sexual abuse, the determination of the Secretary-
General and the Force Commanders to doggedly combat
those acts is evident, and I can assure everyone that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is also fully
committed to do the same.

