Mr. Zeidan (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and the members of
the Security Council for this opportunity to speak on
behalf of Libya as we move with full confidence and
determination towards democracy, while at the same
time developing the highest standards for human rights
and the achievement of development and prosperity, so
as to build a free and democratic State that can credibly
and effectively contribute as part of the international
community to achieving the principles and objectives
of the United Nations.

The United Nations and the Council have played
an important role in my country's history. A decision
was taken at Headquarters on 21 November 1949
concerning the independence of Libya. On that basis,
a Constitution was drafted with the help of the United
Nations - one of the best constitutions of that time. I
would like to express my gratitude for the efforts of the
United Nations to support Libya back then. To this day,
one of the most beautiful streets in Tripoli bears the
name of Adriaan Pelt, the Organization's representative
who helped us draft that Constitution, which was in
force until 1969, when a coup took place. That support
was in evidence once again in February 2011, when
the United Nations stood up to prevent the murder of
civilians in the streets following an important statement
made here in the Chamber by Ambassador Shalgham
(see S/PV.6490), with the Secretary-General at his
side and in the presence of representatives from other
nations, which marked a new beginning in the history
of Libya's revolution.

Since then, the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL), which was present in Benghazi
prior to the liberation of Tripoli, has made important
contributions in all areas. Special Representative
Tarek Mitri and his team continue to play their roles
seriously and with enthusiasm, including vis-a-vis
the Government and civil society. The Government
continues its cooperation with the United Nations
country team. We are quite happy to support the
renewal of the United Nations mandate in Libya for an
additional 12 months.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Mitri and Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. The
Secretary-General's assistance during the revolution
played a significant role in ensuring victory. I also
thank all our partners and allies from friendly countries
that supported us in various ways. Thanks to their
efforts and support, we achieved victory on 20 October
2011. I should like to reaffirm our partnership with
the international community, the United Nations and
all our friends and allies that supported throughout. To
those throughout the regions of the world that did not
support us we nevertheless extend a hand in friendship
and cooperation.

At this historic stage, when the Libyan people are
moving ahead with forging a State based on the rule
of law and human rights, I should like to reassure
the international community, the United Nations and
the Security Council that Libya is moving steadily
and with confidence, determination and will towards
establishing a democratic country in which the rule of
law and human rights are respected, and where there
is positive cooperation with all our partners around
the world. At the most recent Summit of the African
Union, I spoke to our African brothers about our
strong ties with them and about our important role in
Africa, which would henceforth be more positive. I also
thanked all those in Africa who had supported us in our
revolutionary march.

The security challenges we face today are
enormous and difficult. However, in a short time, we
have been able secure the means and put in place a
mechanism to establish control. We have made progress
in securing weapons coming in to and leaving Libya.
We have placed emphasis on controls at ports and
airports, including following up in order to prevent
weapons from coming in. We have secured our borders
with Algeria, Chad, Egypt, the Niger and the Sudan.
We accept the fact that those borders should be under
our control: the control of our army, air force and
revolutionary fighters. Intelligence has recently been
employed to help control crime. We have begun to train
police and military to those ends. We are also trying to
establish a national guard to assume responsibility for
security in zones outside urban areas.

The Government is now developing its justice
sector programme, which might be approved in a week
or two. We have made progress in rehabilitating prisons
to bring them up to international standards. We have
trained approximately 10,000 judicial police officers,
which is in addition to the 15,000 who have already
been trained.

The Government is also working to promote
national reconciliation at all levels, including with
regard to religion, as well as building the necessary
institutions and legal instruments through the Ministry
of Justice and its organs.

We are taking decisive steps to reintegrate Libya's
internally displaced persons. We have also made
arrangements for persons who are now in neighbouring
countries and are taking measures to enable them
to return to our country, including putting in place
significant security guarantees.

We are rebuilding the Ministries of Defence and of
the Interior. We will shortly complete the reconstruction
of the Ministry of Defence. We have made progress
in retraining the air, land and naval forces. Our navy
recently discovered 32 tons of drugs coming through
the Strait of Gibraltar.

With regard to the elections, we must select the
constitutional drafting body. The Government is
preparing the ground for that with the General National
Congress.

We have recently established the High National
Election Commission in order to select the
constitution-drafting body and to hold municipal
elections following the approval of the budget next
week. Following those elections, in the next six
months, we hope to reach the stage of being able to
hold elections and of having drafted the constitution on
the basis of which the elections will be held and the
State and its structures will be established. We will
then enter a phase of stability and development and
be able to establish permanent State institutions. We
have also undertaken a number of initiatives to rebuild
the country. We have launched projects in the areas of
housing, power, communications and health care in
order to rebuild what was destroyed in the past year and
during the revolution.
My country is making efforts to cooperate. We
participated in the Paris conference, held under the
auspices of France. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank the French Government for hosting the
conference, as well as the Government of the United
Kingdom, which arranged the previous conference in
preparation for the one in Paris.

Mr. Mitri mentioned political isolation. The
Government is wisely and Vigilantly dealing with that
issue in order to move forward in establishing justice
and respect for human rights and to provide equal
opportunities for all Libyans without exception. We
have been detached from democracy and the world
for 42 years. We need to make great efforts in order to
inform the people about the importance of democracy
and its role.

All of that requires efforts on our part and patience.
We hope that the international community will
understand. We reaffirm with full confidence that the
Libyan people will not accept injustices against anyone
in society. We will not allow anyone to be isolated
unless it is under judicial orders. We are experiencing
and trying to achieve national reconciliation every day.
We are making every effort to achieve that goal. We
have enjoyed the strong cooperation of the people and
hope soon to see progress in that regard.

I would like to reaffirm Libya's commitment to
the resolutions adopted in support of the revolution.
We will comply with those resolutions. Through
the Council and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), we will
try to observe all directives ofthe Security Council. We
ask for the Council's assistance in restoring the frozen
assets. We affirm that the Libyan Investment Authority
will soon restart its work and will be reorganized. That
will enable it to have the best leadership on the best
basis. We reaffirm our full commitment to supporting
world peace, establishing respect for human rights and
democracy and working together with all nations to
achieve justice in the world.

We hope for the Council's cooperation and support
so that we can achieve our aspirations with regard to
our country's development and the normalization of
the situation. We reiterate the thanks of all the Libyan
people - men, women and children - and their
appreciation of the role of the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and UNSMIL. We reaffirm our
commitment to cooperating with the Council at all
times. We hope that members will accept the expression
of our respect and appreciation.
