Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to debate the report (S/2011/4l) on the
review of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for the
period between 1 July 2009 and 31 December 2010.
We also thank Ambassador Peter Wittig for his
excellent presentation of the report and for the skill
with which he has discharged his duties as Chair of the
Commission. We would also like to convey to his

successor, Ambassador Gasana, our best wishes for
success in his new post, and to assure him of our
support.

With regard to the ever more important role of
the Peacebuilding Commission in the post-conflict
peacebuilding process, my delegation welcomes the
commitment that has been expressed here on the part
of the international community for strengthening the
capacity and resources of the Commission so as to
enable it to act more effectively on the ground. It is in
that context that we welcome the work done by the co-
facilitators - the Permanent Representatives of
Ireland, Mexico and South Africa - in reviewing the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture with the
goal of making it more operational. We welcome the
fact that the recommendations made as a result of their
consultations have already begun to be applied by the
Commission, as the report under discussion attests.

It seems to us that there are two particularly
important aspects associated with our desire to
strengthen the peacebuilding architecture, namely, the
partnerships that the Commission has to forge with the
various actors involved in the peacebuilding process
and the central role that the host country must play in
that process. With regard to the first point, my
delegation welcomes the approach taken by the
Commission in relation to international financial
institutions and donors, for some efforts require a
stronger international commitment and more resources
and, without prejudice to the issue of the most effective
strategies, it is important to increase the resources of
the Peacebuilding Fund and its main components.

Similarly, cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations and, indeed, with all other
actors involved in peacebuilding activities, is essential.
That is why peacebuilding should be a focal point of
the dialogues held periodically by the United Nations
with regional organizations. The Commission's
ongoing cooperation with those entities is an essential
factor in efforts to improve resource mobilization and,
above all, to more effectively coordinate and
harmonize actions on the ground. In that context, we
support the Commission's relationship with the main
organs of the United Nations, in particular the General
Assembly, our Council and the Economic and Social
Council.

In the Security Council, we recognize that the
links between peacekeeping and peacebuilding are

growing and require the Commission to be more
effective in fulfilling its advisory role vis-a-vis the
conduct of peacekeeping missions. For instance, we
support the Commission's recommendations to the
Council regarding the situation in the Central African
Republic. Those recommendations called for increased
financial support for the stabilization of the country,
for the Economic Community of Central African States
to provide military observers for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, and for the
subregional military presence of the Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African
Republic.

Regarding the second point, my delegation
believes it important to mention that peacebuilding
cannot occur without the involvement of the recipient
country. Indeed, national ownership and the
strengthening of existing capacities are the two main
pillars of the recovery process for countries emerging
from conflict.

The Central African Republic configuration, of
which my country, Gabon, is a member, can once again
serve as a good example. Indeed, the Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding and the poverty
reduction strategy paper were created by the Central
African Government, in partnership with the
Commission. In that context, we suggest that the
Council consider the Commission's potential role in
the Sudan in terms of post-referendum issues.

National or local ownership, a key component of
the strategy adopted by the Commission, should
transcend the governmental sphere. All segments of the
population should therefore be involved in programmes
launched as part of the peacebuilding process. The
issues of youth unemployment, the reintegration of
ex-combatants and the situation of such vulnerable
groups as women and girls must be accorded the
highest priority. Attention should also be paid to the
issue of political governance in the actions of the
Commission, because it is a factor that could play a
role in any return to conflict. That was the intent
behind the 2009 review of the Peacebuilding Fund's
guiding principles, which was undertaken to ensure
that the Fund would be able to respond to real needs.
Greater account must also be taken of existing national
capacities in peacebuilding activities.

As the international community is not usually
called upon to remain indefinitely in a country
emerging from conflict, it would be useful in the future
for such countries to work with the countries
concerned to formulate a priority action plan to
establish sustainable peace. The action plan should
include security sector reform, socio-economic
development, youth employment, national
reconciliation, good governance and the rule of law.
The Commission's activities should create no local
dependency that would make it difficult for the
international community to leave.

I would like to highlight the challenges and issues
that should be further discussed in terms of the role of
the Commission. One is how to coordinate the various
actors involved in such a way as to not complicate the
conduct of operations, and how to reconcile the
approaches and modus operandi of the various actors.
Another is how to better take into account the
specificities of each situation. A further issue is how to
ensure participation at the national level so that
ownership is not limited solely to the elites.

Finally, I reiterate our support for the
Peacebuilding Commission, which is playing an
increasingly important role in the international
community's efforts to help countries devastated by
conflict to regain their footing.

