Ms. Shilo (Israel): Over 20 years ago, the Graca
Machel report (see A/51/306) was published, paving the
way for the Security Council to establish the children
and armed conflict agenda. Despite more than 20
years of countless resolutions and debate, hundreds of
millions of children still endure war and strife, physical
injuries and mental trauma.

It is difficult to find words to describe the scale
of the atrocities we have seen in the past few years.
Acts of sustained barbarism and cruelty have shaken
our collective conscience. We must, however, not let
despair overcome our duty to protect these innocent
souls. We must provide the victims with the tools to
rehabilitate and reintegrate into society. These children
deserve our honest efforts.

The Middle East region is plagued by this horrific
reality. According to UNICEF, 2017 was the worst year
yet for Syria's children as violence ripped apart places
that should be safe - schools, hospitals, playgrounds
and even the homes of children. It is reported that in
the first two months of 2018 alone, more than 1,000
children were killed or injured. Syria is the world's
biggest producer of both internally displaced people
and refugees. Current estimates show that 2.8 million
children have been displaced from their homes.

In Yemen, according to the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/465), over 500 children have been killed
in air strikes and ground assaults. More than 700 have
been maimed. These acts of cruelty reflect a complete
and utter disrespect for life.

For decades, Palestinian children have been
exploited by their leadership. They attend schools
named after terrorists. They cross streets honouring
terrorists. They watch their leaders on television
hand out candy to celebrate terrorists who have killed
innocent Israelis. We acknowledge the fact that, for the
first time, the Secretary-General's report recognizes
Palestinian leaders' incitement to violence. But it
does not end with incitement. In Gaza, Hamas - the
internationally recognized terrorist organization - has
long been guilty of using children for terrorism. It
exploits schools, hospitals and civilian neighbourhoods
as bases for its terror activities and does not hesitate
to employ the despicable practice of using innocent
people, including children, as human shields.

This summer, while children around the world are
enjoying their vacation at home, at summer camps or
on the beach, the children of Gaza are instead attending
military camps. Hamas recruits thousands of children
to those camps. Instead of teaching them how to swim
or play soccer, the children of Gaza are taught how to
assemble automatic weapons and operate missiles. Just
in the past month, Hamas has even resorted to turning
children's toys into weapons, sending bombs made out
of kites into Israel. The incendiary kites ignited over
400 fires in Israel, destroying more than 7,000 acres
of Israeli agricultural land. To make matters worse,
over the past month Hamas has launched hundreds of
rockets and mortar shells into Israeli civilian population
centres, even hitting a kindergarten in one of its attacks.
That behaviour cannot be misconstrued - Hamas is
targeting children.

While we recognize the progress made, the report,
unfortunately, continues to describe only a fraction of
the reality on the ground and misleads the international
community. One reason for that misleading portrayal
of reality is the fact that the formal field working
group includes organizations like Defense for Children
International-Palestine, which is closely linked to the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP).
We have raised that concern repeatedly. We must recall
that PFLP is an internationally recognized terrorist
organization infamous for turning airplane hijacking
into a preferred tool of terror. No non-governmental
organization with ties to terrorist organizations can
be a source of information for an objective, credible
United Nations working group.

Israel envisions a future that does not require a
meeting on children and armed conflict. We believe
in solutions, and with the honest efforts of all Member
States and international bodies, we are sure those
solutions are within our reach. We must protect our
children today so that we can prevent future conflict.
We can do this in two ways. First, we must invest in our
youth and empower them to become actors for peace
and conflict prevention. Secondly, for those who have
been affected by conflict and the trauma of war, it is our
moral duty to provide them with education and health
care, including psychosocial support and rehabilitation.

Through such efforts, we can break the cycle of
conflict and ensure a peaceful life for these children,
their communities and their countries.

