Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to welcome Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon to our meeting and thank him
for his statement. We would like to express our thanks
to Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his briefing
and our appreciation for all his efforts and the large
amount of work he has carried out in the field since he
took office about a year ago. We also commend the
relevant United Nations bodies for their work in the
humanitarian field over the years.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
been a classic item for the United Nations since the
Organization's founding. The international community
has established for this purpose a comparatively
complete international humanitarian legal framework,
with comprehensive provisions contained in the
relevant international legal instruments, including the
1949 Fourth Geneva Convention and the two
Additional Protocols of 1977. The Security Council has
been considering this issue for nearly a decade and has
adopted numerous resolutions and presidential
statements. All the aforementioned has provided
guidance for the practical work in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

However, with the change of the characters of
conflicts and the emergence of new factors, and as a
result of the interlinkage of complex historical,
political, territorial, religious and resource-related
issues, we are still witnessing the sad situation in
which large numbers of civilians are affected, harmed
and devastated by armed conflict. We strongly urge
parties to conflicts to abide strictly by international
humanitarian law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions and to fulfil their corresponding obligations
to protect the lives, property and legitimate interests of
civilians.

In order to improve the work in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, it is necessary to enhance
international cooperation and to give full play to the
role of international bodies, the Government concerned
and humanitarian bodies. There is need to emphasize
protection and humanitarian relief and to ensure
compliance with international law, as well as to pay
attention to conflict prevention. I wish to emphasize
the following points.

First, the Security Council should continue to
fulfil its primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security, in accordance with the
United Nations Charter, and play its unique role in the
protection of civilians. It is necessary to intensify
efforts in preventing and resolving conflicts and in
peacebuilding, so as to provide a secure environment
for civilians - which is, in the end, the most effective
protection. This requires cooperation between the
Security Council and other relevant United Nations
bodies and only when the Council functions within its

spheres of competence can it play its proper part in this
integrated undertaking.

Secondly, it is necessary always to bear in mind
the need to respect the role of Governments in the
protection of civilians and to let them play this role.
Governments bear the primary responsibility to protect
their civilians. While the international community and
outside forces can provide help, the provisions of the
Charter must be followed in doing so, and care must be
taken not to undermine the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the country concerned. Even when outside
support is necessary, the will of the country concerned
must be fully respected and forcible intervention
avoided. The internal judicial organs of the country
concerned should also be allowed to play a bigger role
in ending impunity.

Thirdly, humanitarian relief work should be
carried out in a judicious and effective manner, in
accordance with the principles of fairness, neutrality,
objectivity and independence. Humanitarian relief is
very important in the protection of civilians and
constitutes an indispensable link in efforts to address
any conflict situation. However, it is necessary to
ensure the credibility and humanitarian nature of
humanitarian relief work, which should comply with
international humanitarian law and should not replace
or interfere in conflict resolution and political process.
We find it deplorable that certain bodies use
humanitarian relief as a pretext to engage in illegal
activities in conflict regions.

Fourthly, the concept of the responsibility to
protect should be interpreted and applied in a prudent
and accurate manner. The Outcome Document of the
2005 World Summit contains detailed elaboration and
provisions on the responsibility to protect and
stipulates explicitly that this concept should be
discussed by the General Assembly. The Security
Council should not become a forum for extrapolating
this concept or engaging in other similar legislative
activities, because that is a task for the whole
membership of the United Nations. At present, this
concept is not yet mature, and many Member States
have considerable concerns about it. The relevant
discussions should be held within the framework of the
General Assembly, and the Security Council should not
prejudge the result of such discussions.
Fifthly, the Security Council should continue to
address the protection of civilians in the context of

specific conflicts. Each conflict has its own causes and
characteristics, and efforts to address humanitarian
problems, including the protection of civilians, cannot
be separated from the peace process and political
situation of a specific conflict. The protection of
civilians cannot be addressed in isolation, nor can
superficial symptoms be our sole concern. Since the
country-specific consideration mechanism of the
Council has been effective, and in order to avoid
overlap and repetition, we are not in favour of
establishing a special working group on the protection
of civilians.

Finally, we are willing to work together with
other members of the Council to strive for more
constructive results in the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts through pragmatic and effective
efforts.

