Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's meeting on this exceedingly
critical international issue. We thank Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing on the report
(S/2016/589) of the Secretary-General. We also thank
Ambassador Joao Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union, for his briefing on
the activities of the Procurement Working Group of the
Joint Commission. And we thank Ambassador Roman
Oyarzun Marchesi, Permanent Representative of Spain,
for the briefing he made in his capacity as Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

The agreement reached with Iran on the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), after years of
complex and very difficult negotiations, was swiftly
followed by the unanimous adoption by the Security
Council one year ago ofresolution2231 (2015), endorsing
the JCPOA, which came into effect three months later
on adoption day on 18 October 2015. Furthermore, the
submission by the Director-General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of a report confirming
that Iran had taken the actions specified in the JCPOA
brought the agreement to the landmark implementation
day and the lifting of sanctions against Iran. From
then on, concerted efforts by Iran and the international
community have been made that will hopefully lead,
in the long-term, to the adoption of a draft resolution
on termination day, in which the IAEA Director-
General will declare the broader conclusion according
to which all nuclear material in Iran is exclusively used
for peaceful purposes - hopefully at a time by which
Iran will be fully integrated into the international
community and able to make a meaningful contribution
to international peace and security, given its importance
as a regional and international player.

The conclusion of the JCPOA was a decisive step
forward in strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation
regime and a demonstration that, with a spirit of
compromise and political will, the most difficult
issues in international relations could be the subject of
a peaceful, diplomatic solution. The JCPOA was also
a ground-breaking development in the Middle East,
where diplomacy had been unable to score any gains
since the peace treaties concluded between Egypt and
Jordan with Israel many years ago.

The JCPOA prompted a fundamental shift in
the Iranian nuclear programme. Its conclusion and
implementation confirms how the international
community and Iran are willing to forge a new
relationship based on mutual respect and cooperation.
It is our expectation that the smooth implementation
of the JCPOA - confirming the exclusively peaceful
nature of Iran's nuclear programme - will contribute
to building trust and deepening expert cooperation in
all areas, including on issues pertaining to peace and
security in the Middle East.

In the past six months since implementation day and
the issuance of a note by the President of the Security
Council setting forth arrangements and procedures for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), concrete
steps have been taken in structuring a framework for the
resolution's implementation, through the establishment
of a channel for communication between members of the
Council and the Joint Commission; in the establishment
of operational linkages with the Procurement Working
Group; in building discussions with representatives of
the Security Council; and in setting up a website for
those interested in the implementation of the resolution.

We have taken due note of the transparency, outreach
and guidance measures developed by the Facilitator
and the Secretariat with a view to improving the
implementation of the resolution and its understanding,
mainly concerning procedures related to the submission
of proposals to the Council, which retains the central
role in reviewing and deciding on procurement and
supplying of nuclear-related transfers and other activities.

We deem it absolutely essential that the J CPOA be
rigorously implemented. To that end, the strengthening
of mutual trust is a fundamental prerequisite, by
keeping dialogue and diplomatic channels permanently
open in a spirit of goodwill to resolve all contentious
issues arising from the agreement's implementation and
by guaranteeing that the Iranian nuclear programme
remains exclusively for peaceful purposes, an outcome
that would benefit nuclear non-proliferation worldwide.

WefullyconcurwiththeFacilitator'srecommendation
that the Security Council must ensure that the JCPOA,
as stated in resolution 2231 (2015), be conducive to
promoting and facilitating the development of normal
economic and trade contacts and cooperation with Iran.
We call on the JCPOA signatories to do their utmost
to deepen political and diplomatic cooperation towards
appropriate solutions to the conflicts in the Middle
East - in Syria, Iraq and Yemen - and to establish
real unity ofpurpose in the fight against terrorism. Iran
is a great regional Power whose cooperation is key for
the attainment of solutions to the conflicts in the region.
We firmly believe that, if unlocked, a new chapter in
the relations between Western Powers and Iran could
provide bright prospects for peace and security in the
entire region.

Finally, we appeal to the Iranian authorities to
continue implementing the JCPOA provisions with
the same rigour and in good faith, and to persevere
in strengthening trust with its partners, thereby
contributing to the economic and social development
of the country and the easing of tensions in the region.

