I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over the Security Council this month. I am pleased to participate in this meeting, as my country is a main party concerned with this item. The Israeli occupation forces, several days ago, once again committed a series of acts of aggression targeting the Syrian Arab Republic, using guided missiles that were fired over Lebanese territory, with the aim of enhancing the morale of the remaining proxy terrorist groups. That aggression is a blatant violation of international law, the Charter of the United Nations and related resolutions of the Security Council, as well as of the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement. Such acts of aggression would not have been committed had the Security Council not failed for decades to impose the implementation of its relevant resolutions regarding the Arab-Israeli conflict and had there not been unlimited support for that rogue entity from certain permanent members of the Security Council. Such behaviour has encouraged Israel to continue to repeatedly commit crimes, violations and State terrorism without even the most nominal accountability. This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations. The Palestinian question and ending the Israeli occupation of occupied Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan, have been issues on the agenda of the largest number of meetings, resolutions and statements allocated to this topic. Unfortunately, owing to the pressure of some permanent members of the Council, our Organization is still unable to find a just and comprehensive solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict or to implement its relevant resolutions, namely, resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981), or to oblige Israel to end its occupation of the Arab territories. The inability of the United Nations has encouraged some to shirk their legal commitments and the agreed terms of reference, seek to twist the facts and entrench the occupation. That has been seen over the past few months through unilateral and provocative actions such as the United States Administration considering occupied Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, its declaration of what it referred to as recognition of Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan and its attempt to legitimize settlement activity. The Syrian Arab Republic, along with the overwhelming majority of Member States, strongly condemns those decisions and considers them unilateral conduct on the part of a party that lacks the legal, moral or political authority to determine the fate of the peoples of the world or of the territories that are part and parcel of the Syrian Arab Republic and occupied Palestine. These American practices in support of the Israeli aggression, occupation and settlement in the occupied Arab territories are not only a violation of international law and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, but they also represent deliberate political and security blackmail of our countries and the peoples of the region. The past period has witnessed systematic and dangerous Israeli practices through which the occupation authorities have sought to consolidate their control and impose their will on the occupied Syrian Golan, including, but not limited to: holding a meeting of the Israeli Government in the occupied Syrian Golan, seeking to organize illegal local elections there and concluding contracts and granting licences to usurp its natural resources. 91/99 92/99 The most recent instance in this respect was the looting of the property of Syrian citizens and their displacement in order to set up a project to generate power using wind turbines in an area of approximately 6,000 dunums in a number of locations surrounding the towns of Majdal Shams, Ayn Quniya, Baq'ata and Masada and to continue settlement activities, and forcing our people in the Golan to register the land that they inherited from their ancestors with the Israel Land Authority, under penalty of confiscation of the protesters' lands. All that constitutes flagrant violations of international law and international humanitarian law, which some parties address with double standards and hypocrisy that exceeds all limits. Unfortunately, none of these issues attracted the attention of the Special Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov, to be included in his monthly briefings to the Council. Such gross ignorance represents an ethical and political breach of the duties of his mandate, in contravention of the principles and rules of procedure applicable in the United Nations, thus rendering his mandate illegitimate. Finally, my Government stresses that the occupied Syrian Golan is part and parcel of the Syrian Arab Republic. It must be returned in conformity with the 4 June 1967 borders, as per international law. That is the main priority of Syrian policy and the compass that we will never divert from. Syria reaffirms its support for the right of the Palestinian people to determine their own destiny and establish an independent State on all their national soil, with Jerusalem as its capital, while guaranteeing the right of return to refugees, in accordance with resolution 194 (III). My country reiterates its demand that Palestine be allowed to become a full-fledged Member of the United Nations.
