Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev for his briefing, and through
him I would like to extend the United Kingdom's
appreciation for all the work carried out by United
Nations staff working on mine action, especially in the
United Nations Mine Action Service.

I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2018/623) on the implementation of resolution
2365 (2017). The United Kingdom reiterates its support
for the resolution, in which, for the first time, the Council
calls for action against the lasting threat posed by
landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) to civilians and peacekeeping
and humanitarian personnel. Twenty years after the
adoption of the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention,
landmines remain a major threat. As discussed in the
Secretary-General's report, landmines continue to kill
and maim indiscriminately. It is civilians, and all too
often children, who are the victims of those brutal
weapons. Although a great deal has been done and
achieved to rid the world of those horrific weapons, it
is clear that more remains to be done.
The United Kingdom fully agrees that instruments
of international law provide protection against the
proliferation of explosive weapons. We remain fully
committed to the Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons, which we chaired in 2017, the Anti-Personnel
Mine Ban Convention and the Convention on Cluster
Munitions. We call on all States not already party to
those conventions to accede to those key international
disarmament initiatives without delay. It is only when
we stop producing those atrocious weapons, that people
will stop being killed by them.

The United Kingdom will continue to uphold its own
commitments under the Convention. We are working to
clear landmines in the Falkland Islands, the only part
of our territory that is contaminated with landmines.
We are also proud to offer substantial international
assistance. Last year, we tripled our funding for mine
action and will spend $130 million over three years to
tackle the humanitarian and development impact of
landmines and other explosive remnants of war. That
support is making 150 square kilometres of land safe,
which will help 800,000 people and ensure that, every
year, over 100,000 people - especially children - fully
understand the dangers posed by landmines and how to
avoid them.

We welcome the significant role played by the
United Nations, in particular its focus on strengthening
national capacity and the importance of partnerships.
In support of that, we provide funding to the Voluntary
Trust Fund of the United Nations Mine Action Service,
and, through the United Kingdom military's Defence
Explosive Ordnance Disposal, Munitions and Search
Training Regiment, have supported the United Nations
development of improvised explosive device disposal
standards. We welcome the completion of those
standards and recognize the role that they will play
in ensuring the safety of United Nations personnel
who take part in demining activity. As identified in
the Secretary-General's report, there is an appalling
trend of increased use of improvised explosive devices
by non-State actors. The United Kingdom supports
Resolution 2370, (2017), which restricts terrorist actors'
access to weapons. We call for additional stringent
national measures to deny terrorists ready access to
weapons and explosive precursors. We also support
General Assembly resolution 71/72, on countering
the threat posed by improvised explosive devices, the
second of its kind.

International cooperation is vital to tackling
the criminal and terrorist networks facilitating and
using IEDs. The United Kingdom is actively engaged
in facilitating discussions among the international
community on the topic of IEDs and mine action.
The conference that we hosted in May considered
the challenges of realizing a mine-free world and
looked at how we could overcome them. Much of
the remaining clearance challenge stems from recent
indiscriminate contamination by mines and IEDs.
It is vital that we continue to assess the challenges
ahead and collaboratively consider the means to meet
such challenges. We must augment our efforts where
we can so that we can collectively tackle the scourge
of landmines.

