Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Like
others, let me also add our warm welcome to the
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. Moratinos
Cuyaube and for his comprehensive overview of the
OSCE activities under Spanish leadership this year.

Looking around the table I notice seven Council
members are also members of the OSCE. It is no
coincidence that there are numerous areas that Minister
Moratinos Cuyaube outlined in which the interests and
work of the Council are also the interests and work of
the OSCE. That overlap is much appreciated.

I think it would also be useful for Council
members, particularly those who are not OSCE
members, if Minister Moratinos Cuyaube would
elaborate on two particular areas of interest to the
Council. One of them is Afghanistan, which is an
OSCE partner State. Afghanistan has expressed interest
in deepening cooperation with the OSCE to assist in
strengthening its security and democratic development.
In a recent statement to the OSCE Permanent Council,
the Afghan delegation noted particular interest in
working with the OSCE on border control and
management and police training and on combating the
trafficking of illicit drugs and supporting future
elections.

OSCE has very strong credentials and expertise
in those areas, and I would be interested in learning if
the Minister has a moment to describe for us the
potential he sees for the increased cooperation and
activity of the organization in Afghanistan.

The second issue I would like to pursue is one
that has been raised by a number of other delegations,
and that is the situation in Georgia and the immediate
region. In the light of the 6 August rocket incident on
Georgian territory, and other security incidents that
have heightened tensions in the Georgian regions of
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, what concrete steps has
the OSCE taken in Georgia that contribute to bolstering
security on the ground, to deterring future such
incidents and to the promotion of greater confidence
between the sides? Similarly, beyond capacity-
building, has the OSCE considered reviving a border
monitoring mission for Georgia?

Are there any other steps that the Minister might
want to share with us that OSCE may be planning to
take in Georgia to bolster security and promote
confidence-building measures?

