Mr. Messone (Gabon) ( spoke in French): Madam
President, my delegation commends you for having
convened this debate on the situation in Haiti. We
would like also to thank President Clinton and the
Secretary-General for the detailed information they
have provided us concerning the situation there.

This debate is taking place following the second
round of presidential elections in Haiti, in a context of
renewed hope. We welcome the presence among us of
President Preval as well as the role he played in the
successful resumption of the electoral process.

Gabon has a particular interest in this debate. In
the course of our history we have been the beneficiary
of contributions from Haiti; thus we have focused our
continued attention on the situation in that country
since 2004, and in that spirit we made a small
contribution of $1 million following the January 2010
earthquake. My delegation would also like to address
the political, security and humanitarian situation there.

Gabon, which has paid close attention to the
information that has been provided to us, would like to
acknowledge the considerable contribution made by
the international community in Haiti since 2004. Our
joint efforts and our contribution will be more than
ever necessary to ensure a sustainable recovery in
Haiti, in particular to allow that State to resume the
provision of basic services to its citizens.

The political environment is currently reflective
of the results of the second round of presidential
elections, which were announced by the Electoral
Council. We commend the efforts of the political

stakeholders and of the Haitian people during the
particularly sensitive period between the two rounds of
voting. It is our hope that the conclusion of the
electoral process will enable the country's institutions
to resume functioning as normal. In addition, the
conclusion of the electoral process must lead to much-
desired reforms and the consolidation of the
democratic institutions, which is necessary to the
development of the country. This reform process
requires reconciliation among the Haitian people, who
have for so long lived in a context of deep social
division. Gabon therefore calls on the political
leadership and civil society to work jointly to that end
so as to create conditions conducive to a
comprehensive, sustainable recovery in Haiti.

The security situation has improved in recent
months, owing mainly to the enhanced operational
effectiveness of the Haitian National Police, as
reflected in the level of security during the electoral
process. That is one of the gains achieved by
MINUSTAH, which has been in place since 2004. The
military and police components of the Mission, along
with the Haitian National Police, worked jointly to
provide security during the process as a whole. Gabon
welcomes this fruitful cooperation and the results we
see today.

However, the security situation must continue to
improve. Efforts to that end must lead not only to
increased security in urban areas but also, and in a
spirit of urgency, to the protection of vulnerable
groups- women and children. It is therefore
important to enhance security in camps for displaced
persons, where many people are still staying.

MINUSTAH and Haiti's other partners must
continue to provide assistance in strengthening the
human and organizational capacity of the National
Police so that it can tackle other security problems and
other types of criminal activity in Haiti, including the
uptick in gang violence and drug trafficking.

MINUSTAH is today more than ever involved in
the process of the recovery and reconstruction of the
country's institutions, economy and infrastructure. We
wish to commend the determination and
professionalism of its staff and hope to see the rapid
implementation of the integrated strategic framework,
whose operationalization will enhance the coordination
of the activities of MINUSTAH and the United Nations
country team.
Similarly, we welcome the high level of regional
and subregional cooperation, characterized, inter alia,
by the support of the Organization of American States
and of the Caribbean Community, whose contributions
to the reconstruction efforts represent an important
pillar.

Additionally, my country deeply appreciates the
added value provided by decentralized cooperation,
which has allowed for the mobilization and rapid
deployment of humanitarian assistance, particularly in
the context of combating the cholera epidemic.

We must learn from other attempts to coordinate
the activities of the international community in Haiti,
including the example of the interim cooperation
framework and the framework for State governance
and reform. The action plan for reconstruction and
development must open up new prospects, in particular
with respect to ownership of the process by the Haitian
people, both in Haiti and abroad, and the identification
of structural, institutional and sectoral priorities.

But above and beyond that, it is important for the
international community to honour its commitments.
Haiti's future, as well as its ability to deal with the
urgent challenges facing it following the earthquake,
require a democratic, peaceful transfer of power; the
implementation of institutional and political reforms;
strong support on the part of the international
community for the new Government; and capacity on
the part of the new Government to give momentum to
economic development by promoting investment and
creatingjobs.

In conclusion, Gabon reiterates its support for the
efforts of the international community to assist Haiti as
well as for those of MINUSTAH. Finally, we endorse
the presidential statement that will be adopted at the
end of this debate.

