I wish to thank Acting Special Representative Williams for her briefing. I commend her for the work she has done towards achieving peace in Libya and expect that she will continue to contribute to peace, stability and development in the country in her future role. I also welcome Ambassador Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya, to this meeting. The current situation in Libya is showing positive momentum, and the international community should seize the rare window of opportunity to promote lasting peace and sustainable development in the country. I would like to emphasize the following four points. First, we must ensure the implementation of the ceasefire agreement. China welcomes the signing of the ceasefire agreement on 23 October between the parties to the Libyan conflict within the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. We commend the political will shown by all parties to achieve a ceasefire, and we thank Acting Special Representative Williams and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya for their work. The ceasefire in Libya is an important positive result of implementing the Secretary-General's global ceasefire initiative and the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative, which is good news for the region and the world. Only when the ceasefire agreement is implemented effectively on the ground can the hard-won peace gains be truly consolidated. China calls for the establishment of a mutually acceptable ceasefire monitoring mechanism as soon as possible. We hope that the United Nations and all the relevant parties will form a plan as soon as possible in order to continue to play a constructive role and maintain and consolidate the current positive momentum. Secondly, we must continue to promote political dialogue. China appreciates the efforts made by Tunisia, Morocco, Egypt and other regional and neighbouring countries to promote intra-Libyan dialogue and welcomes the resumption of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum. The international community should fully respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Libya and insist on advancing the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process under the auspices of the United Nations. We look forward to the Secretary-General's appointment of a Special Envoy as soon as possible. All parties in Libya should focus on the interests of the country and its population, continue to build up mutual trust, resolve differences and reach consensus on and implement relevant political arrangements as soon as possible. This relates not only to the future of Libya but also peace in the entire region. At the same time, economic development must be integrated into the political process in order to lay a solid foundation for lasting peace in Libya. Thirdly, we must resolutely combat terrorism. Terrorism in and around Libya remains an important threat to international and regional security. The international community must maintain a high degree of vigilance, strengthen coordination and cooperation, jointly respond to challenges and resolutely combat all forms of terrorism. Preventing the cross-border movement of foreign terrorist fighters should be included in the overall consideration for resolving the Libyan issue in order to avoid a spillover effect that threats the security of neighbouring countries. Fourthly, sanction tools must be applied prudently and steadily. We have always believed that sanctions are a means but not an end and should always serve the political settlement of relevant issues. Under the current circumstances, the arms embargo should be strictly enforced, and any actions that aggravate conflicts, such as military intervention, should be avoided. At the same time the implementation of sanctions should avoid harming the overall national interests of Libya and the normal livelihoods and humanitarian needs of the people, especially to avoid a negative impact on Libya's fight against the coronavirus disease pandemic. The crisis in Libya has been ongoing for nearly 10 years, and there is now a dawn of hope. However, the political process is still very fragile and needs to be maintained with the support of the international community. China will continue to work with all parties to help Libya achieve long-term stability and prosperity at an early date.
