Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I thank the United States
presidency for convening this open debate, which
comes at a time of great uncertainty in the Middle East.

In Syria, we entered 2017 with the same array of
factors that had poisoned all the efforts to reach peace
last year. Military logic still prevails over the political
will to reconcile and the blockade of cities and use of
starvation as a means of warfare continue unabated.
The use of non-conventional and prohibited weapons
seems to be the new norm and perpetrators are walking
away without punishment.

We regret that, owing to the eighth veto of the
Russian Federation last week, the Council has once again
failed to uphold its duties. The Council's continuous
inability to address chemical attacks in Syria is leading
to further impunity and sending a signal to perpetrators
that they can get away with murder.

Proxy warfare in Syria and the fact that foreign-
controlled militias are deepening their roots on the
ground are increasingly concerning. Sustainable peace
and the stabilization of Syria require expedient and
organized withdrawal of those militias. This issue bears
particular importance for the future of Syrian State
institutions. Ukraine condemns in the strongest terms
the terrorist attack in Rashidin on 15 April during the
evacuation of the towns of Foah and Kefraya.

The highly volatile security environment in Syria
continues to aggravate the humanitarian situation.
The humanitarian disaster is a reflection of the overall
situation on the ground. The Council must be proactive
in addressing this crucial issue. A more effective
monitoring, verification and enforcing mechanism is
badly needed.

With regard to the Syrian political track, today
we are clearly at a very low point. Following the latest
two rounds of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, it is fair to
say that, unfortunately, we have not seen much desired
progress on either of the 3+1 baskets. Why is that the
case? The answer is obvious - it is a lack of political
will on the part of the Syrian regime to negotiate in
good faith on the core issues. Ukraine is disappointed
by the absence of real results from the Astana process
and the ceasefire negotiated within its framework. We
are afraid that the stalled political process may set
in motion a vast number of alternative scenarios that
nobody will like. Damascus and its allies need to realize
that the ultimate victory standpoint is a mirage which
will lead nowhere, prolong the crisis and contribute to
increasing extremism.

We are convinced that any political progress would
be unsustainable without a clear adherence to the word
and spirit ofthe 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), resolution 2254 (2015) and a transparent and
strictly scheduled political transition. We hope that
the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva will resume in May.
That will allow time for Damascus and its allies to
demonstrate a change - a change in mindset, in
intentions and attitude.

The situation in Lebanon remains key to the
security and stability of the Levant. It is therefore
important that, after the election of the president and
the formation of the Government, the political process
maintain a positive momentum. The stability of Lebanon
remains, to a high degree, hostage to the developments
in Syria and wider regional dynamics. That is why
there is an urgent need at this stage to assist Lebanon
in establishing its effective control of the border with
Syria and prevent illegal arms transfers.

Ukraine sees an urgent need to put an end to
violence in Yemen. We are concerned by the rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation in that country.
The international community faces an imminent risk
of seeing an entire generation of Yemenis traumatized
by hunger and war. This is not only an immediate
humanitarian challenge, but a long-term challenge for
the stability of Yemen and the wider region.

Reaching a negotiated political solution remains
complicated. As the parties continue the strife to improve
their military positions, the Council's unity on Yemen
is badly needed to strengthen the position ofthe Special
Envoy and the Secretary-General in their attempts to
break the current deadlock and give peace a chance.
We call on the parties to resume direct talks without
preconditions and to negotiate in the most flexible and
constructive manner that would enable them to swiftly
reach a final and comprehensive agreement.

We reiterate our concern about the clear upsurge
in 2017 in rocket attacks launched by the Houthi forces
in Yemen against objects located on Saudi Arabian
territory, as well as those on maritime vessels operating
near Bab Al-Mandab. Such attacks should cease
immediately and the necessary steps should be taken to
de-escalate the situation. The Al-Houthi-Saleh forces
must relinquish their arsenal of ballistic missiles under
any future peace deal. No long-term settlement of the
conflict is sustainable without that.

More must be done to prevent greater numbers
of sophisticated weapons from reaching Yemen from
abroad. Without a meaningful dialogue, the result could
be a disaster, and the only actors that would benefit
are the terrorist groups that are increasingly active in
Yemen. It is extremely worrying that we continue to
see Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula demonstrating
a sustained ability to expand its operational support
base in Yemen and exploit the deep rifts in war-torn
Yemeni society.

With regard to Palestine and Israel, Ukraine has
consistently supported the Middle East peace process
and the principle of a two-State solution, with Israel
and Palestine coexisting in peace and security. The
lack of direct dialogue, along with a stalled negotiating
process, has led to an extremely unpredictable and
explosive situation. As a member of the Security
Council, Ukraine firmly believes - and shares the
belief of the current President of the Council - that
peace can emerge only through direct negotiations.

Underestimating the ability of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and of Al-Qaida, to
capitalize on the grievances in the currently unresolved
Israeli-Palestinian conflict could backfire in very
unexpected and dangerous ways. In order to prevent
such a scenario, the root causes of the conflict must be
addressed. Ending the violence and de-escalating the
situation are immediate priorities. All sides should take
concrete steps to calm the tensions, bring the parties
back to the negotiating table, renew the peace process
and re-inject some confidence into the fading concept
of a two-State solution.

The rapidly evolving terrorist threat transcends all
boundaries in any region. It is benefiting from existing
conflicts and continuing to destabilize countries
throughout the Middle East. We are concerned about the
fact that despite some serious military setbacks, ISIL is
still a genuine threat to regional and global security.
Mosul, for example, where the military operation to
liberate the city is ongoing, is rightly seen as ISIL's last
stronghold in Iraq. Its people have suffered enormously
in the past two years under ISIL's despotic rule, but
they now finally have a chance to be freed from the the
tentacles of their monstrous terrorist masters.

While we await the ultimate and inevitable
conventional military defeat of ISIL, it is vital that we
formulate a day-after strategy by which regional actors
should play a leading role in preventing the resurgence
of ISIL's clones. Without a clear way out of the
multiple crises that are tearing apart the Middle East,
particularly in Syria, Yemen and Iraq - coupled with
the simmering Israeli-Palestinian conflict - it will
be impossible to contain the growing threat of violent
extremism and the global spread of terrorist groups.

