Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Muburi-Muita for his briefing this morning.

The seriousness of the threats to international
peace and security in Africa, and particularly the
situations in Somalia, the Sudan and Libya, underline
the need for the international community to work
together effectively. A robust partnership between the
African Union (AU) and the United Nations should be
central to that. In that regard, the quality of the United
Nations presence in Addis Ababa is an important
factor.

As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General outlined, the United Nations Office to the
African Union has, since its establishment last year and
under his leadership, helped to improve the
effectiveness of the United Nations engagement with
the AU. The meetings of the Joint Task Force have also
played a role in building a better and more coordinated
relationship between the United Nations Secretariat
and the African Union Commission.

This is against a backdrop of continued progress
in the institutional development of the AU. This is a
key element in good cooperation. It has been facilitated
by crucial support to capacity-building from the United
Nations, the European Union (EU) and bilateral
partners.

The United Kingdom welcomes the progress
made so far in the United Nations Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme for the AU. The EU's assistance
to the AU on peace and security issues, totalling €1
billion, is a major source of predictable and sustainable
funding. The African Peace Facility helps to support
the costs of deploying United Nations-authorized AU
peace support operations.

The United Kingdom is a key donor to the AU
peace and security efforts in its own right, including
through recent uncaveated contributions totalling $5.5
million to the United Nations Trust Fund for the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), as well
as through the training of peacekeepers and support for
mediation and peace support operations.

Joint AU-United Nations activities for AMISOM
are an example of the vital cooperation between the
two organizations. We commend Uganda and Burundi
for their continued commitment to AMISOM. at great
sacrifice. The United Kingdom greatly welcomes
continued consultation and cooperation on Somalia.

The situation in the Sudan continues to be a high
priority, on which the AU and the United Nations must
work together. We would like to take this opportunity
to commend once again the cooperation between
President Mbeki, as Chair of the AU High-Level
Implementation Panel, and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Menkerios, with the support of
Ethiopian Prime Minister Zenawi, in facilitating the
Abyei interim agreement. We must continue
cooperation at all levels to ensure that both of the
parties follow through on this agreement and that they
urgently reach agreement on all outstanding issues
relating to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and
post-secession arrangements.

The United Kingdom looks forward to greater
coordination between the Security Council and the AU
High-Level Panel on Libya. It was helpful that the
High-Level Panel could brief us on their work last
week. In line with the aims of the contact group, which
serves to coordinate international policy on Libya, we
welcome the AU's efforts to work with and through the
United Nations Special Envoy to find a solution to the
crisis based on the legitimate demands of the Libyan
people. We also welcome the AU's commitment to
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011).

All of these issues demand that the AU and the
United Nations have a strong relationship, including
between their respective member States. Here is the
opportunity to have honest, frank and constructive
dialogue, including on issues where we may disagree.
We look forward to working closely with the AU on
these important issues in the future.

