Mrs. Bailey: Like other speakers before me,
let me start by commending you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important Security Council open
debate on the theme "Post-conflict peacebuilding:
review of the peacebuilding architecture". I would
also like to thank the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Kamau; the former Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Skoog; as well as Ambassador De Aguiar Patriota and
Ambassador Rosenthal, for their respective briefings.

Today's open debate is very timely, as we are
reaching the final stages of the review process of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. The African
Union (AU) attaches importance to that process, which
represents, in our view, an excellent opportunity not
only to improve the orientation and functioning of
the institutional components of the peacebuilding
architecture, but also to strengthen its effectiveness in
helping the countries concerned to lay the foundation
for durable peace and development.

As everyone is aware, Africa has been the major
regional focus of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture over the past decade. All of the countries on
the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission are from
Africa. African countries have received approximately
80 per cent of the Peacebuilding Fund's allocations over
the period 2007 to 2014. Therefore, the experience ofthe
African countries on the Peacebuilding Commission's
agenda offers a vital source of lessons learned that
could benefit the ongoing review process.

Despite the general improvement in the conflict
situations on the continent, recent experiences have
clearly shown that the risk of relapse into conflict
remains very high and that the peacebuilding gains are
still very fragile, in particular during the early stages
of a transition, as demonstrated by the Ebola crisis
in West Africa. It is important, therefore, to identify
policies and programmes that allow three initiatives
to be undertaken: first, addressing the root causes
of conflicts; secondly, speeding up reconstruction
activities; and, thirdly, consolidating peace, thereby
preventing a return to violence.

Throughout that process, international support
will amount to little if no corresponding effort exists
to mobilize adequate resources for the implementation
of the priorities defined. Needless to say, the challenges
facing countries emerging from conflict are enormous.
They often include the need to transform war-
weakened economies and highly polarized political
and social relations, as well as the need to strengthen
the State apparatus so that Governments can fulfil the
roles critical to social and economic well-being. No
significant progress can be made without adequate
financial resources and technical assistance to assist
the countries concerned in facing those challenges.
Over the past decade, the African Union has
increasingly affirmed its readiness and capacity to
engage in peacebuilding activities based on the African
Union post-conflict reconstruction and development
policy, adopted in 2006, as well as on the relevant
provisions of the protocol relating to the establishment
ofthe Peace and Security Council ofthe African Union.
As part of the implementation of the policy, the AU
Commission has undertaken a number of measures.
They include the identification of experts to be included
in an African experts database on peacebuilding, the
development of guidelines for the implementation
of specific activities related to the policy and the
organization of assessment missions to countries
emerging from conflict. The AU has also raised funds
to support quick-impact projects in countries emerging
from conflict, including Liberia, Cote d'Ivoire, the
Comoros and South Sudan, so as to lay the foundation
for long-term sustainable development. In addition,
in 2012, the AU launched the African Solidarity
Initiative, which is aimed at mobilizing a higher level
of support, particularly from Africa, for post-conflict
reconstruction and development efforts. The initiative
was designed to encourage, motivate and empower
African countries to begin systematically offering
assistance to post-conflict countries.

In that context, the AU Peace and Security Council
made the following suggestions to the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for advancing the
partnership between the two institutions, based on the
principles of complementarity, comparative advantage
and collaboration:

First, the PBC and the AU should cooperate to
develop a common assessment of the nature and scope
of the peacebuilding challenges facing the countries
concerned. They should also agree on a division of
tasks, with each institution responsible for providing
support in the peacebuilding sphere.

Secondly, the PBC and the AU should develop a
more frequent and structured dialogue. In that regard,
the first engagement between the PBC and the African
Union's Peace and Security Council, in 2014, should be
followed up and become institutionalized so as to gain
greater coherence on strategic priorities between the
PBC and the PSC.

Thirdly, the high-level exchanges between the AU
and the PBC need to be underpinned by a desk-to-desk
exchange between the Peacebuilding Support Office,
the relevant departments of the AU Commission and
the relevant parts of regional mechanisms.

Fourthly, the PBC should encourage AU efforts,
including by supporting the African Solidarity Initiative
in developing its database of support from African
countries to other countries emerging from conflict.

In conclusion, the AU hopes that the ongoing
United Nations review will provide concrete results that
will improve the implementation of the noble agenda of
peacebuilding. For its part, the AU remains committed
to assuming its responsibilities in that regard in full
cooperation with the United Nations.

