Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to
participate in this debate. At the same time, I should like to
acknowledge the report of the Secretary-General and to
thank him for it, as well as for the introductory comments
that he made this morning.

I should like to begin by highlighting the important
role of the Security Council in the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) through its
peacekeeping operations. It is clear from the statements
made during this debate that there are two essential
prerequisites for such a process to be successful in a peace-
building environment. On the one hand, the conditions for
the DDR process must be set out in the peace agreements
signed by the parties to a conflict, while, on the other, the
financial means required for the implementation of the
process must be assured. These two prerequisites are
essential for any DDR process, but they are not sufficient
to ensure its success. It is worthwhile to point out, however,
that there have been some successful cases of DDR in
which neither the Security Council nor any peacekeeping
operation has been involved.

In his report, the Secretary-General clearly presents the
experience of peacekeeping operations in the processes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. We share in
particular his suggestions about the need for the United
Nations to have at its disposal sufficient information about
experts who could provide assistance to the Organization
when the United Nations is called upon to participate in
DDR activities. Furthermore, we consider his comments
about the need to provide training to participants in
peacekeeping missions on practical aspects of the DDR
process to be relevant. However, we should like to make
our own assessment with regard to the involvement of the
United Nations in this area.

The signing of a peace agreement putting an end to an
armed conflict should be seen as an achievement deserving
the broadest support of the international community.
However, the stage of managing peace is much more
difficult and tends to take place without much fanfare and
without making great headlines in the press. Hence, there
is a risk of losing the initial international support that was
generated for peace. When this happens and the support of
the international community falls off, or when the
international community is slow to react to a post-conflict
situation, the risk of a return to conflict increases.

We therefore recognize the importance of giving the
United Nations effective tools to enable it to provide
continuous and uninterrupted support for post-conflict
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities.
Peacekeeping missions are important instruments for that
purpose, but we must not lose sight of the real causes of
conflict, which may be many and may require a long-term
response.

One area of great concern for Colombia is the wide
availability of weapons in conflict zones and the illegal
traffic in weapons. We believe that the international
community has now become aware of the need to
exercise stricter control over the trade in small arms. The
upcoming Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons will provide a great opportunity for
us to respond to this factor, which destabilizes peace.

The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process requires great trust to be established between the
parties. Post-conflict reintegration, in particular, can call
for economic rehabilitation or the establishment of new
governmental institutions, which might exceed the limits
of a peacekeeping operation. In such cases, we need to
turn to the modalities of cooperation for development of
other United Nations bodies, and we must respect their
mandates.

In this context, we wish to highlight the work carried
out by other bodies of the United Nations system in the
process of reintegration, and we welcome the ever-
growing participation of the World Bank. This is a stage
that requires considerable investment to generate
permanent sources of employment, rebuild the social
fabric and establish new institutions. The broad
participation of various international actors is therefore
required at this peace-building stage. The calamities
caused by war have worsened the living conditions of
millions of people throughout the world. Let us ensure
that indifference or an improvisational approach on the
part of the international community to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes does not
reverse progress on the road to peace.
