Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative of the Republic of Korea in
holding this open debate on the question of protecting
civilians in armed conflict. We welcome Mr. Kim
Sung-hwan, President of the Security Council for the
month of February, as he presides over today's meeting.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing. We listened attentively to the statements
by Ms. Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, and Mr. Spoerri, Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee for the Red Cross.

Civilians represent the most vulnerable groups in
wars and armed conflicts. In order to protect innocent
civilians from harm resulting from armed conflicts,
the Council has in the recent past adopted numerous
resolutions and presidential statements, thereby playing
an active role in promoting the protection of civilians,
including women and children. However, civilians
in many countries and regions are still subjected to
devastation and harm as a result of armed conflict. The
international community still faces an arduous task
in terms of protecting civilians. China supports the
Council in conducting in-depth discussions on the major
challenges it confronts in considering the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts, effectively promoting
related work so as to achieve more constructive results.

I wish to highlight four points.

First, protecting civilians represents an unshirkable
responsibility facing all parties to a conflict. All parties
to an armed conflict should implement in earnest the
Geneva Conventions, international humanitarian
law and the relevant resolutions of the Council by
making unremitting efforts to protect civilians. The
Governments concerned have the primary responsibility
for protecting innocent civilians in armed conflict.
The concern and help of the international community
should not replace the responsibility and obligation
of the country concerned, related countries and their
Governments, as well as the parties in response
to conduct that violates human rights. As well as
contributing to international humanitarian law, to
pursue accountability and judicial justice, the first line
of action is to fully utilize the domestic judicial system
as the main channel.

Secondly, in carrying out actions to protect civilians
in armed conflict, it is essential to comply with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular such principles as respecting
national sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. It is
essential to avoid politicizing the protection of civilians.
It is inadmissible to make arbitrary interpretations of
Security Council mandates in the name of protecting
civilians. It is even less so to carry out regime change
under the same pretext. When it comes to protecting
civilians, the Council should adopt a consistent position
in all situations on its agenda. Double standards or select
practices can only damage the authority and the role
of the Council. When conducting humanitarian relief
operations for the purpose of protecting civilians, it is
imperative to observe such principles as humanitarian
neutrality and objectivity. Only by winning the trust and
support of host countries can we ensure the effective
implementation of humanitarian relief operations.

Thirdly, in order to strengthen the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, it is essential to make
greater effort in preventing and solving conflicts. The
Council should place the protection of civilians in the
larger framework of peacefully resolving conflicts.
It should actively conduct preventive diplomacy to
prevent and contain conflicts. The Council should go
out of its way to urge all parties to conflict to resolve
their differences through such peaceful means as
dialogue and negotiation to achieve political settlement
and minimize civilian casualties. Resorting to military
means can more often than not result in bigger crises,
resulting in more bloodshed and civilian casualties.

Fourthly, when considering a protection-of-
civilians mandate for a peacekeeping operation, it is
crucial to respect fundamental principles, such as the
consent of host countries. Peacekeeping operations
should always strictly observe the mandate of the
Council by minimizing civilian casualties. However,
they should also respect the sovereignty of the host
country, ensure objectivity and impartiality and avoid
becoming a party to the conflict.

Past experience and lessons learned have shown
that the appropriate relationship between the two
aforementioned parties will have a significant impact
on the effective implementation of peacekeeping
operations. We should also acknowledge that relying
solely on the deployment of peacekeeping operations
cannot resolve the fundamental issue of the protection
of civilians. The Council and the international
community should consider the long term by paying
close attention to and fully taking into account the
conditions prevailing in the host country. As a priority,
they should take steps to strengthen the host country's
security and judicial sectors and to improve its ability
to effectively protect civilians on its own.

