Mr. De Mistura: I thank you, Madam President,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council. We
believe that the timing is very appropriate, in particular
because the focus is on Idlib. We have been hearing
about it over the past few days. We are all terribly
concerned because all of the elements exist for a perfect
storm, with potentially devastating humanitarian and
other consequences. First of all, let me provide a
summary of the facts. I am sure that John Ging will be
able to refer to some of the humanitarian aspects.

The best available and independent assessment
of the United Nations estimates that there are at
least 2.9 million people in Idlib. I repeat 2.9 million
people 4 almost 3 million, in fact. Among them
are 1 million children, and 1.4 million people who
have already been displaced at least once. Terrorist
groups on the Security Council's list are also present,
including non-Syrians, foreign fighters and those who
have committed terrible acts in many other places.
There are also armed opposition groups, many ofwhom
have been evacuated to Idlib through reconciliation
agreements and are not members of terrorist groups.
An overwhelming number ofpeople in Idlib - 98.5 per
cent - are civilians.

President Al-Assad has stated that restoring
sovereignty and defeating terrorists remain the priority
of the Syrian Government. Senior Government officials
have also stated that retaking Idlib is the next goal.
Senior Iranian and Russian officials have spoken in
strong terms about their own determination to purge
terrorists from Idlib. At the same time, they have
indicated that, first, the Government would prefer so-
called reconciliation agreements rather than military
action; secondly, Russian-Turkish understanding is
crucial; and, thirdly, Syria does not want a confrontation
with Turkey. Those are recent statements made by
Syrian Government officials.

Russia has been engaged in intense dialogue with
Turkey in particular and, as the Council knows, all
eyes are on what could transpire, or has transpired,
following the summit meeting of the Presidents of Iran,
Russia and Turkey, which just concluded in Tehran.
Meanwhile, reports suggest increased deployments of
Government and affiliated forces and equipment near
the Idlib de-escalation zone - yes, that used to be,
and still is officially, a de-escalation zone. Air strikes
and mutual artillery shelling have been reported on
its perimeter for the past months, resulting in deaths
and injuries on both sides, with an intensification since
4 September.

Meanwhile, the leader of what they call the Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham - basically the Al-Nusra Front, and
let us call them by name - has publicly signalled the
group's intention to fight. On 2 September, photos of
weaponized drones were circulated online after landing
in the Al-Ghab plain. Ostensibly, the same models of
Russian Federation planes were used to carry out several
attacks on the Khmeimim air base in recent months.

For their part, armed opposition groups in Idlib
have reportedly been fortifying their own positions,
digging tunnels and trenches and detonating bridges.
Many of those armed opposition groups - that are not
terrorist groups - have pleaded publicly for the Astana
guarantors to secure a non-military solution. Since
early August, almost every single armed opposition
group in Idlib has now come under the banner of what
is called the "national liberation front". That includes
various groups that have been operating under the
same banner as the Al-Nusra Front in the past. If that
is confirmed, which is what we seem to be hearing,
that can be taken as a sign of their own willingness to
separate from Al-Nusra. We hope that they will now
take even further steps to separate themselves from
listed terrorist groups. I note in that context that, at the
end of August, Turkey made it clear that it views Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham - the Al-Nusra Front - as a terrorist
organization, thereby sending a strong signal to armed
groups to separate from Al-Nusra from now on. With
statements and counter-statements regarding potential
chemical-weapons use, we have warnings and counter-
warnings about the dangers of a major assault on Idlib,
and we have seen an intensified military presence in
the region.

I have laid out to the members of the Security
Council all of the ingredients for a perfect storm. The
dangers are profound, in that any battle for Idlib would
be a horrific and bloody battle. Civilians are its potential
victims, and there are ever-present dangers in the case
of a full-scale assault of incidents or rapid escalations
involving regional and international players. Let us
remember that there is no Idlib after Idlib to which
people can be evacuated, or at least feel safer in during a
battle. There must another way than an all-out military
escalation. The Security Council cannot accept that the
civilians of Idlib must meet that type of fate.

Efforts to combat terrorism do not supersede
obligations under international law and the moral
conscience of humankind. We must put the sanctity
of civilian human life above everything else. That is
why we are urging ourselves and all stakeholders to
contribute to finding a formula to prevent a terrible
tragedy, while at the same allowing the issue of Security
Council-designated terrorist groups to be addressed.

The declaration issued by Presidents Putin, Erdogan
and Rouhani states that they have decided to address
the situation in Idlib "in the spirit of cooperation that
characterized the Astana format". We do not have
many more details on that. We would like to see what
that means in practice in order to address the issue.
They are the guarantors of the last de-escalation area,
and therefore have direct influence - and, frankly,
responsibility - on how to solve it. I am sure Idlib
is at the top of their agenda, as was shown in the
Tehran meeting.

I look also to other key actors, including Gulf
and many other countries, that have leverage over
non-terrorist armed opposition groups to do whatever
they can to ensure that they put civilians first and
separate from Al-Nusra. I am concerned about reports
that many groups - although not all - have become
increasingly desperate, and in some cases ruthless.

My colleague John Ging, from the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
will brief members of the Council on what must happen
on the humanitarian side to protect civilians and on
the humanitarian response plan. But let me emphasize
that people should be granted safe passage to places of
their own choosing, if they want to leave temporarily.
We must allow the opening of a sufficient number of
protected voluntary evacuation routes for civilians in
any direction f east, north and south. For that, the
United Nations must be granted access to scale. The
United Nations stands ready, including myself and
surely all of my colleagues of the humanitarian team,
to work with all parties on the spot and elsewhere
on the modalities and parameters for establishing a
functioning evacuation route, if it were required, with
full respect for international humanitarian law and
human rights principles.

Let me further reiterate the Secretary-General's
clear position that any use of chemical weapons is totally
and completely unacceptable. As the Organization on
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has
found, the norm against the use of chemicals weapons
has been repeatedly violated in Syria. That must not
happen again. I cannot stress enough the danger
associated with any alleged use of those weapons, not
only in humanitarian terms but also when it comes
to the acute threat to maintaining international peace
and security. I equally strongly underscore that the
overwhelming majority of civilians killed in Syria have
been victims of indiscriminate, or sometimes targeted,
attacks against them using conventional weapons. Such
attacks re also abhorrent and unacceptable.

All the talk ofan assault that could produce a perfect
storm in Idlib is happening at exactly the same time as
serious talk about moving forward on a constitutional
committee and about desires to urge Syrian refugees to
return to their country. Those narratives do not square
well with each other. Either we are trying to find a
political way to end the war and move to a post-war
political scenario, or we will see the war reach new
levels of horror. That is why today's meeting in Tehran
is so important, and why I am convening Iran, Russia
and Turkey in Geneva on Monday and Tuesday, and
Egypt, France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the
United Kingdom and the United States on Friday. It
will be the ultimate failure of the imagination and an
end of diplomacy if with those efforts we simply see an
increase in military activity.

Let me conclude with two points.

I have seen many people - civilians - from Idlib
today, including women, noble doctors, farmers and
people of all kinds, approximating almost 3 million.
They have held peaceful demonstrations and lighted
candles at night to show that normal people live in each
of the houses, not necessarily terrorists. They make up
3 million civilians. I have been inspired by what they
have been telling me. They have been asking us - the
United Nations, through the Council - to also express
our voices. In that context, since we are addressing the
question of separating terrorists from others, protecting
civilians and giving a voice to civilians, and as I have
been asked if we the United Nations have any ideas, I
would like to share that we do have some ideas, and
I will take the liberty of elaborating on them when
we meet in private. Any idea or proposal to avoid this
situation from becoming the biggest humanitarian
tragedy at the end of the most horrible conflict in recent
memory should at least be given a chance.

