Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, the Senegalese delegation would like to thank
the United Kingdom presidency for its initiative in
convening this important briefing on South Sudan,
over which Mr. Boris Johnson, the Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, was kind
enough to preside. We also thank the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and the Chairman of
the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission for
their important briefings, and we appreciate Ms. Betty
Sunday's important presentation on the situation. Their
statements have further highlighted the acuteness of
the issue before the Council.

The crisis that has torn South Sudan apart for more
than three years has led to an increase in violence and
violations of human rights. My delegation would like
not only to reiterate its profound concern about the
worsening security situation in the country and its
impact on the implementation of the 2015 Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, but also to condemn the armed incursions
and threats against humanitarian workers and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), as
well as the violations of the status-of-forces agreement,
international humanitarian law and the security of the
United Nations staff.

The repeated violations of the ceasefire agreement
and the increasing hostilities in many parts of the
country have, as we are all aware, led to a wave of
refugees fleeing to neighbouring countries and an
increase in the number of internally displaced persons
within the country, further worsening an already
disastrous humanitarian situation. If we add to that
the famine that is now present in various regions, it
becomes a matter of urgency for us to act if we are to
prevent the population from succumbing to disease and
hunger. The fact is that the ongoing fighting and the
economic collapse have left more than 100,000 people
facing a situation of famine. According to various
United Nations agencies, 1 million more are considered
to be on the borderline of famine. It is the worst famine
the country has seen since the conflict began.

My delegation therefore believes, and I think
we can all agree, that only a political solution to the
conflict in South Sudan will make it possible to resolve
the disastrous humanitarian situation once and for all.
We therefore call on the various parties to the conflict
to resume dialogue and implement the peace agreement
in the Republic of South Sudan. In that regard, we
believe that the national dialogue process announced in
December by President Salva Kiir could, if it proves to
be truly inclusive, free and transparent, help to create
conditions conductive to the restoration of peace in
the country. That would endow the process with the
necessary legitimacy and ensure ownership on the part of
the South Sudanese population, without discrimination,
with the support of the region and the international
community. The national dialogue should also make it
possible for those involved to discuss general issues,
including issues crucial to governance, security-sector
reform and national reconciliation, among others. It is
in that spirit that we warmly encourage cooperation
among the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the United Nations

aimed at ensuring coordinated measures to support the
peace process, including the national dialogue process,
and at ensuring the broadest possible inclusivity in the
national dialogue through the involvement of all the
parties to the conflict in South Sudan.

Going back to the famine, President Alpha Konare',
the High Representative of the African Union for
South Sudan, has made specific proposals aimed at
mitigating the disastrous effects of the famine so as to
ensure overall food security in the rest of South Sudan.
That will require a cessation of hostilities, particularly
in order to enable farming activity to resume. We
therefore call on all of the armed groups to immediately
cease hostilities and allow UNMISS - and we pay
tribute here to the staff's untiring efforts in a hostile
environment - to give humanitarian personnel access
to the civilians who need their help. Unless unhindered
access is provided immediately, the humanitarian
situation can only get worse, and it will be the local
population that will suffer most.

My country also supports the creation in South
Sudan of a hybrid independent court for prosecuting
the perpetrators of crimes and other atrocities against
the civilian population, and we call on the Government
of South Sudan to support the African Union in
that endeavour.

Finally, with regard to the regional protection
force - and we welcome the recent developments
noted concerning its deployment - we urge the South
Sudanese authorities to take all necessary measures to
ensure its immediate deployment. Here I would like to
pay tribute to the troop-contributing countries for their
dedication to the cause of peace in South Sudan.

