Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia): My delegation wishes to
thank the Singaporean presidency for convening this
meeting. I do not think it is a coincidence that during
Singapore's presidency Africa has occupied a high
place on the agenda ofthe Security Council; this is due
to the importance that Singapore attaches to the
problems of Africa. Mr. President, your own presence
further confirms that fact. Like some of my
predecessors who spoke on this subject, I would like to
say that you have an excellent team here at the United
Nations. It is ably led by Ambassador Kishore
Mahbubani. My delegation also wishes to thank the
Chairman of the ad hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, Ambassador
Jagdish Koonjul, for his excellent work, which
definitely led to the convening of this Security Council
meeting today.

I also welcome the presence of the President of
the Economic and Social Council, Ambassador
Simonovie, Ambassador Kebe of the Organization of
African Unity and my good friend Assistant Secretary-
General Ibrahima Fall, whom I wish well in his new
task in Dakar.

Uncharacteristically, allow me to thank all those
members of the Security Council who are still
persevering and staying with us until almost 9 p.m. I
also wish to thank the speakers remaining on the list. I
would especially like to thank the Ambassadors who
have stayed - the Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic and, until
very recently, the Ambassador of Norway. They
deserve special thanks, at least from my delegation, for
having stayed.

I do not have a prepared statement as such, which
would have been distributed to you. After having
listened to many statements, I fully endorse the
statement made by South Africa. Ethiopia's formal
statement has been made by South Africa. I am now
just adding a few points.

The United Kingdom mentioned lessons learned.
I am going to dwell on lessons learned and things that
we, the Ethiopian delegation, feel that the Council and
the rest of us should really look at. Some of it may not
be flattering to the Council, so please bear with me.

Many have spoken very positively about the
Ethiopia-Eritrea conflict having been successfully
resolved. We are very happy with the peace agreement
signed in Algiers and with the Boundary Commission's
decision, which both countries have accepted. This is
very positive. But if we go back and ask, could this
conflict have been prevented? The answer is, yes, of
course. I do not want to enter a debate on this. Since I
do not see my Eritrean friends here, I will not indulge
in that. But it could have been avoided. The role of the
Council, in our view, should have been more vigorous
in supporting the role of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), which took a very good initial step
through its conflict resolution mechanism. But it was
not supported at the beginning. The OAU, the regional
organization, did not have the full, vigorous support of
the Council. I am saying that the Council could have
prevented that conflict; the conflict whose successful
resolution is now referred to by all.

Other lessons learned have related to coordination
by external actors. That is very important. Some
members have also mentioned that. Regarding
coordination or the lack ofit, as some delegations, such
as the Djibouti delegation, have pointed out, if there is
good coordination, there is the interest of a big Power.
That is unfortunate, but that is the case. In Sierra
Leone, which had the support of the regional
organization, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), we have had a positive and
happy outcome. I congratulate my brothers and sisters
in Sierra Leone on their successful election.

In other cases where this has not been the case,
such as Somalia, Sudan and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the conflicts have not been resolved.
There are many actors and various initiatives. That is
another point I wish to make. We should avoid having
too many initiatives by various parties, some of which
have differing or conflicting interests. The Council
sometimes looks askance at this and keeps its distance,
unless it is nudged by a powerful interest. Of course,
all Permanent Representatives of members on the
Council will stay until 9 p.m. even, if something of
great interest to them is being considered.

The Council imposes sanctions. I am referring
here not only to economic sanctions, but to sanctions in
general. That is all right if they are imposed for good
reasons. But the Council should not impose sanctions,
if it does ensure follow-up, because then they will be
disregarded by everyone. That is the case with weapons
sanctions, and there are many other examples that can
be cited.

The Council should not take action when one
party is clearly at fault. The Brahimi report on
peacekeeping tells us that one of the lessons to be
learned is that a spade should be called a spade. The
Council does not do that in some cases, which helps
conflicts to continue. What sometimes happens is that
the Council takes sides, even in deciding who the
parties to a conflict are to the exclusion of others. In
cases where there is a clear culprit, such as the case of
UNITA in Angola, nothing has been done. Of course
they continue. Other circumstances are, hopefully, now
helping the resolution of that problem.

The role of the Economic and Social Council has
been emphasized. The new direction and collaboration
that is developing between the Council and the
Economic and Social Council is welcome. There is also
the need for very strong coordination between the
various United Nations specialized agencies, which
does not exist. It has not existed before the conflict,
during the conflict and after the conflict.

I will conclude by making one recommendation.
It is good that the Council occasionally visits countries
or regions in conflict. That practice must be continued,
in the View of my delegation. However, my delegation
would also like to recommend that the Council
sometimes hold its meetings away from Headquarters
in New York. The Council has done that on two
occasions. The first was in January 1972, in Africa, at
the OAU headquarters in Addis Ababa. The other
time - ifI am not incorrect - was the following year
in 1973, in Panama. This is a good practice. I think it
will also give the Council an inside perspective on
places other than New York. Maybe the Council should
also hold those meetings when the weather in New
York is too cold.
