Ms. Amos: I thank you, Madam, for the opportunity
to brief the Council on the humanitarian situation in
the Central African Republic following my recent
visit to the country with Ms. Kristalina Georgieva, the
European Commissioner for International Cooperation,
Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Response.

The political and security situation in the Central
African Republic, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Gaye, has already said, remains
volatile and unstable. The new Government of National
Unity is fragile and faces considerable challenges,
including divisions within Seleka; the proliferation
of weapons in Bangui and beyond; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts; and the
absence of State administration outside of Bangui.

Over the past months, the humanitarian situation
has deteriorated dramatically and has shifted from
being a long-term crisis of poverty and chronic
vulnerability to a complex emergency characterised
by violence, acute needs and grave protection issues. If
inadequately addressed, the crisis threatens to spread
beyond the Central African Republic's borders and to
further destabilize a region already facing significant
challenges.

As Special Representative Gaye has already said,
all 4.6 million Central Africans have been affected by
the crisis. Half of them are children. Some 1.6 million
people are in dire need of assistance, including food,
protection, health care, water, sanitation and shelter.
Humanitarian needs are increasing by the day. More
than 206,000 people have been internally displaced
and nearly 60,000 have sought refuge in neighbouring
countries - two-thirds in the Democratic Republic
of Congo. Many people continue to hide in the bush
and remote areas in poor sanitary conditions and
without access to basic services or clean water. More
than 650,000 children are not able to go to school due
to the closure and occupation of schools by armed
groups. Some 484,000 people are now severely food
insecure, and thousands of boys and girls are acutely
malnourished.

During our visit, we heard reports of armed
attacks against civilians, illegal detention, torture and
abductions, and according to UNICEF, 3,500 children
have been recruited into the armed forces and groups
during the conflict. I am also extremely concerned
about reports of widespread sexual violence, with
women and children again paying a heavy price.

The already fragile health-care system is
overwhelmed. Many public service officials have
left their posts and health care is now being provided
almost entirely by non-governmental organizations
(NGOs). Basic drugs and hygiene products cannot be
purchased locally due to the breakdown of the supply
chain. The risk of disease outbreaks is very high,
and international NGOs already report a spike in
malaria. The replacement of goods in hospitals, such
as generators, and supporting the supply, for example,
of fuel will be challenging, and the risk of further
looting remains high. During a field visit to a hospital
in Kaga Bandoro, I saw the daily struggle doctors and
nurses face to provide for the most basic health needs of
people. The hospital, with just 60 beds, serves as many
as 130,000 people throughout the province. Most of the
mattresses had been looted and there is no electricity.

The deterioration in the security situation since
December 2012 is of great concern and needs to be
addressed. I visited United Nations premises that had
been looted and some United Nations premises remain
occupied by Se'le'ka elements. Persistent insecurity and
the degradation of infrastructure have posed serious
challenges to the humanitarian response. Despite that,
we have reached nearly 160,000 people with food
assistance and nutrition programmes; 590,000 have
benefited from water and sanitation programmes; and
200,000 have received health support. But this is tiny
in comparison with widespread needs throughout the
country.

NGOs have played and continue to play a
significant role. Many remained present in the areas
worst affected by fighting, and I thank them for their
ongoing work. Staff from the United Nations are in the
process of deploying beyond the capital. Redeployment
to Paoua, Bouar, Kaga Bandoro and Bambari began on
10 August. Human rights and protection monitoring
will also be increased. The establishment of a United
Nations presence in new areas will provide assistance
and much-needed protection.

The authorities in the Central African Republic
have shown a genuine willingness to cooperate with
humanitarian actors to address the challenges we
face. During our visit, the authorities reiterated their
commitment to facilitating the humanitarian response,
including guaranteeing the security of humanitarian
workers. Encouragingly, officials identified the
restoration of security and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration as their main priorities. However,
as already stated by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Gaye, they face a considerable
challenge given the numbers of the Seleka forces,
the lack of command and control over them, and the
presence of fighters from other countries.

Humanitarian assistance cannot be the long-
term solution to the complex challenges facing the
Central African Republic. A comprehensive response,
prioritizing the restoration of security and addressing
humanitarian, recovery and development needs, is
urgently needed. The authorities must do more to protect
civilians and respect human rights. That includes
releasing and reintegrating children associated with
armed groups. Those children are the next generation
of Central Africans, and we must ensure they have the
opportunity to contribute to a peaceful future.

I have a number of requests to make to the Council.
First, in order to support the restoration of security
and stability in the Central African Republic, I ask the
Council to treat the request for support by the African
Union (AU) for its newly established peacekeeping
mission, the African-led International Support Mission
in the Central African Republic, with urgency. It
is critical for the continued safety of humanitarian
operations that the AU Mission have the funds and
logistical support to operate effectively.

Secondly, I ask the Council to again remind all
parties to the conflict of their responsibilities under
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
to ensure that all those responsible for violations are
held to account.

Thirdly, I ask Council members to use any
influence they have on the authorities to facilitate
dialogue towards political reconciliation.

Fourthly, we need to increase funding. Only 32 per
cent of the $195 million required has been raised to
date. While the European Union (EU) announced an
additional contribution during our visit, bringing its
emergency relief to €20 million this year - and it is the
highest donor - much more international support is
required to meet growing needs. Critical sectors, such
as water, sanitation and hygiene, have received less
than 10 per cent of the funding required.

Finally, I ask the Council to support the authorities
in expediting the swift return of public service officials
to areas outside Bangui to facilitate the restoration
of much needed basic services. We need to make the
longer-term investments required to put the country on
the path back to recovery and self-reliance.

The Central African Republic is not yet a failed
State, but has the potential to become one if swift action
is not taken. Despite the significant challenges, there
is an opportunity for the international community,
working with the authorities, to make a significant
contribution to the political, economic and social
development of the Central African Republic. A failure
to act now could not only prolong and exacerbate the
appalling conditions the people of the Central African
Republic have had to endure, but could also see the
crisis spread beyond its borders and throughout a region
already facing enormous challenges.

