Mr. Ka (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would firstly
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having taken the
initiative of including the important question of AIDS on
the Council's agenda. Everything has been very well said by
the Vice-President of the United States, the African
Ministers, the United Nations Secretary-General and the
previous speakers. My privileged position as the last
speaker means that I can be very brief at this very late
hour of our discussions.
There can no longer be any doubt that the AIDS
epidemic is far from being a simple public health
problem. For our continent, which pays the heaviest price,
this epidemic also poses a development problem, maybe
even a problem for the future of the continent. It is good
that the United Nations and the Security Council today
have grasped the full magnitude of the threat posed by
this disease to the human development of the people of
the continent and has decided to coordinate their efforts
and those of United Nations agencies to tackle the
problem.

Africans have not given up in the crusade against
AIDS. They have deployed tremendous efforts to
eliminate this disease, as was recalled by the Minister of
Namibia a few moments ago.

Upon the initiative of Senegal in 1992, at the summit
meeting of the Organization of African Unity in Dakar, a
resolution was adopted that acknowledged AIDS as a real
threat to the continent's future and called upon the African
States to do their utmost to curb the spread and impact of
this scourge. My country committed itself very quickly to
a broad, multisectoral and multidisciplinary response by
setting up a national programme to fight AIDS. That
programme benefited from a favourable structural
situation in dealing with the disease and was fortunately
supported by a Senegalese society imbued by moral,
traditional and religious values.

From the health standpoint, the real preventive
strategies were realized just after setting up the National
AIDS Committee. Need I recall that it was in Senegal
that researchers proved the existence of the HIV type 2
for the first time? In 1990, there already was general
access in Senegal to condoms, the sale and distribution of
which increased tenfold over the past ten years.

Insofar as information, education and
communications are concerned, beginning in 1992,
Senegal had included sex education for youth in primary
and secondary school instruction on the spread of the
AIDS virus and more than 130,000 schoolbooks devoted
to the information, education and communication on
AIDS were distributed in 1997 in public and private
educational institutions. Hundreds of non-governmental

 

organizations and associations of people living with AIDS
were set up and have been participating in the struggle
against AIDS. Political dialogue, training seminars and
discussions led by community leaders, religious leaders,
parliamentarians, professionals and journalists are some of
the strategies in combating AIDS.
Senegal has also been at the forefront of this new
struggle against AIDS, from the very outset of this thinking
about introducing new strategies throughout the continent.
This thinking has led to the UNAIDS initiative that has
worked to the benefit of two African countries.

Out of concern for cohesiveness and continuity,
Senegal has given supplementary financial assistance to
make it possible for people who have AIDS to receive
treatment. Because of the encouraging results obtained by
my country in the crusade against AIDS, President Abdou
Diouf was honoured by UNAIDS, together with his brother
and friend, President Yoweri Mouseveni of Uganda. They
received the first prize for excellence in the struggle
against AIDS.

By way of conclusion, I should simply like to say
that these efforts must be supported and reinforced.
Vigilance must be the rule, for the history of these
diseases teaches us that when vigilance drops, the
infectious agents profit.

I should like to pay tribute to our international
multilateral partners - notably, the World Bank, the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
World Health Organization (WHO) - and our bilateral
partners, who continue to support us in our struggle
against AIDS. I am convinced that we will be able to rely
on the fame and the influence of the Security Council to
be our interpreter to all our partners and tell them how
determined we are to ensure that future African
generations will see a horizon free of the spectre of this
pandemic that seriously compromises the chances for
development, peace and stability on the African continent.

