Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Jamaica, which holds the
presidency, and you, Sir, for having organized this
meeting on Afghanistan. I would also like to join
previous speakers in thanking Ambassador Lakhdar
Brahimi for his briefing. We all agree that his mission
is sensitive, but we also know that he merits the trust of
the Secretary-General and the international community.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his unflagging interest in the situation in Afghanistan.

Today's meeting once more attests to the
determination of the Security Council to put an end to
the suffering of the innocent Afghan people, who,
unfortunately, have for many years been held hostage
in their own country. There is a danger that the
situation may deteriorate, given the continuing military
operations and the intensification of fighting between
the forces inside the country. The situation will become
increasingly critical as winter approaches, making it
even more difficult to deliver assistance to the civilian

population.
While we understand the urgent need to fight the
scourge of terrorism - now that we have all come

together to eradicate it - we must also endeavour to
ensure that the military campaign led by the coalition
against terrorism does not, in its turn, cause despair and
confusion among an impoverished population that for
several years has been left to its own devices. As
Mrs. Mary Robinson has emphasized, the unanimous
commitment of the international community to
eradicate terrorism should not obscure the fact that all
action undertaken to that end must be based upon
respect for human rights, and should not result in more
innocent victims.
It is in that spirit that we appeal for the civilian
population of Afghanistan to be spared the torment of
war and destruction. We again support the appeal of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, that the war be
brought to an end as soon as possible. That would
mean relief for the coalition, which would have
achieved its objectives; for Afghanistan, which could
anticipate a settlement; and for international public
opinion.

International humanitarian assistance for
Afghanistan is an absolute priority. Tunisia is
contributing to the achievement of that by providing
assistance through the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). However,
given the steadily increasing flow of refugees since 11
September - according to UNHCR, the number has
reached 135,000 - it is still likely that the gap will
steadily increase between the minimum assistance
required by the country and the amount actually
provided by the United Nations and donor countries.
Furthermore, that fear has been emphasized by
Mr. Oshima, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs.

We are also very concerned about the difficulties
related to access and the delivery of assistance,
particularly given the arrival of winter, which will
close off several transit routes. We encourage the
decision taken by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to send a mission to assess the
security situation with regard to sending humanitarian
assistance by river from Uzbekistan. In this regard, we
would also like to thank the countries of the subregion
for mobilizing to help Afghan refugees. We welcome
their efforts to provide aid and assistance to the
thousands of people who are most vulnerable.

It is essential to redeploy United Nations
humanitarian personnel within Afghanistan so as to
coordinate the humanitarian action. Such dedicated
personnel must be provided with the security necessary
to enable them effectively to play their role under
proper conditions. In this regard, we call upon the local
authorities of the forces of the Northern Alliance to
guarantee protection for humanitarian personnel in
Mazar-e-Sharif, which is now under their control. In
this context, we would like to pay tribute to the
ongoing efforts of the United Nations humanitarian
agencies and their staff, including local personnel, who
are working under dangerous conditions, sometimes at
the cost of their own lives, to provide assistance to the
Afghan population and to refugees who are trapped on
either side of the borders with neighbouring countries.
A lasting political solution in Afghanistan will
require the establishment of a regime that is
representative of all the Afghan people of various
ethnic backgrounds. Given recent events, such an
approach could revive hope in a country that has been
devastated by conflict for many years. The
commitment of the United Nations to that process will
be necessary, especially in the transition and
reconstruction phase. It is essential to emphasize that
the participation of the Afghans themselves in this
process will be decisive; the international community's
role is to help them to implement their own decisions.
Mr. Brahimi was right to tell the media that it was time
for the Afghans to understand that today - perhaps for
the first time ~ they have an opportunity that
absolutely must not be wasted.

The joint declaration issued by the meeting of the
"six plus two" group that was chaired by the Secretary-
General, with the participation of Mr. Brahimi, has
strengthened our belief with regard to the best
approach to adopt in dealing with the problems of
Afghanistan. It is very important at this stage for the
"six plus two" group to act in a united and coordinated
way and, above all, on an urgent basis, so as to
guarantee peace and security for the country and the
entire subregion.

Despite Afghanistan's slide into chaos in recent
years, and the dangerous and destabilizing implications
that that has had for the subregion and elsewhere, the
international community still has an essential moral
duty not to condemn the entire Afghan people for the
mistakes of an authority that has been isolated within
the country and has made enemies of much of the rest
of the world by turning that country into a base camp
for an international terrorist network. It is a matter of
urgency to help the Afghan people to take charge and
forge their own destiny.

The approaches, measures and arrangements that
Ambassador Brahimi has just suggested to the Council
can serve as a starting point for a peace process. We
must pay very close attention to those proposals. We
encourage Ambassador Brahimi in his task of serving
as an informed messenger of the international
community.

