Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
on a very important dimension of United Nations
peacekeeping. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve Ladsous,
and Under-Secretary-General for Field Support,
Ms. Ameerah Haq, for their very useful briefings.

The management and success of United Nations
peacekeeping hinge on partnerships. Partnership
entails cooperation among Member States on broader
policy framework issues and among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) on mandates and operations. Strong
partnerships ensure the success of peacekeeping
operations. Similarly, partnership and cooperation
between missions operating in geographic proximity
are important for addressing emergent needs and short-
term goals. In many instances, such exchanges have
proved decisive in addressing a crisis situation.

As a troop-contributing country, Pakistan supports
the sharing of human and material resources between
neighbouring missions on a case-by-case basis. We
have not shied away from committing our personnel
and equipment to move from one mission to another.

In 2010, when the situation in Cote d'Ivoire
deteriorated, Pakistani troops from the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) proceeded to assist the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI).
Our internal processes for authorizing that movement
were completed expeditiously. We did not delay the
transfer of Pakistani troops, despite serious logistical
and operational issues. Later events proved that
reinforcement from UNMIL was critical to the success
of UNOCI operations during the crisis from 2010 to
2011.

I would highlight the following five salient aspects
of our perspective on inter-mission cooperation. First,
inter-mission cooperation is an ad-hoc arrangement to
make up for deficiencies in troop strength and critical
assets in the wake of a crisis. The stop-gap nature of
inter-mission cooperation cannot be overemphasized.

The force requirements of every mission are
carefully planned, and no mission works with surplus
resources. Any transfer of resources should not
compromise the donor mission's operational capacity
and safety. Strong linkages between mission efficacy,
force requirements and inter-mission cooperation
should be paid due attention.

Secondly, an important aspect of inter-mission
cooperation is the operational and administrative
control of the assets being transferred. Questions with
regard to operational control of the assets transferred
and related administrative issues should be answered
adequately. Each mission has its own dynamics that
underpin, among other things, the calculation of the costs
of contingent-owned equipment. Moving to a different
mission entails a change in dynamics, which warrants
the application of different financial modalities. One
way of going around those complexities may be to
consider providing some extra allowances to make
up for the hardship and related problems. Similarly,
the formulation of standard operating procedures and
related drills of inter-mission cooperation is essential.
Progress on standard operating procedures is still
awaited.

Thirdly, missions differ in their nature from one
another owing to their particular mandate's area of
operations, politics, demography and trouble spots.
There is no concept of a universal peacekeeper.
Moreover, specific training is administered to troops
as per their mission requirements, which may differ
from mission to mission. From the perspective of
TCCs, within domestic regulations it is procedurally
impossible to seek approval to provide forces to two or
three missions. Adequate time should therefore be given
to the TCCs to secure the approval of their respective
capitals for the requisite transfers. We highlight that
point despite having completed our local procedures
expeditiously for UNOCI.

Fourthly, inter-mission cooperation is a contingency-
based exercise. For the most part, it involves infantry
units and certain enabling assets, such as helicopters.
Due caution is advisable with regard to the transfer of
special forces, engineering units and hospitals from
one mission to another. If such an exchange is planned,
we should come up with more permanent solutions.

Finally, inter-mission cooperation does not obviate
the need for a constant exchange of information and
intelligence between neighbouring missions. We
positively view the idea of biannual and triannual
meetings between such missions so that the commands
and senior leadership of the neighbouring missions are
well versed in the challenges that they face.

In conclusion, we would like to underscore that
inter-mission cooperation should be an exception,
not a norm. Such cooperation should be executed on
a case-by-case basis to address emerging situations.
Long-term remedial measures require permanent
solutions based on due processes. Inter-mission
cooperation should work around those processes and
regulations, not against them.

