Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Allow me to thank you, Mr. President * Minister
Simmonds - for hosting this session and to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his briefing.
I wish to welcome the presence of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Somalia as
well.

At the outset, we would like to take this opportunity
to express appreciation to the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga,
and to the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
for their contributions to Somalia's progress. The
United States welcomes the establishment ofthe United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM),
based in Mogadishu, and looks forward to its expanded
presence in key locations throughout the country. With a
fully integrated United Nations country team, UNSOM
will provide the Somali Government "one door to
knock on" for United Nations support. We also welcome
Nicholas Kay as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of UNSOM.
We support his early outreach to the African Union,
as the UNSOM-African Union partnership is critical to
fostering peace and stability in Somalia. In addition,
we especially want to thank the brave soldiers of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the
Ethiopian Defence Forces and the Somali National
Security Forces. Their sacrifices have made possible a
brighter future for the people of Somalia.

But much work remains. Despite many tactical
successes, Al-Shabaab is not yet defeated, and there
are others who wish to drag Somalia back into chaos.
Recent terrorist attacks show that Mogadishu and many
rural parts of Somalia are still vulnerable. We look to
the Somali National Security Forces and AMISOM. to
continue their efforts to expand and maintain control
over the country, so that the Somali Government can
improve governance and the rule of law. In addition, we
urge Member States to fulfil their obligations related
to the targeted sanctions, the modified arms embargo
and the charcoal ban to stop proceeds from providing
revenue to Al-Shabaab.

We strongly support President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud's national security strategy and look
forward to its implementation. At the second London
Conference on Somalia, held on 7 May, the United
States announced almost $40 million in new assistance
to support development and justice sector reform in
Somalia. We applaud those who also made pledges
and stress that fulfilling our pledges is essential for
continued progress.

Long-term stability in Somalia depends on many
factors - an effective, responsible security sector,
good governance and the rule of law, and economic
development. On the security front, AMISOM's
training of the Somali National Security Forces and
joint combat operations are critically important. The
relocation of the European Union Training Mission in
Somalia from Uganda to Mogadishu is another positive
development.

We encourage United Nations entities and donors to
continue to support economic development, including
efforts to address land disputes, which is a key driver of
conflict. We recognize the work of the United Nations
Development Programme to establish a microfinance
mechanism in Somalia and encourage greater attention
to youth unemployment.

The United States remains gravely concerned
by continuing human rights violations in Somalia,
including alarming reports of sexual violence and
exploitation. We appreciate the work that Special
Representative Bangura has contributed towards the
United Nations-Federal Republic of Somalia joint
communique of 7 May, in which Somalia makes
significant commitments to addressing sexual violence.
The substantial decline in reported cases of grave
violations against children in the first quarter of 2013 is
encouraging, but the 552 cases that have been reported
remain alarming. We urge increased attention to that
overall problem and look to the Somali Government to
follow through on its declared intent to work with the
international community to fight the scourge and hold
perpetrators accountable.

We are also concerned about Somaliland's decision
on 14 May to ban United Nations flights over Somaliland
airspace. That could harm the humanitarian situation
there and affect the provision of food, shelter, water
and sanitation, and other support by humanitarian
organizations. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs estimates that approximately
413,000 people in Somaliland need humanitarian aid,
including 39,000 children who suffer from malnutrition.
More than 85,000 people remain displaced due to
recurrent drought and conflict.

Somalia must continue moving along the path to
national elections and a referendum on the national
constitution by 2016. The United States continues to
support Somali-led governance and calls for further
dialogue with local political and community leaders,
including women, on unresolved regional issues. The
situation in Jubaland is particularly concerning. We
look to Somalia's neighbours for support in easing
the tension and finding lasting solutions. We applaud
those regional actors that have played a positive role in
supporting Somalia's unity and sovereignty, especially
in the early days of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud's
Administration.

We join those here today who are committed to
Somalia's success and will continue to make every
effort to support the Government and the people of
Somalia as they strive for peace and prosperity in their
country.

