Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): We appreciate your
initiative, Madam President, to bring to the attention of
the Council one of the most critical topics in the field
of peace and security. We share the ideas outlined in
your concept note (S/2017/6, annex). We carefully read
your manifesto on Sweden taking a Security Council
seat and wish to assure you, Madam, of our full support
of Sweden's priorities, which soundly resonate with
our own.

We welcome the Secretary-General's views on
the ways to collaborate with the Council. We are
pleased to note that the approach presented today by
Secretary-General Guterres fully coincides with the
position expressed by him as Secretary-General-elect
at the informal meeting with the Council convened last
November on Ukraine's initiative.

It is not only symbolic that our meeting today
coincides with the date the General Assembly was
first convened in London in 1946. Seven decades ago,
the founding Members faithfully believed that the
Organization had to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war. The task is yet to be accomplished.

It is sad to acknowledge that the world has not
become much safer. Some of those who signed the
Charter tend to liberally interpret its principles for
their own convenience. As a result, the international
community has to deal again and again with
conflicts - conflicts that broke out because of the
erosion of rule of law, gross human rights violations
and a lack of international institutional capacities to
bring those responsible to account.

Being a lawyer myself, I want to stress Ukraine's
firm and unequivocal position that international law
is one for all. It applies to all United Nations Member
States equally and without exclusions. There are no big
or small States before the law, rich or poor, more or less
equal. International law is one for all with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations at
the forefront.

The Syrian conflict is probably the most brutal
armed conflict of recent times. We have witnessed
the inability of the Council to react appropriately to
the butchery and slaughter that had been happening in
Aleppo and other areas of Syria due to six consecutive
vetoes from the same permanent member. What is the
result? Aleppo is bombed into dust, many innocent
lives are lost, the declared ceasefire is barely holding
and prospects for a settlement are yet to be seen. It was
the Council's collective responsibility to prevent such
a course of events from happening and to put an end
to that conflict. The Council has, unfortunately, failed
to do so. We still believe that ongoing efforts will bear
results and that a sustainable ceasefire will pave the way
for the start of meaningful political dialogue in Syria.

In the contemporary globalized world, none of
the conflicts that we are facing is too distant. The
international community has spent enormous resources
in helping to rebuild war-torn societies and to assist
people in need. Moreover, Europe is also not immune
from conflicts.

Ukraine has been countering military aggression
for nearly three years, one that has taken on all forms
of hybrid warfare. What has happened? The General
Assembly has adopted resolutions condemning the
aggression and the occupation of Crimea. In the
attempts by the Security Council to stop the military
aggression, we were again blocked by the same
permanent member. We expected the former Secretary-
General to provide his good offices, but he did not
go beyond expressing concern. Something similar
happened in Georgia in 2008. The Security Council
members, and especially the permanent members, have
a special responsibility - both the founding permanent
members and the most recent one, the Russian
Federation, which acquired the status of occupying
Power in General Assembly resolution 71/205, adopted
in December 2016.

The Security Council, which was established after
the Second World War, during which time Europe
had been the primary battlefield, must again today
pay special attention to the stress on international
peace and security caused by conflicts on that
continent - something that was inconceivable, even
during the time of the former Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, which was a permanent member of the
Security Council before the Russian Federation.

Prevention is a powerful tool and bold tactic, and
we are particularly encouraged by the special emphasis
that the Secretary-General placed on that tool in his
statement today. The United Nations has to use all
its potential to prevent the outbreak, resurgence and
prolongation of armed conflicts. We welcome the
concepts of sustaining peace and a people-centered
approach that were reflected in various decisions
adopted by the Council and the General Assembly last
year. Prevention is but one of the hallmarks of Ukraine's
foreign policy. It covers all three United Nations pillars:
peace and security, development and human rights.

With regard to human rights, it was through
Ukraine's initiative in 2010 - years prior to the coming
of war to our country - that the Human Rights Council
adopted the first-ever thematic resolution (resolution 14/5) on the role of prevention in the promotion and
protection of human rights. As it is well known, gross
human rights violations are often a precursor to the
outbreak ofa military conflict. It is also a certainty that
the Government of an aggressor country violates the
human and civil rights of its own citizens, thereby getting
a free hand to launch an assault on its neighbours. In
September 2016, the Human Rights Council reinforced
the message to bolster the work on the prevention of
human rights violations by adopting another resolution
(resolution 33/6), sponsored by 74 States, including by
the members of the Security Council. Yet in November
2016, we saw desperate attempts by some Member
States that are at the same time aggressors to prevent
the Third Committee of the General Assembly from
addressing human rights violations in certain countries.

Conflict prevention is the most effective way to
avert human suffering, as well as the least expensive
tool in conflict resolution. Unfortunately, all too often,
Member States tend to keep their heads in the sand,
until it is too late. That pattern must be changed in
order to ensure that Srebrenica, Rwanda and Aleppo do
not happen again. The Secretary-General should play
a special role in prevention. We are looking forward
to his proactive, unbiased and independent action,
which includes bringing the most worrying situations
to the attention of the Security Council. That function
of the Secretary- General is envisaged in the Charter
of the United Nations but has, unfortunately, been
underutilized for many years. That is why we welcome
the intention of the Secretary-General to increase the
capabilities of the Secretariat in strategic information
analysis. It is crucial also for the Secretary-General to
give a new breath of air to Article 99. We expect that
those initiatives will also result in more substantive
and informative reporting on the issues on the
Council's agenda.

Another important but unused tool at the Secretary-
General's disposal is his good offices and other political
enablers. Those means are rarely seen in play, whether
it be a matter of conflict-prone or de facto conflict-
affected States like Ukraine. We sincerely believe
that the new Secretary-General can skilfully manage
the entire content of the toolbox given to him by the
Charter, and he should not hesitate to use it wherever
necessary. One more area of interaction between the
Secretary-General and the Council is peacekeeping,
in which Ukraine continues to be a reliable partner of
the Organization. The role of the Secretary-General
in further improving the way in which that adaptable
instrument and flagship activity of our Organization is
utilized cannot be overestimated.

Preventing conflicts from entering into a vicious
spiral of violence often depends on the ability of the
Organization to deploy the necessary resources at the
earliest stage. In that regard, the Secretary-General
can and should play an important role. In cases
where the deployment of a peacekeeping mission is
requested, the Council can benefit from an early and
comprehensive assessment of the situation on the
ground and recommendations on possible mandates for
a peacekeeping operation from the Secretary-General.
That should be done by default, once the request has
been received by the Secretariat, thereby enabling the
Council to take an informed and timely decision.

In conclusion, conflict prevention can be
successful only as the result of the collective efforts of
all stakeholders within and beyond the Organization.
We believe that the United Nations should continue
to build and enhance its strategic partnership with
regional organizations that share the principles set
forth in the Charter and respect the rules and norms
of international law. We welcome the close cooperation
and partnership that the United Nations has established
with the European Union and the African Union. We
also see potential in establishing closer United Nations
interaction with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) aimed at contributing
to OSCE peace activities on the ground.

We trust that the new Secretary-General and the new
leadership of the Secretariat will be true custodians of
the principles of the Charter and able to take a proactive
approach to conflict prevention and resolution.

