Mr. Rendon Barnica (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): The delegation of Honduras wishes first of all to
thank the Secretary-General for his report submitted
pursuant to Security Council resolutions 982 (1995) and
987 (1995). The report deals realistically and frankly with
the central aspects of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as with the factors that have led to the
virtual paralysis in the fulfilment of the objectives of the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR).

The recent tragic events in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which followed the conclusion of the
agreement on a cessation of hostilities and which,
regrettably, led to the resumption of military action and the
loss of precious human lives in the "safe areas" of
Sarajevo, Banja Luka and Tuzla and to a situation of
insecurity for the United Nations personnel that make up
UNPROFOR, demonstrated the parties lack of will to
resolve the conflict by peaceful means as well as their
inaccurate assessment of UNPROFOR's objectives in that
country. These facts have brought home to the Council the
need to conduct a review of the peace-keeping operation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina so that, while making its personnel
less vulnerable, it can also enhance their capacity to fulfil
UNPROFOR's objectives.

In his report the Secretary-General points out with
great clarity and precision the main obstacles to the
attainment of the purposes for which UNPROFOR was
established. One of the main obstacles, as I have already
said, is the parties' lack of will to reach a solution to the
conflict through peaceful negotiation. Another obstacle is
the lack of desire to cooperate with the United Nations
peace-keeping operation, which consequently finds itself
with limited scope for action, exposed to constant
criticism and attacks from both sides. The persistence of
this crisis therefore makes it necessary to adapt the United
Nations operation to the political realities and
circumstances prevailing in Bosnia and Herzegovina in an
effort to relaunch the peace process.

The purpose of UNPROFOR is to keep the peace,
not impose it. A revision of UNPROFOR's mandate in
order to allow it to take military action without the
cooperation of one of the parties or to ensure the
protection of its own personnel was not a viable
possibility. This would have distorted its objectives
without ensuring cooperation by the parties and would
also have run the risk that the parties might take more
radical positions and that they might consider the United
Nations presence in the country to be biased.

Taking all these aspects into account, my delegation
studied the proposal for the integration of a rapid reaction
force under United Nations command and available to
UNPROFOR as a solution that would help the operation
fulfil its mandate, maintain security for its units, help its
redeployment and facilitate its movements. My delegation
supports this proposal not only because its objective is to
strengthen UNPROFOR's capacity to fulfil it mandate
while reducing the risk to its personnel, but also because,
above all, it will continue to be a peace-keeping
operation.

In his report the Secretary-General refers to the
deficiencies inherent in the "safe area" regime, which
limit UNPROFOR's capacity to carry out its mandate
effectively and to prevent deliberate attacks originating
from and directed against these areas. In his report of 1
December 1994 the Secretary-General had already pointed
out that in order to apply the "safe area" concept
successfully, it was necessary to accept, among other
things, the fundamental principle that the purpose of the
"safe areas" is to protect the civilian population and not
to defend territories or military positions and that
UNPROFOR's protection of these areas is not intended to
make UNPROFOR a party to the conflict. The Secretary-
General stated that in order to achieve the primary

 

objective of the "safe areas" - the protection of the
civilian population and the handing over of territories - it
was necessary to change the present regime, including
norms for the delimitation of the areas and their complete
demilitarization. He also said that the capacity of one of the
parties to maintain its troops, weapons and military
installations inside a "safe area" results in a situation that
is in itself unstable and that encourages attacks by the
opposing party, and that the use of force by UNPROFOR
to repel that type of attack in defence of the "safe areas" is
inevitably interpreted as taking sides in the conflict, which
has a destabilizing effect throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

These views, which we share, were reiterated by the
Secretary-General in his report of last 30 May. We believe
the military presence of the parties in the "safe areas" or
the launching of attacks from or against them is totally
inconsistent with the fundamental principles that should
govern these areas and, in essence, are one of the causes of
the current situation of destabilization in the region and the
risky, difficult situation now facing UNPROFOR in the
fulfilment of its mandate. We must therefore express our
agreement with the provisions of the draft resolution we are
going to vote on, as it highlights the need to demilitarize
the "safe areas" by mutual agreement.

My delegation also shares the views of the Council of
General Affairs of the European Union, as contained in its
declaration on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
adopted last 29 May. The deliberate bombardment of the
civilian population in the "safe areas" and the taking of
United Nations soldiers and observers as hostages are
completely unacceptable acts that must be condemned by
the entire international community. The persons still being
held must be released immediately and unconditionally. We
recognize that the work done by UNPROFOR personnel is
difficult and dangerous, and we wish to express to them our
respect for their courage and dedication.

I wish to conclude by saying that my delegation is a
co-sponsor of the present draft resolution because it
contains the elements that we consider essential for
resolving the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina: it asserts
that it is only through peaceful means that the parties can
arrive at a lasting solution, it appeals to the parties to
cooperate effectively with the United Nations mission, it
ensures the protection of UNPROFOR personnel and the
capacity of UNPROFOR to fulfil its mandate, it addresses
the problems of the "safe areas" realistically and it urges
the parties to negotiate a cease-fire and a cessation of
hostilities by making it clear to them that there can be no
military solution to the conflict. My delegation will
therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution in the hope
that its adoption will contribute substantially to the
attainment of reconciliation and peace in the region of the
Balkans.

