Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
join colleagues in thanking Ambassador Qazi for his
presentation on the Secretary-General's report. I would
also like to express, along with other representatives,
particular thanks to His Excellency the Vice-President
for agreeing to join us in the Council and for giving a
presentation on behalf of his Government. I also thank
Ambassador Wolff for his presentation on behalf of the
Multinational Force in Iraq.

The United Kingdom stands firm in offering its
support to Prime Minister Al-Maliki and his
Government as they tackle the challenges that Iraq
faces. In particular, we welcome the effort and
commitment of the Government of Iraq to confront all
forms of sectarian violence, including through the
Baghdad security plan. As the Secretary-General's
report notes, national reconciliation is of the utmost
importance, but if it is to be achieved, the cycle of
attacks must first be broken. For our part, the United
Kingdom is committed to doing all we can to help
through our military contribution to the Multinational
Force, as well as through our diplomatic and
development efforts.
The countries of the region, as many speakers
today have noted, have a particularly important role to
play in helping to preserve the unity and territorial
integrity of Iraq. Strong bilateral relations between Iraq
and its neighbours are a necessary, but not sufficient,
condition for success. We also encourage the
neighbouring countries to work in partnership with the
Iraqi Government and to match its determination to
tackle the challenges facing Iraq.

In that regard, the United Kingdom shares the
Secretary-General's view that the expanded meeting of
Iraq's neighbours held in Baghdad on 10 March was a
welcome initiative by the Government of Iraq. A
number of speakers today have also drawn attention to
that, which is very welcome. The United Kingdom was
pleased to take part, and I take pleasure in
congratulating Iraq's leaders on that successful event.
At the meeting, participants extended their support for
Iraq's sovereignty, independence, national unity and
territorial integrity. They also recognized the principle
of non-interference. The United Kingdom reiterates its
endorsement of those principles.

The United Kingdom looks forward to the event
to be held here in New York tomorrow by the United
Nations and the Government of Iraq on the
International Compact. We urge the international
community and the Government of Iraq to give it their
full backing.

The United Kingdom would like to echo the
Secretary-General's appreciation for his Special
Representative and for the staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and what they
do. We pay tribute to the men and women who work
there in often difficult conditions. Despite the security
challenges, UNAMI has a crucial role to play in
supporting the Government of Iraq. UNAMI offers
support throughout the country, including in capacity-
building, in the constitutional review process, in the
preparation for elections and in coordinating
humanitarian assistance.

In this last respect, we welcome the leadership
that UNAMI is providing in the humanitarian field. We
encourage it to continue to work closely with the
Government of Iraq so as to increase its ability to
provide basic services to its people. We ourselves are
helping to provide further funding to international
organizations working on the issue of internally
displaced persons.
Given the importance of the United Nations role
in Iraq, I should like to take this opportunity to urge
Member States to respond positively to the Secretary-
General's call for additional funds. These are needed to
continue the Distinct Entity Trust Fund, which pays the
cost of the middle-ring security protective force. It is
that force that enables UNAMI to continue its mission.
We cannot and should not allow lack of money to
hinder or stop the vital work that UNAMI is doing.

Finally, we note the Secretary-General's
observations on Basra, in the south. As part of our
work to transition security responsibility to the Iraqis
in the south, the United Kingdom will soon consolidate
our forces at the Basra Air Base. We remain in close
contact with the United Nations over the logistics of
this move and we are looking at steps that would allow
UNAMI to play an active and productive role in the
south of Iraq.

