Mr. Taula (New Zealand): I would like to thank
our briefers - Mr. Chambas, Mr. Laborde, Ms. Barbut
and Ms. Ibrahim - for their insights. The challenges
they outlined have implications that go far beyond
the Sahel and its people. They relate to wider security
issues on the Council's agenda, as well as to refugee
and migration issues addressed by other bodies of the
United Nations and its Member States.

One of the recurring themes of discussions on
conflict prevention and resolution has been to call
for the Council to be more alert to the underlying
drivers of conflict. Tackling the symptoms of conflict
without adequately identifying and addressing its
underlying causes is a recipe for failure and continued
instability. It is therefore entirely appropriate, in our
view, that the Security Council should focus attention
on the underlying drivers of instability in the Sahel and
consider their implications for conflict in the region.

The causes of instability in the Sahel are complex
and varied. They include underdevelopment and
economic and political marginalization. Those
factors have fed unrest and instability and have
made the whole region vulnerable to encroachment
by extremists and transnational criminal networks.
As we have heard from our briefers, those trends are
undoubtedly being magnified and exacerbated by the
acute and intensifying challenges posed by droughts,
irregular rainfall, desertification and other climate and
ecological changes.

What we have heard today is a further manifestation
of the reality highlighted during the Council's open
debate on the security challenges faced by small island
developing States (see S/PV.7499), convened during
New Zealand's presidency in July 2015. Environmental
degradation and climate change can result in major
security concerns for small, vulnerable States with
limited resilience and capacity to adapt, whether they
are small islands or large, arid continental spaces. Most
of the tools for addressing such specific climate-related
challenges lie outside the Council Chamber. But
it is important that our discussions of the Sahel
are underpinned by a firm understanding of those
manifold challenges. They must be factored into our
conflict analysis and integrated into our strategies for
maintaining peace and security in the region.

One of the Council's major focuses regarding the
Sahel region has rightly been addressing the threat
posed by terrorism. We have placed heavy emphasis on
counter-terrorism measures, which play an essential role
in disrupting the terrorist networks that thrive where
governance is weakest. But they are not sufficient. It
is also necessary to consider the economic, social and
climatic drivers that facilitate terrorist recruitment.
As Ms. Ibrahim mentioned, if extremist groups such
as Boko Haram can offer a few hundred dollars to
poor, desperate people who are facing climate-induced
hardship and therefore have only grim and uncertain
choices in providing for their families, we should not
be surprised that many, tragically, have chosen to
join them.

The multiple drivers of conflict in the Sahel also
remind us that it is a mistake to simply call every person
who takes up arms a terrorist. In most cases, where
individuals and minority groups have rebelled out of
a sense of hopelessness, peace and security will be
secured only through negotiation and peace processes
designed to accommodate their grievances and achieve
rehabilitation and reintegration.

New Zealand has consistently stressed the
importance of various actors working together to
address peace and security issues. We have, for
example, been active proponents of encouraging both
the African Union Peace and Security Council and our
Security Council to improve their working methods
and work cooperatively with subregional bodies. That
principle is just as important in the Sahel region as it
is elsewhere. In the Sahel, we are unfortunately faced
with a situation where the problem is reasonably well-
defined but the solution is lost among a surfeit of
strategies. Duplicative, contradictory or competitive
approaches will simply serve to dissipate our effort and
diminish the impact on the ground. In that regard, we
welcome the recent consolidation of United Nations
regional offices to create the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel.

New Zealand stands ready to discuss creative
options to further rationalize existing efforts to deliver
tangible results for the Sahel region and its people.

I thank Spain and Egypt for initiating this
discussion today.

