Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I regret to inform
the Council that South Africa will vote against the draft
resolution on Myanmar. My Government decided on
this action on the basis of the following three reasons.
First, we believe that this draft resolution would
compromise the good offices of the Secretary-General
in dealing with sensitive matters of peace, security and
human rights. Secondly, it deals with issues that would
be best left to the Human Rights Council. The third and
most fundamental reason for us is that this draft
resolution does not fit with the Charter mandate
conferred upon the Security Council, which is to deal
with matters that are a threat to international peace and
security.
3

Before elaborating on these three reasons, my

delegation wishes to make it quite clear that we do not

wish to question, to judge or to comment on the

content of this draft resolution. For the record, I wish

to reaffirm that my delegation is concerned about the
situation in Myanmar.

When the General Assembly established the good
offices mission of the Secretary-General, it was to
make it possible for the United Nations to establish a
channel for private and confidential communication.
The commendable work done in Myanmar by Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Ibrahim Gambari
has been made possible through the use of the good
offices of the Secretary-General. This draft resolution,
should it be adopted, may close forever the window of
hope and communication opened by Mr. Gambari.

Furthermore, the draft resolution contains
information that would be best left to the Human Rights
Council. Ironically, should the Security Council adopt
it, that would mean that the Human Rights Council
would not be able to address the situation in Myanmar
while the Council remains seized with the matter.

Finally, it is worth recalling that the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has stated that
Myanmar is not a threat to its neighbours. Just
yesterday, on ll January 2007, the ASEAN Ministers
meeting in the Philippines reaffirmed that Myanmar is
no threat to international peace and security.

For these reasons, South Africa cannot vote in
favour of this draft resolution.

