Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin, Sir, by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I believe that your presidency will be
successful as the Council is facing extremely difficult
circumstances, particularly those under discussion
today.

Here we are once again, and I do not believe that
it will be the last time. We come to the Security
Council and call upon it to discharge its responsibilities
and commitments in accordance with its mandate to
maintain international peace and security by providing
protection for the Palestinian people, since it has not
yet done so.

On 19 September 2002, the Zionist occupying
forces reoccupied the headquarters and compound of
President Arafat. They have destroyed a number of
buildings in the compound and killed or injured a
number of civilians in a new defiance of international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. It is
not the first time that this has happened. The Council
has been called upon to protect President Arafat and
the Palestinian people several times before today. The
Palestinian people, the brethren of the Iraqi people, are
experiencing an unprecedented situation, comparable to
other situations that humanity has known in different
ages, such as the age of colonialism and the era of
fascism and nazism.
At a time when the international community is
incapable of taking the necessary measures to protect
the Palestinian people, the war crimes perpetrated by
the forces of the Zionist entity escalate. The
tremendous suffering of the Palestinian people
continues - for men, women and children, and in all
domains of life. We Iraqis know exactly what siege is,
as well as curfews, the bulldozing of land, killing, State
terrorism, the cutting off of power and water supplies,
and the cutting off of food and medicine. These are
weapons that have commonly been used against the
Palestinian people every hour and minute of the day, in
addition to traditional methods and weapons such as
bombings by Apache helicopters and United States
tanks and armoured vehicles. All the weapons that the
Israelis use are from the United States. In full View,
those weapons are being used with unprecedented
brutality against an unarmed people.

Despite the fact that the Zionist entity continues
its criminal acts, which have been described by many
just and fair people as war crimes, crimes against
humanity and State terrorism, the international
community, including the Security Council, has not
been able to stop those crimes or to hold the Zionist
aggressor accountable. This is a case of double
standards. This new United States doctrine in the
United Nations will destroy what is left of the
credibility of the Security Council and the United
Nations - if they still possessed credibility in the eyes
of some.

At a time when we really know that the specific
position of one permanent member of the Security
Council is not to allow the Council to take a decision
on a resolution to halt the aggressor and to order the
dispatch of a protection force for the Palestinian
people, we are fully confident that the Council will not
stay silent. It should shoulder its responsibility in
accordance with the Charter.

The Palestinian people's large and spontaneous
demonstrations in support of President Arafat in the
towns and camps of Palestine during the last two days
send a clear message to those who wish to change
Governments and Presidents according to their own
interests and their own likes and dislikes. Here we have
the Palestinian people upholding their President. All
the slogans being voiced reflect the strong faith of that
people, who clearly insist on President Arafat despite
the numerous American and Zionist attempts to apply
pressure to replace him. The siege on President Arafat
by the Zionist occupying forces is a huge challenge to
the resolutions of international law and a flagrant
breach of the norms of international humanitarian law
and the United Nations Charter.

My delegation believes that silence in the face of
such brutal crimes is silence in the face of truth.
Therefore, the Security Council has a duty to take the
necessary measures to protect this unarmed people and
its legitimate leadership from the Zionist machine of
war and destruction. This is a historic responsibility,
which the Council should undertake.

The draft resolution submitted to the Council by
the Arab Group is the bare minimum. It is even less
than that. Therefore, any opposition to the draft
resolution reflects the policy of might, to which the
Security Council should put an end in all
circumstances. Otherwise, the pressure will definitely
lead to an explosion. It will then be too late, and
everyone will be extremely regretful.

