Mr. Zoumanigui (Guinea) (spoke in French):
First, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to thank you for
organizing this meeting. I also wish to assure you of
our complete cooperation. This is an opportunity for
me to express our gratitude to His Excellency
Mr. Giadalla Ettalhi, Permanent Representative of the
Socialist People's Libyan Arab J amahiriya for the work
achieved in the past month. Allow me to express to
Ms. Coomaraswamy, Ms. Veneman and Ms. Becker our
appreciation for the presentation of the report and for
their statements which further enlightened us on this
matter.

The founding fathers of our Organization in
adopting its Charter stressed, inter alia, the need for the
peoples of the United Nations, "to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war to promote
social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom" and, to that end, "to unite [their] strength to
maintain international peace and security."

The conflicts of today, given their new
dimensions, affect civilian populations more, in
particular those who are the most vulnerable including,
inter alia, children. The actions of the international
community to find a solution to this situation are
encouraging and should be supported. In that respect,
we welcome the fact that the Security Council has been
dealing with this important matter on a permanent
basis since 1999, with particular focus on the full
implementation of relevant recommendations and the
strengthening of measures to be taken at all levels to
put a definitive end to the tragic consequences of
conflicts on children worldwide.

We appreciate the report in document
S/2007/757, which provides useful information on
compliance in ending the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict and also includes
information on progress made in the establishment of a
monitoring and reporting mechanism and in the
development and implementation of action plans.

While welcoming the progress achieved by the
parties, my delegation shares the concerns expressed in
the report, supports the efforts under way and favours
an in-depth consideration of the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General.

My delegation notes that the success of any
action depends on cooperation. For that reason, we
encourage partnership between United Nations bodies
on the one hand and between those bodies and other
national and international actors on the other, so that
the question of children and armed conflict will have a
positive outcome. In addition, the Security Council
should carry out a comprehensive thematic evaluation
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
encompassing all the issues that have an impact on
children and armed conflict: women, peace and
security, small arms and light weapons and cross-
border matters.

We encourage, in particular cooperation between
the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, which in our opinion should take into
account the issue of children and armed conflict.

My delegation firmly supports a zero-tolerance
policy and welcomes the adoption of a comprehensive
strategy on assistance and support to victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse. This will help the United
Nations to help victims of sexual exploitation
responsibly and in a coordinated manner. Thus, my
delegation, which condemns rape and sexual violence
during armed conflict, considers that in no situation
should such violence serve as a weapon of war.

We appeal to Member States to attach greater
importance to the work of the 2008 Third Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. The scope and tragic
consequences of the illicit use of those weapons show
that the fight against this scourge requires greater
capabilities than those of national entities alone. Thus,
it behoves the international community to draw up and
implement specific measures for combating the
scourge.

Clearly, the participation of my delegation in this
meeting is based on the will of my Government to be
fully involved in the efforts of the international
community to effectively combat the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflict. Even though Guinea
itself has not been the theatre of armed conflict, it
belongs to a continent, and in particular to a subregion,
which has long been scarred by conflicts that have had
a negative impact on the lives of countless children.
My Government, aware of its responsibilities, has
spared no effort to be involved in the search for a
solution to conflicts in the subregion.

Today we are encouraged by the process of peace
and stabilization in the countries of the Mano River
Union, Cote d'Ivoire and Guinea-Bissau. We invite the
international community to give further support to that
process. In the view of my delegation, the various
experiences gained at the national, subregional,
regional and international levels in combating the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict
should be shared in order to bring into play the
comparative advantages of each organization and
country.

Lastly, my delegation expresses the hope that this
meeting will make it possible for us to plan future
actions on the basis of experience gained in order to
better discharge a common and historic duty: to
bequeath to the next generation - that is, today's
children - a world of peace, security, justice, progress
and harmony.

