Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): Last
Tuesday's terrorist attack against the United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad profoundly shocked and upset
my country. On behalf of the Bulgarian Government, I
should like to extend the sincerest condolences of the
Bulgarian people to the families of those who were
killed in the attack and our sympathy to the wounded
and to their families.

Sergio Vieira de Mello was an outstanding
international civil servant who, through his spirit of
self-sacrifice and his dynamism, made his mark on
parts of the world as varied as Timor-Leste and
Kosovo. We will never forget him.

It seems to us that, even as rescue teams continue
to search the rubble of the Canal Hotel, the best way to
honour the memory of Sergio Vieira de Mello and his
colleagues is to continue the work they began in Iraq,
so that the Iraqi people can take charge once again of
their own destiny and build the free and democratic
Iraq that the terrorists who killed them do not wish to
see.

It comes as no surprise that no group has yet
claimed responsibility for the heinous act committed in
Baghdad. Evil sometimes dares not show its face to a
horrified international community. For this reason, we
must fight this evil with even greater vigour and unity.

I should like to thank Ambassador Negroponte
and Sir Emyr Jones Parry for their reports on the
situation in Iraq three months after the adoption of
resolution 1483 (2003). I am deeply impressed by the
scope of the work that the United States and the United
Kingdom have done in Iraq in terms of the political and
economic reconstruction of the country.

The news coming out of the country, which is
sometimes a source of concern, does not always enable
us to see the good work done by the international
community to help the Iraqis to build the Iraq that we
all want.

My country, Bulgaria, is among those deeply
committed to the process of stabilization and
reconstruction in Iraq. In terms of security, Bulgaria
has contributed a battalion which has been deployed in
the Karbala region. My country is also prepared to
contribute its expertise and its resources to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI).

We deem crucial that at this time the international
community, through the United Nations, regain its
unity and help the Iraqi people to take charge of its
own destiny. Bulgaria continues to attach importance to
the central role of the Organization in the political and
economic reconstruction of Iraq. We believe that the
United Nations has the necessary expertise and
experience to do outstanding work in Iraq. The clearest
evidence of this is the work that was accomplished by
Sergio Vieira de Mello and his colleagues.

Regarding the political process, we believe that
the creation of the interim Governing Council is an
important step in the creation of an internationally
recognized Iraqi Government. We are convinced that,
through this process, Iraq will regain its full
sovereignty and be able to make the extremely difficult
transition from an internationally isolated authoritarian
regime to a democratic Iraq that is fully involved in the
international arena and at peace with its neighbours.

Bulgaria will continue to contribute to the work
of the United Nations in Iraq. Of course, we must
consider ways to enhance the security of United
Nations staff in Iraq and everywhere else in the world.
But Tuesday's terrorist attack should not deter us from
following the course charted by Sergio Vieira de Mello
towards an increasingly important and active role of
the United Nations in Iraq.

Resolution 1500 (2003), which created UNAMI,
is an excellent foundation for this work. It is important
that the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council
be fully implemented.

Before concluding, I should like to reiterate
Bulgaria's belief that only if there is unity within the
Council can Iraq regain its full sovereignty and take
charge of its future, which can only be one of freedom
and democracy.

