Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea thanks
Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), for his
excellent briefing on the situation in Libya during the
recent period, as well as for his commitment to carrying
out his mandate.
We also express our gratitude to Ambassador
Olof Skoog, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya, for having shared with us his
impressions and what he experienced and saw during
his recent visit to Tripoli.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea joins the
voices of both UNSMIL and the United Nations in
condemning the events that have taken place in Tripoli
in recent days, in particular the attacks of armed groups
and militias on hospitals and their medical staff, as
well as on private entities, with the aim of intimidating
and systematically instilling fear, emboldened by the
prevalence of impunity for their actions. That is one of
the issues that must be confronted in order to put an end
to such cowardly, detestable and deplorable actions.
We call for the absolute and immediate cessation of
such actions. They must not happen again in future.
We must remember that any attack on civilians or
medical facilities and their personnel is prohibited by
international humanitarian law, and that such actions
can be considered war crimes.

As it has in previous statements, the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea expresses once again its deep
concern over the sad situation faced by migrants and
refugees trapped in Libya, who are subject to deplorable
humiliation and continue to suffer arbitrary detention,
who fall prey to illegal human trafficking networks
and victim to systematic violations of human rights,
and who in some cases are sold as slaves. They endure
terrible conditions of extreme overcrowding, without
access to health care or adequate food. They are
subjected to torture and other ill treatment in detention
centres, without minimum guarantees or basic humane
conditions. For that reason, as we said on Monday,
5 November (see S/PV.8389), we welcome the updating
of the sanctions regime and the inscription of new
individuals on the list of sanctions. These measures are
aimed at confronting that situation and sending a clear
and direct message to the perpetrators of those barbaric
violations that they may be held accountable for their
actions before courts of law.

We believe that we need to take further steps. It is
no secret to any of us that groups that smuggle migrants
and violate their rights are being financed by third
parties. In our view, such activities are shameful. We
therefore propose that an investigation be launched in
order to identify those elements or groups to ensure that
they feel the weight ofthe Council's sanctions. What we
are witnessing in Libya, where some 200 armed groups
are vying for control of a natural resource, petrol,
is something that we have seen in other countries of
Africa where armed groups, financed by third parties,
sow terror and destruction while the third parties go
unpunished. We have always called for investigations
to ensure that those groups, too, feel the weight
of sanctions.

In conclusion, we welcome with optimism the
positive aspects outlined by Special Representative
Salame in his briefing, such as the ceasefire, the
resumption of oil production, which now stands at a
rate of almost 1.3 million barrels per day, the prospect
of elections and the possible establishment of peace.
However, we recognize that much needs to be done in
Libya. We acknowledge that it is Libyans themselves
who must lead the process, allowing for the full
implementation of the United Nations action plan and
achieving reconciliation through frank, inclusive and
direct dialogue with room for all those voices in favour
of national unification and the restoration of peace
to be heard. In that context, the upcoming Palermo
conference is of vital importance.

