Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): We are delighted
to report to the Security Council for the second time
under your presidency, Sir. We would like to recognize
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy
Haysom for their briefings. We would also like to wish
Mr. Haysom the best of luck in his new assignment.

On behalf of our Government, we welcome the
Secretary-General's letter regarding the reconfiguration
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) and the situation in the Abyei Area
(S/2018/778). The proposals the Secretary-General is
recommending have been well received by the Dinka
Ngok. I hope that the Council was able to read the
letter of the Ngok Dinka chiefdoms, which we sent to
it yesterday.

While we welcome the proposals and
recommendations of the Secretary-General, we would
like to express our concerns regarding the proposed
migration police liaising with the resident Misseriya
community in the Abyei Area, because, in the long
run, that practice may legitimize illegal residency and
further occupation of Dinka lands, which continue
to discourage the return of Ngok Dinka internally
displaced persons to their rightful lands.

Regarding the benchmarks, our Government is still
committed to engaging the Government of the Sudan
to work together with it to achieve the benchmarks.
However, as the Council may know, for technical
reasons, the two sides have not been able to meet
regularly, especially while the region was preoccupied
with the revitalized Peace Agreement negotiations. But
we are now reliably informed, that a meeting of the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism is scheduled to
take place on 23 and 24 September in Addis Ababa.

With regard to resolution 2416 (2018), my delegation
would like to propose a way ofimplementing paragraph
6. Members may recall that paragraph 6 instructs the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel to
update the Security Council on progress made by the
parties on the implementation of the Agreement on
Temporary Arrangements for the Administration and
Security of the Abyei Area and on progress made on
the settlement of the final status and two other issues.
Since the parties have not been meeting consistently,
we would like to propose that the parties directly update
the Security Council, jointly or individually.

In conclusion, ifit seems that there has been relative
peace in the Abyei areas in recent years, it is because,
to quote from the letter of the Dinka Ngok chiefs,

"We fully agree that UNISFA has performed quite
well over the past seven years of its presence in
the Abyei Area. It has practically averted further
confrontation between the Sudan and South Sudan,
particularly over Abyei. Furthermore, we believe
that the proposed adjustments to the UNISFA
mandate will add more dimensions to a sustainable
peace across borders and between communities
interacting within the Abyei box".

Therefore, to enhance the current UNISFA force level
with the proposed police element would be a prudent
and wise decision on the part of the Security Council.

