The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Under-Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs and International Coooperation of Italy.

First ofall, I would like to thank High Commissioner
Filippo Grandi for his comprehensive and outstanding
remarks and for the work carried out on the ground by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to assist all those in need of international
protection, including the victims of trafficking.

Allow me also to thank all of the members of the
Security Council for their insightful contributions on
an issue that deserves an urgent, coherent and collective
response, as well as preventive action whenever
possible. We cannot close our eyes in the face of human
suffering. We cannot hide its tragic consequences for
future generations. Therefore, today we make a call
for action.

I think that regular briefings on this matter are more
than welcome. Of course, Italy will continue to play its
part, and the refugee agency can count on Italy's full
support. From Myanmar to Libya, and from Somalia to
Jordan and Yemen, Italy will work side by side with the
agency to ensure protection and assistance for civilian
populations, in particular the most vulnerable segments
and those who deserve special protection.

We are aware of the increasing need for financial
resources in order to operate in multiple crisis
scenarios, which is why we have decided to further
increase our financial support and plan to remain
one of the agency's main donors. In addition to our
annual voluntary contribution to the regular budget so
far, we have already approved additional emergency
humanitarian projects. Further initiatives will be
implemented by the end of the year. The dramatic
figures provided by the High Commissioner and the
many critical situations he addressed in his briefing
clearly show that we are facing one of the most serious
challenges to international stability, and especially to
respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms, as
well as international humanitarian law.

We must shift the focus on human mobility from
an emergency approach to an encompassing and long-
term one. We need to enhance our capacity to tackle the
root causes of crises and give hope and dignity to the
most vulnerable segments of the civilian population,
especially youth. Indeed, the 2016 New York Declaration
for Refugees and Migrants has improved the way in
which the international community has begun to look
at and respond to such a large and disorderly movement
of refugees and migrants. We need ajoint response and
strengthened cooperation among countries of origin,
transit and destination.

In our opinion, the global compact for safe, orderly
and regular migration and the global compact on
refugees, to be adopted next year, should represent a step
forward in preventing and eradicating the root causes
of forced migration and refugees flows. We have shared
our proposals, which are based on three main actions,
namely, investing, protecting and valuing - investing
in supporting countries of origin and transit, protecting
refugees and the most vulnerable migrants and valuing
the many positive aspects of migration flows.

Italy's priority is to promote two key principles.
The first one is partnership among countries of origin,
transit and destination of flows. There is growing
evidence of the need to collaborate on migration, not
just to fight trafficking in human beings and criminal
networks associated with migratory movements, but
also to deal with the root causes of migration. The
second key principle, which I already mentioned, is
shared responsibility, both in managing the migratory
flows and in protecting migrants and refugees,
especially the most vulnerable ones, such as women,
children and people with disabilities.

With particular reference to the global compact on
refugees, increasing resettlement and complementary
pathways for admission are essential to cope with
the current large-scale influx of refugees from crisis
areas such as Syria, Libya, South Sudan, Somalia,
Afghanistan and Myanmar.

In Libya, it is critical to improve access to protection
and support for asylum-seekers, refugees and internally
displaced people and vulnerable migrants, in the light
of the recent drastic decrease in sea arrivals in Italy
from Libya, on one hand, and the potential increase
in the number of those remaining in Libya in unsafe
and precarious conditions, on the other. Scaling up the
presence ofthe refugee agency in Libya is important, as
the High Commissioner mentioned, for the protection
of human rights in refugee camps.

The Security Council can play an important role in
preventing and halting the refugee crisis by promoting
and encouraging the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, which are the main causes of large-scale
movements of displaced people. In that context, I
would like to express once again Italy's support for the
Secretary-General's peace continuum approach - from
prevention to peacekeeping, from post-conflict recovery
to inclusive national reconciliation and sustainable
development processes. The Security Council can
play its role, including when renewing or drafting
peacekeeping missions' mandates. Indeed, as the High
Commissioner highlighted, peacekeeping can be a
fundamental and extraordinary tool to protect refugees
and migrants and to facilitate their relocation.

Most important, the Council needs to act with
resolve and unity in order to put an end to the protracted
crises and conflicts that force people to flee. I have
mentioned all such crises and protracted conflicts. We,
as members of the Security Council, have the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. We must therefore meet the expectations of
the millions of people who are counting on us to restore
and build peace.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

