Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I also thank the High Commissioner for Human Rights
for his briefing.

Spain deeply regrets the Russian veto of the draft
resolution (S/2015/508), submitted by the United
Kingdom to commemorate the twentieth anniversary
of the Srebrenica genocide. As the Deputy Secretary-
General mentioned at the outset, one of the major
responsibilities ofthe United Nations and ofthe Security
Council is to prevent atrocity crimes such as the one
that occurred in Srebrenica two decades ago. Vetoing
such an initiative represents two steps backwards in the
Organization's efforts to support progress in terms of
the responsibility to protect our citizens and in limiting
the use of the veto for atrocity crimes.

The Security Council meets very frequently and
addresses a great many issues very seriously. However,
the issue before us today has special significance.
Today we are meeting to honour the memory of the
victims of one of the most tragic episodes in Europe in
recent history and to express our solidarity and respect
to the survivors and the relatives of those who died.
But we are also pointedly meeting to look towards the
future and to reiterate unequivocally once again that
the events of 20 years ago will never happen again.

The conflictthatdevastatedBosnia andHerzegovina
of 20 years ago, with all of its unspeakable crimes, is
one of the worst tragedies in the history of Europe in
the second half of the twentieth century. The genocide
carried out in Srebrenica in July 1995 was undoubtedly
an atrocity that we must all deplore. As always occurs
in war, nobody wins, everybody loses, and all parties
suffer. All parties are victims who weep. The victims
of Srebrenica are our victims.

Over the past 20 years, the United Nations has
done admirable work on the basis of lessons learned.
We have worked very hard on an early warning system
and on the prevention of atrocities, such as that we
commemorate today. Vital contributions have been
made to our work, including the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document (General Assembly resolution 60/1)
on the responsibility to protect. We now have such posts
as the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect, who report to
the Secretary-General and who play a huge role in
prevention and protection. The same is true of the role
of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and for Children and
Armed Conflicts. Finally, we also have the Secretary-
General's Rights Up Front initiative.

Spain is contributing to all those efforts. A
meeting of the Global Network for Focal Points on
the Responsibility to Protect was held just recently, in
Madrid on 23 and 24 June, which considered, among
other topics, the new challenges and threats confronting
the most vulnerable populations and the contemporary
factors linked to crimes against humanity.
But the most important lessons that we have learned
over the 20 years since Srebrenica have been in Bosnia
and Herzegovina itself. Twenty years after the signing
of the Dayton Peace Accords, which laid the foundations
of peace and launched Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
path towards a new era, the country is advancing down
the path of reconciliation, socioeconomic progress, and
full integration into Europe, to which it belongs in its
own right.

A few months ago in the biannual debate on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/PV.7440),
we welcomed the entrance into force of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement between that country and
the European Union. We welcome the future-oriented
perspective shown by leaders of all political stripes in
undertaking that written commitment and expressing
the voice and the desire of all citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to continue down the path of reform and
stability. That is the path to follow. That is today's Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and that is why we commemorate all
the victims who have suffered.

