Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): On behalf of the
Indonesian delegation, I have the pleasure of
welcoming the participation in today's Security
Council meeting of the President of the Republic of
Djibouti, His Excellency Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh. We
listened attentively to his statement and, of course, to
the statement of the Permanent Representative of
Eritrea.

The situation between Djibouti and Eritrea is a
cause of concern for Indonesia. The situation poses real
danger for both countries and, beyond, for the region.
It is thus a problem that needs to be resolved
peacefully.

We thank the Secretary-General for his follow-up
to the Security Council's request to send a fact-finding
mission to the region. We regret that the mission, while
it visited Djibouti, was unable to go to Eritrea; this
deprived us of an opportunity to have an explanation of
the views of one of the key parties. We would benefit
from clarification of the nature of the current situation
from the perspective of all the parties. Today's
deliberations will go some way in addressing that need.

The efforts of various parties, in particular the
African Union, the League of Arab States and
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, to assist
in bridging the two parties' differences are welcome
and should be commended.
The Security Council's consideration of the
Djibouti-Eritrea issue needs not only to address the
tension itself, but also to support the resolution of the
underlying causes, including the border problem. The

parties may deny having aggressive intentions,
territorial ambitions or an intention to allow the
situation to slide into a full blown conflagration, and
indeed there are no reasons to believe otherwise.
Notwithstanding their intentions, however, the
situation could develop in an unanticipated direction
and take on a logic of its own towards wider
conflagration, as many conflicts do.

We therefore welcome the report of Djibouti's
withdrawal of its forces to the status quo ante. A
similar step by Eritrea would be equally welcome.
Furthermore, both sides need to commence diplomatic
and judicial approaches to settle their dispute, either
directly or with the involvement of a third party. It is
our belief that the resolution of the current crisis
cannot be based on the status quo, which will not be
sustainable. There is a danger in letting the situation on
the border fester without a resolution.

We urge both countries to redouble their efforts to
determine and demarcate their border as soon as
possible. They need to come together to discuss and
find mutually acceptable ways and means to do so.
Both countries should see it as being in their vital
interest to resolve the border problem peacefully.

Finally, we recognize the linkages between the
tension between the two countries and the broader
security issues in the Horn of Africa. The report of the
United Nations fact-finding mission (S/2008/602)
made a connection between this issue and the Eritrea-
Ethiopia border problem. While we wish to avoid
blurring the two issues, the fact that these countries are
geographically in proximity to each other needs to be
recognized.

