The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya.

At the outset, I would like to extend my thanks to
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing to the Council this morning.

As the Permanent Observer of Palestine has said,
since the end of the Annapolis Conference, just a few
weeks ago, Israeli occupation authorities have
escalated their aggression against the Palestinian
people in the Palestinian territories occupied since
1967. In the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, Israel kills,
intimidates, terrorizes and causes starvation. What is
the purpose of that escalation directly in the wake of
the Annapolis Conference? Finding the answer to that
question does not require much intelligence or a great
deal of thought. Regrettably, there is nothing new
about Israel's actions, including its ignoring of
international law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, and its imposition of collective
punishment. I believe we would all agree that Israel's
behaviour is consistent. However, our memory may
sometimes be highly selective.

It is unthinkable that an occupying Power should
deprive 1.5 million people living on a narrow piece of
land of the freedom of movement, even preventing
them from having access to life's basic needs - food,
medicine and fuel - from any source, including the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which has been
unable to deliver supplies.

Meanwhile, Israel is continuing its military
attacks with the most modern and lethal sorts of
weapons. The primary victims of those attacks are
civilians, including women, children and older persons.
It is indeed unfortunate and regrettable that the Israeli
representative attempted this morning to imply that
Israel was punishing Palestinians because they elected
one particular Palestinian movement and not another.

I am beginning to wonder how to describe this
situation. How can we categorize preventing access by
1.5 million people to food, medicine, fuel, movement
and other necessities? Members can see with their eyes
what is taking place in the territories occupied since
1967, and have heard the statements by officials on the
ground, as Ambassador Urbina has reminded us. As
UNRWA Commissioner-General Karen Koning
AbuZayd has said, we are very concerned and feel
great fear with regard to what is taking place on the
ground. The Commissioner-General has also said that
more than 600,000 Palestinians living in Gaza City are
now living in complete darkness. Bakeries have closed
and hospital generators are no longer working.
Mr. Pascoe also confirmed that to us this morning. This
desperate appeal went on to recall that Gaza cannot
live on food convoys alone; what is required is to
preserve human dignity in Gaza. Does that human
dignity mean nothing to the Security Council?

We do not believe that these practices against
civilians can be justified on any pretext; nor can they
be equated with any other acts. Due to the unjust
closures, the humanitarian situation in Gaza has
reached an unprecedented level of deterioration.
Civilians, including children, are being killed and sick
people are dying because the occupying Power is
preventing patients and medical personnel from
reaching hospitals and is blocking deliveries of
medicine. Some people even face death by starvation
because they can no longer get food. People are living
in darkness. Much of the Gaza Strip is under waste
water, because the sewage pumping station is not
working due to the lack of fuel as a result of the
closure of all crossing points in Gaza. All of that is due
to the fact that the occupying Power has decided to
label Gaza a "hostile entity". That is unprecedented.
Never in history has an occupier made such a claim.

The humanitarian situation in occupied Gaza has
reached a state that requires the Security Council to
urgently shoulder its responsibility. We must remember
what has happened in the past when the Council has
not acted in other places. Need I recall those events?
The Security Council must assume its responsibility
under the Charter. It must adopt urgent measures to
protect the civilian population in Gaza from attempts at
genocide by the occupying Power. I am sorry, I cannot
find another word to describe what is happening there.
The Security Council must adopt urgent measures to
lift the siege on Gaza immediately, before it is too late.

Have members not heard yet another appeal by
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which
stated that it would be forced, in two days' time, to halt
the provision of supplies upon which 900,000
Palestinians entirely depend if the situation continues
as it is? Even from a moral point of View, the Council
must not let the Israelis have a free hand to close and
open crossings whenever they please, to allow a fuel
convoy to pass through today but not tomorrow. The
Council must force the occupying Power to respect
international law by putting an end to the policies of
siege and closure.

Allow me to remind the Council that we have a
draft presidential statement before us that focuses on
the humanitarian aspects of the situation in response to
the concerns that members expressed yesterday in
consultations. I am hoping that it will receive sufficient
support.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council

I give the floor to the representative of Saudi
Arabia.

