Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): Like earlier
speakers, I should like to welcome Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch, High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Coordinator of United
Nations Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I thank
them for the very detailed information they have just
shared with us on the evolution of the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Our meeting today, in the presence of the high
United Nations officials responsible for overseeing the
implementation of the Dayton/Paris agreements, gives
us an opportunity to welcome the encouraging results
achieved in that task, despite the many difficulties
encountered along the way.

From a political standpoint, my delegation is
pleased with the considerable efforts that have been
made to resolve the thorny issues of ethnic
reconciliation and the establishment of democratic
institutions and the rule of law in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this context, we welcome the adoption
on 23 August of the Election Law after several years of
unsuccessful attempts. The adoption of that Law was
undoubtedly a decisive step taken by Bosnia and
Herzegovina towards democratic governance and
admission into the Council of Europe, as well as access
to the European processes of integration. In order to
achieve these political objectives, which are very
important to my delegation, it is crucial that all the
inhabitants of Bosnia and Herzegovina commit
themselves fully and jointly to creating a democratic
and multi-ethnic society.

From the economic perspective, my delegation
feels that institutional reform must go hand in hand
with economic restructuring that will allow Bosnia and
Herzegovina to rely on its own strength and internal
resources. The private sector is the driving force of
development and we therefore welcome and support
the outstanding efforts of the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to revitalize that important
sector. Because economic development is the best
guarantor of peace, my delegation urges the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to persevere with the
macroeconomic reform that has been undertaken and to
cooperate with international financial institutions in
order to integrate Bosnia and Herzegovina in European
and Atlantic structures. In order to achieve these
objectives, it is essential to engage in an unflagging
struggle against corruption.

The establishment of an effective judiciary
system that can distribute fair justice to the citizens is
also a source of concern to my delegation. We welcome
and encourage the efforts that have been made in the
reform of the justice system and the human rights
institutions. Everything must be done so that this new
justice system can guarantee for all the inhabitants of
Bosnia and Herzegovina their legitimate cultural and
legal rights.

It is a fact that the continued presence of war
criminals in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a serious curb
on the establishment of peace and inter-ethnic
reconciliation. We welcome the arrests that have
already been made and encourage all States and
Entities to do everything they can to track down and
hand over to the international tribunal all those that are
to blame. It is time for the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to improve their cooperation with the
International Criminal Court.

From a humanitarian standpoint, we note with
interest the return of many minority citizens to their
homes. This important wave of return is to be
encouraged. Every effort must be made in order to
come to their assistance and to punish severely those
who are guilty of acts of violence against these
minorities.

Lastly, my delegation reaffirms its support for the
considerable efforts made by the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) in the
framework of the implementation of the general
framework agreement for peace in that country. As we
see it, the stabilizing role played by UNMIBH is vital
for the consolidation of peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

