The President: In accordance with rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Argentina, Australia,
Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Singapore, South Africa, Switzerland and
Turkey to participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/585, which contains a letter dated
1 July 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Japan to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

All speakers, Council members and non-Council
members alike, are asked to kindly keep their
interventions succinct and within four minutes.
Speakers who wish to do so may circulate the text of
a more detailed statement to Council members and
participants, without making oral statements that
exceed four minutes. The microphone light will start
blinking at the 3-minute, 30-sec0nd mark. At the
4-minute, 30-second mark, the President will urge
speakers to kindly wrap-up immediately, as necessary.
I would like to appeal to speakers to deliver their
statements at a reasonable speed so that interpretation
may be provided accurately.

I wish to inform all concerned that this open debate
will be suspended during the lunch hour.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Japan.

Let me begin by expressing my sincere appreciation
to all the Member States that are participating in what
I believe to be an important and timely open debate
to share their valuable Views. I should like to take the
floor first so that I can provide the broad context of
this debate.

The Security Council's working methods are crucial
to its ability to fulfil its responsibility to act promptly
and effectively on behalf of international peace and
security. That is why Japan has attached great importance
to codifying, improving and implementing the working
methods of the Council. In 2006, the first note 507 by
the President of the Security Council (S/2006/507) was
compiled. It set forth clearly the Council's practices at
the time to enhance the transparency, efficiency and
inclusiveness of its working methods. Today marks the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of that note.

Over the past decade, the Security Council has made
further progress in codifying and improving its working
methods, most notably in the form of the revised note
507 of 2010 (S/2010/507). We are pleased with much
of the positive feedback on the note 507 as a useful
handbook, particularly for newly elected members. Yet,
it is important for the Council to review the progress
periodically and make necessary adjustments. In
the coming months, the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters intends
to work towards a revised note 507. Some measures
may need to be revisisted and adjusted; some others
may need further efforts for enhanced implementation.
Decisions contained in a number of separate additional
notes may need to be consolidated and streamlined.

I have convened this open debate today because
I thought that the Council would benefit greatly from
listening closely to the views of the wider United
Nations membership, in addition to accumulating best
practices within the Council. That is not to say that the
Council has not made progress. Let me refer to some
concrete examples.

To take full advantage of the elections of the
non-permanent members being carried out from this
year on, Japan as Chair of the Informal Working
Group has proposed that the Working Group revisit
the transitional arrangements for the newly elected
members of the Council. I am delighted to draw
attention to the fact that, after intensive discussions,
on 15 July the Council adopted the new presidential
note S/2016/619, which makes improvements to the
transitional arrangements. Within that note, the
newly elected members are now invited to observe
the Council's meetings from 1 October. The process
for selecting the Chairs of subsidiary organs will be
carried out in a more transparent and inclusive manner.
I am convinced that this will benefit not only the newly
elected members by helping them to prepare more
efficiently, but also the Council as a whole by allowing
it to function much more effectively right from the
beginning of the year.

Enhancing transparency is another area in which,
although it may not be fully satisfactory to the wider
membership, the Security Council has made consistent
efforts in recent years. As President of the Security
Council, I have been conducting a press stake-out after
every session of informal consultations, though there is
a limit to the contents thatI can share. I also welcome the
holding of informal wrap-up briefing sessions, which
have become a regular practice in recent years. In an
effort to continue and build upon that good practice, on
29 July I will hold an informal wrap-up briefing session
with the participation of several other Council members
as briefers. I look forward to seeing many Council
members, as well as non-Council members there.

The participation of many Member States in
today's debate reflects the strong interest of the wider
membership. The voices of all States Members of the
United Nations are valuable in making the Council more
effective. As Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters, I
intend to listen to them closely and will follow up on
their specific, practical suggestions in the process of
revising note 507.

I should like to conclude my remarks by stating
that improving working methods is not the end of the
story. An enlarged Security Council that reflects the
geopolitical realities of the twenty-first century could
be more effective in dealing with the unprecedented
challenges we face today. Japan will continue to work
with all Member States towards that goal.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the other members of the
Security Council.

