Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would also like
to start by thanking today's briefers for their
insightful presentations.

Three years ago, by adopting resolution 2178 (2014),
the Council responded to the evolving phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters, whose participation on
the side of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
exacerbated conflicts in the Middle East. As a result,
around the world many foreign terrorist fighters have
been prevented from reaching Iraq and Syria, and
their recruitment and financing campaigns have been
revealed and disrupted. Yet, despite resolute measures,
many extremists have managed to infiltrate the region.

Now, due to the constant military pressure exerted
by the international community, ISIL has suffered
significant losses and its so-called caliphate has
collapsed. Still, this fight is far from over. We have
repeatedly raised concerns about possible strategies
that this terrorist organization could choose to ensure
its survival. Sadly, they have all come true, as ISIL
has accelerated the transfer of human and financial
resources to its affiliates in other countries. Europe
and North Africa, as well as Central and South-East
Asia, have to face the inflow of returning or relocating
foreign terrorist fighters. The threat is more than real
as these former ISIL fighters are ready to merge with
any terrorist group, should the opportunity arise, and
put the lethal skills they have acquired in Iraq and Syria
to use. Their joining the fray of existing conflicts will
only exacerbate the latter, increasing their complexity
and duration.

Another side of this problem is the possible abuse
of asylum systems by terrorists at a time when huge
waves of migrants are arriving from conflict zones in
search of shelter. There is a growing concern over the
creation of small sleeping cells in different parts of the
world, as well as the potential preparation of signature
lone-wolf attacks. The terrorist strikes that have swept
through Europe are a clear reflection of this.

No country can be immune to this threat's
manifestations. That is why Ukraine is also actively
working to ensure that all necessary measures are
taken domestically to counter this threat. In recent
years, Ukraine has also acquired bitter experience
in countering the terrorist threat fuelled by external
support for terrorist groups and organizations in the
east of the country. The operations conducted by the
security service okaraine from 2015 onwards have led
to the liquidation oflogistical networks, with 23 transfer
points used for the facilitation of travel of foreign
terrorist fighters who were natives of the Caucasus,
Central Asia and Europe through Ukraine and Turkey
to the Syrian-Iraqi zone and back. Persons responsible
for creating and maintaining transfer points were
arrested and sentenced. Bearing in mind that a relevant
United Nations sanctions regime is a vital and effective
tool against terrorism, Ukraine has also submitted
respective listing requests to the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities.

To address changes in terrorists' modus operandi,
we might consider adopting revised sophisticated
measures to supplement resolution 2178 (2014). The
reviews of its implementation show that combating
potential threats posed by returning foreign terrorist
fighters and relocating them requires the following.

First, there is the matter of introducing advanced
technologies for identifying terrorists at border
crossing points, while conducting risk assessments
of the most vulnerable border segments to strengthen
their respective control. That cannot be accomplished
without expeditious information-sharing among States,
especially terrorists' biometric data, as well as ensuring
a broader use of Advanced Passenger Information
(API) and INTERPOL databases. In that regard,
we welcome the decision of the International Civil
Aviation Organization to approve API as a universal
standard and call on it to help Member States in need
of its assistance to ensure its effective implementation.

Secondly, there is the issue of ensuring a more
universal criminalization of the actions of foreign
terrorist fighters and conducting proper investigations
of their crimes so that terrorists are apprehended and
do not escape justice. The support of affected countries
in collecting credible evidence, as well as that of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011, and the recently
established United Nations investigative team for
Iraq, is vital to that end. Moreover, an appropriate
amount of caution is required in dealing with specific
categories of returnees, in particular minors, women,
family members and disillusioned returnees, who have
committed less serious offences. In cases in which it
is not appropriate to level terrorism-related charges,
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes should
be implemented.

Last but not the least, we must counter the threat
of radicalization posed by returnees. Some are coming
back battle-hardened, strongly indoctrinated and with
newly forged ties with extremist groups. Therefore,
States should focus on implementing nuanced measures
in line with the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism and resolution 2354 (2017),
on countering terrorist narratives.

Implementing the corresponding measures
demands concerted and harmonized actions on the
part of the entire international community. That is
why international cooperation at the regional and
global levels between respective law-enforcement
and intelligence agencies is indispensable. Without it,
any kind of national effort will be futile. The further
development and dissemination of good practices in
preventing the flow of foreign terrorist fighters are
also crucial to dealing with that phenomenon. In that
regard, we support the work being done by the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, as well as that
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate in assisting and enabling Member States to
strengthen their respective capacities.

