Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the briefing by Baroness Ashton, High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union, on cooperation between the
Union and the United Nations. China attaches great
importance to cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In January last year, an open debate on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security (see S/PV.6257) was
held in the Council on the initiative of the Chinese
presidency. The meeting issued a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/l) reiterating the importance and the
necessity of mutually reinforcing cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.

The European Union (EU) is a major cooperation
partner of the United Nations and has made positive
contributions to the maintenance of international peace
and security. In recent years, the EU has been actively
engaged in preventive diplomacy and good offices on
hot-spot issues, and has promoted the settlement of
conflicts and disputes through mediation, negotiations
and other peaceful means.

The EU vigorously supports United Nations
peacekeeping operations and has provided substantial
funding for United Nations-mandated African Union
(AU) peace support operations. The EU is playing an
active role in post-conflict peacebuilding efforts and
has also made significant efforts in supporting the
development of the AU and other African regional and
subregional organizations. China appreciates the
10
positive role of the EU in maintaining regional and
international peace, stability and security. We support
and encourage continued contributions from the EU in
that regard.

China highly values and supports the constructive
role of the EU in international affairs. We trust that, as
the EU intensifies its efforts to implement the Lisbon
Treaty, along with progress in the process of
integration, the EU, the United Nations and the
Security Council will be able to undertake even more
pragmatic and effective cooperation in the maintenance
of international peace and security.

