Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I wish an Eid Mubarak
to you, Mr. President, and to the entire Kuwaiti team.
We assure you, Sir, of our support during your tenure
at the helm of the Security Council, following the very
impressive Indonesian presidency in May.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
Mr. Francois Lounceny Fall, and his team for the report
on the situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the Regional Office (S/2019/430).

South Africa recognizes the important role played
by UNOCA in the promotion of peace and security in
Central Africa. We therefore commend the efforts of
Mr. Fall in discharging the Regional Office's mandate,
particularly in terms of promoting stability in the region
and in preventing or mitigating election-related crises.

South Africa welcomes the signing of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic and the formation of an inclusive
Government in that country. We further express the
view that all parties should take this opportunity to
implement the peace agreement so as to extricate the
Central African Republic from its cycle of continued
conflict. In this respect, it is of vital importance for the
stakeholders in the Central African Republic to put the
interests of the people and country first, above all other
considerations, and work together towards bringing
stability, peace, reconciliation and development to
the country.

It is our conviction that elections are one of the
most positive signs of the consolidation of democracy
on the African continent. South Africa therefore
commends the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for holding its national elections in a relatively calm
atmosphere, which resulted in the peaceful transfer of
power in that country. We will assist the Congolese
people and Government as they take on their new
democratic project.

However, we express our concern over the attempted
coup in Gabon in January. Our continent should strive
towards eliminating unconstitutional changes of
Government, which requires greater support for security
sector reform and post-conflict institution-building. We
therefore urge UNOCA to continue to assist countries
in the region in the preparation and conduct of elections
by creating conditions more conducive to peaceful,
inclusive and credible elections. In a related context,
we wish President Bongo Ondimba a speedy recovery.

South Africa is encouraged by the improving
security situation in the Pool department and in the
Republic of the Congo in general as well as the casing
of social tensions in Chad. Although we remain
concerned by the deteriorating humanitarian situation
in Cameroon, we are encouraged by the efforts
undertaken by the country's authorities to stabilize
the situation. We call upon all parties to refrain from
any actions that could lead to its further deterioration.
We are especially encouraged by the Prime Minister's
positive announcement on 9 May during his visit to
the affected region. These encouraging steps should
be consolidated.

We condemn the indiscriminate attacks against
civilians and national security personnel by terrorist and
armed groups in the region. We are equally concerned
about the increase in piracy and armed robbery of ships
in the Gulf of Guinea. We welcome the progress made
in efforts to combat poaching and illicit trafficking
in wildlife and natural resources as evidenced by the
interceptions and arrests made by the Gabonese and
Cameroonian authorities in terms of the illegal trade in
Kevazingo wood, pangolin scales and elephant tusks.

South Africa notes with concern the number of
people who are in need of humanitarian assistance in
the region. We thank humanitarian partners and urge
them to continue providing fundamental humanitarian
assistance to all populations in need. We urge
Governments to facilitate access for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. We encourage the peaceful
resolution of disputes and inclusive dialogue where it
is required in the region, for example, in addressing the
growing number of conflicts related to pastoralism and
transhumance in the subregion, among other issues.

South Africa notes the cross-cutting nature of
issues in the region. In this regard, we commend the
efforts to enhance the coherence and coordination of the
United Nations action in the region as evidenced by the
close coordination among, inter alia, the African Union
(AU), UNOCA, the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel. Among other things, this
will contribute to stronger responses in assisting the
Lake Chad Basin Commission in the context of fighting
Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA),
maritime security and conflicts between farmers
and herders.

South Africa remains concerned about the security
threat posed by the Lord's Resistance Army in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We therefore reaffirm the decision of the
AU Peace and Security Council of 20 September 2018,
to maintain the AU-led Regional Cooperation Initiative
for the Elimination of the Lord's Resistance Army,
pending the development of a strategy to progressively
phase out the Initiative without leaving any security
vacuum that the LRA could use to renew and intensify
its destabilization activities in the affected areas.

In conclusion, it should be recalled that the Security
Council, atitsmeeting on 10August2018 (see S/PV.8328),
requested the Secretary-General to undertake a review
of the mandate of UNOCA (S/PRST/20l8/l7). South
Africa looks forward to receiving the outcomes
emanating from the Secretary-General's strategic
review of the scope of UNOCA's mandate and activities
by 1 August, with a view to strengthening the role of
this political office in the region. We will continue to
support Special Representative Fall and his joint efforts
with Mr. Chambas.

