Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Mr. President, let me start
by expressing our pleasure at seeing you preside over
this important meeting today on the pertinent issue of
children and armed conflict. My delegation also
commends the Secretary-General for his timely report
contained in document S/2005/72, which gives a broad
perspective on the question of the protection of
children affected by armed conflict.

Indonesia is of the view that the rights of children
in armed conflict should be acknowledged and
respected. Those rights should be an explicit priority
of, and should be firmly entrenched in, peacemaking,
peacebuilding and conflict-resolution processes. My
delegation warmly welcomes the significant progress
made so far by various parties in the context of the
process of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of child soldiers, as well as in developing
action plans to end their use in conflict situations. We
also support measures to prevent grave Violations
against such children.

We are saddened to learn, however, that,
notwithstanding such progress, the situation for
children remains quite serious and unacceptable. The
international community is now faced with a cruel
dichotomy. On the one hand, clear and strong armed
conflict protection standards for children involved in
conflict and important concrete initiatives, particularly
at the international level, have been developed. On the
other hand, atrocities against children continue largely
unabated on the ground.

That gloomy picture is further exacerbated by the
significant increase in the number of allegations of
sexual misconduct against United Nations
peacekeeping personnel. It is imperative that
peacekeepers uphold the trust that the local population
and the international community have placed in them.
In that regard, we appreciate current initiatives to
undertake informal consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries to identify joint solutions
to the problem.

In general, my delegation is aware of the
initiative of the Special Representative, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, to come up with an action plan for the
establishment of a monitoring, reporting and
compliance mechanism. Indonesia strongly believes
that national authorities play a central and immediate
role in providing effective protection and relief to
children in danger. It is therefore necessary that all
actions undertaken by United Nations entities and
international non-governmental organizations at the
country level should always be designed to support and
complement the protection and rehabilitation roles of
national authorities, and not supplant them.
In the case of Indonesia, articles 59 and 60 of law
number 23/2002 on child protection oblige the
Government to provide special protection for children
in emergency situations, such as those who are
internally displaced, those who have become victims of
internal conflict or natural disasters, and children in
armed conflict. Article 63 clearly stipulates that no one
shall engage in recruiting or manipulating children for
military purposes. Those who violate such provisions
will be brought to justice and penalized.

Indonesia is very much aware of the complexity
of the issue of children and armed conflict. A concerted
and comprehensive approach, rather than partial and
selective ones, should be promoted in addressing the
root causes of this problem. While national
Governments play a vital role, the international
community should ensure generous support and
assistance for national plans and programmes in this
regard.

In sum, the future of humanity depends on
children. The use of children in armed conflicts casts a
dark shadow over their future, for children who are
exposed to such violence often carry fear and hatred in
their hearts and minds that have profound long-term
effects. Hence, much needs to be done to alleviate their
suffering and to ensure their rightful place in society
through adequate support programmes. We are in duty
bound to extend our cooperation to the Secretary-
General in his efforts to address the issue of children
affected by armed conflict.

