Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his analysis of the processes currently
under way in Afghanistan. We are also grateful for the
briefings by Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Ambassador Kairat Umarov, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), and Ms. Ghizaal Haress. We listened attentively
to the statement by Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, Ambassador
of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, and we share
many of the opinions in the latest quarterly report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1092). For its part, Russia
has the following comments to make.

The Russian Federation strongly and consistently
supports the Afghan people in their desire for a lasting
peace in their country. Russia and Afghanistan are
traditionally linked through friendly relations that
correspond to the national interests of both countries and
contribute to the stable, multidimensional development
of the entire region and the world generally. The
international Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan in
Geneva, in which Russia was a high-level participant,
shows how important peace and stability in Afghanistan
are to the international community.

We have been monitoring the tense and unfortunately
continually deteriorating security situation in
Afghanistan, a trend that has also been accompanied
by civilian casualties in the Afghan national security
forces, and we want to pay tribute to the memory
and courage of all who have died in the fight against
terrorism. We are still seriously concerned about the
strengthened position of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), which is filling its ranks mainly
by recruiting foreign fighters with combat experience
in Syria and Iraq. The militants remain true to their
goal of increasing their numbers and strengthening
their influence across the country. We are alarmed by
the regular occurrence of major acts of terrorism in
various cities in Afghanistan, including Kabul, whose
victims are Afghan civilians, including women and
children. The adherents of ISIL skilfully combine their
ideological, propaganda and recruitment activities
with their use of information and communications
technology. The jihadists' expansionist aspirations,
including in northern Afghanistan, are a genuine
threat to the security of our Central Asian partners and
Russia's southern regions. We want to emphasize that
it is unacceptable to belittle or downplay the threats
emanating from ISIL in Afghanistan. We await answers
to our repeated questions regarding the transportation
ofISIL militants in mysterious unidentified helicopters.

We are closely monitoring the evolving situation
in the fight against drug trafficking. The drug threat
represents a serious problem for the region, the world and
Afghanistan itself. We remain committed to providing
assistance to collective action to combat Afghan drug
trafficking, including with the active participation of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We must
maintain ourjoint policy of expanding the international
community's efforts in the fight against this evil. The
practical steps we are taking, including through the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), are
also in line with that approach. Russia remains willing
to provide regular assistance to the global Paris Pact
Initiative, established under the auspices of UNODC
to comprehensively combat the illicit traffic in opiates
from Afghanistan, to the UNODC Regional Programme
for Afghanistan and Neighbouring Countries and to
the alternative development project in Badakhshan
province. We intend to continue contributing to the
training of narcotics police from Afghanistan, Pakistan
and the countries of Central Asia. We hope that our
Domodedovo joint project with Japan, which aims to
create a canine unit service for Afghanistan, will be an
important component of the war against drugs there.

We are concerned about the data in the Secretary-
General's report on the increase in the number
of civilian casualties, including as a result of the
international coalition's activities, as well as the level of
losses among the Afghan national security forces in the
current season. We regret to have to conclude that the
17-year large-scale military presence of United States
and NATO contingents has not led to the stabilization
of the military and political situation in the country.
The challenges have only got worse.

Afghanistan is on the threshold of important
political events, including the upcoming elections.
As friends of the Afghan people, we assume that they
should constitute a step towards the country's unity and
lasting stability.

There can be no military solution to the crisis in
Afghanistan. The only path to resolving it is through
the achievement of a common Afghan agreement
reached by political and diplomatic means. We believe
the negotiation process should be conducted under the
leadership of the Afghans themselves. We affirm our
readiness to provide all possible support to launching
it. That was the goal guiding us when we convened a
second meeting under the Moscow consultations format
on 9 November. We regard that event as a major step
towards developing a genuinely functioning collective
approach to resolving the situation in Afghanistan and
the start of direct inter-Afghan dialogue.

We emphasize the importance of the regional
context for the Afghan settlement, and we want to
particularly highlight the mechanism of the SCO-
Afghanistan Contact Group in that regard. We see
good potential for enhancing cooperation on counter-
terrorism and anti-drug efforts between Afghanistan
and the CSTO and recognize UNAMA's important role
in coordinating international assistance to Afghanistan.

What is happening in Afghanistan confirms that
its accumulated problems require consolidated efforts.
Close international cooperation is now more vital
than ever, especially at the regional level, in order to
transform Afghanistan into a land of sustainable peace,
stability and prosperity. We are ready to continue
working to achieve this goal.

