Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis for
his comprehensive briefing. I also thank Ambassador
Tanin of Afghanistan for his statement.

I would first like to express my deepest condolences
to the Government and people of Afghanistan
for the great loss of their first Vice-President,
Marshal Mohammad Qasim Fahim. His exceptional
contribution to the reconstruction of Afghanistan will
be remembered.

I am particularly gratified to address the Security
Council on the situation in Afghanistan because I have
been personally involved in Japan's efforts to help create
stability and development in that beautiful country
since the 1990s, and in particular since the Tokyo
Conference on Consolidation of Peace in Afghanistan,
held in January 2002.

Japan welcomes today's adoption of resolution 2145
(2014) renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for
another 12 months. In this time of uncertainty, the
continuous presence of UNAMA is crucial. I would
like also to emphasize the importance of ensuring
adequate resources for UNAMA to efficiently support
Afghanistan on its path towards peace and stability.

The year 2014 is one of historical significance for
the people of Afghanistan, as the withdrawal of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) will be
completed and the country will experience the election
of its second President. Today, I would like to touch
upon, first, the elections; secondly, the challenges that
must be addressed by the future Government; and,
finally, Japan's commitment to Afghanistan.

First, on the elections, for the long-term stability
of Afghanistan, it is of the utmost importance that the
upcoming presidential and provincial council elections
lend strong legitimacy to the new Government through
a credible and inclusive election process. I reiterate the
importance of holding the elections without delay on
5 April, in accordance with the Afghan Constitution.
In that regard, I commend the tireless efforts of the
Government and the electoral management bodies
of Afghanistan to keep the technical preparations on
track. Japan has made financial contributions through
the United Nations Development Programme in order
to have a positive impact on the process. I call on all
eligible citizens of Afghanistan to participate in these
elections of crucial importance to deciding their own
future.

Secondly, I would like to touch upon what we
would like to see from Afghanistan, in particular
from the future Government that will take over the
responsibilities of President Karzai to lead the country
towards long-term stability. On that subject, I welcome
the participation of the presidential candidates at the
special Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
meeting that was held on 29 January. Since all the
candidates have been active in the political life of
Afghanistan since 2001, I am confident that they all
understand very well the spirit of partnership that exists
between the Afghan Government and the international
community. Even so, it was important for us to know
that the candidates recognize their responsibilities to
implement the commitments under the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework.
Ensuring economic stability is a matter of urgency
for the Government of Afghanistan. In order to achieve
that goal, the new Government will have to immediately
grapple with a variety of legislative and institutional
reforms necessary for increasing annual revenue,
reducing the rapidly expanding illicit economy and
developing industry. We look forward to seeing tangible
results before the ministerial meeting to be co-hosted
by Afghanistan and the United Kingdom.

Furthermore, recognizing that reconciliation is
the only way to achieve lasting peace in Afghanistan,
the future Government must continue to call on the
Taliban to join the peace process. Japan supports the
Afghan-led peace and reconciliation process. For the
sake of lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan,
continuous efforts by the country's leadership and the
constructive engagement of neighbouring countries
are indispensable. The increased dialogue between
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, including
Pakistan, is encouraging in that regard.

Concerning the security situation, in 2013 we
witnessed a sharp increase in insurgent attacks and
civilian casualties. A further deterioration in the
security situation will inevitably have a negative
impact not only on Afghanistan's economic and social
activities, but also on the implementation of our
assistance. Security is also vital to encourage the full
participation of all eligible voters, especially female
voters, in the upcoming elections. One of the most
crucial responsibilities of the Afghan Government
is to continue building the capacity of the Afghan
National Security Forces and ensuring the necessary
security arrangements, in close cooperation with its
international partners.

Finally, let me say a few words on Japan's
commitment to Afghanistan. Since January 2002,
when we hosted the International Conference on
Reconstruction Assistance to Afghanistan in Tokyo, we
have contributed more than $5 billion to Afghanistan
for its developments efforts. Japan's contribution
covers a wide range of areas. For example, we have
provided 30 per cent of the total salary of the Afghan
National Police and have built or renovated more than
820 schools all over the country.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming Japan's
commitment to stand by the Government and people of
Afghanistan in their endeavours for long-term stability.

