Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, let me express my congratulations to Egypt for
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of August. At the same time, we would like to thank
the Chinese delegation for its excellent stewardship of
the Council during the month of July. We also would
like to extend our welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, Ambassador
Vassily Nebenzya.

We appreciate the briefings delivered by today's
distinguished briefers. We also thank the delegation
of Egypt for the negotiation of the text of resolution
2370 (2017), which we adopted today. The resolution
is of great relevance, because of the serious threat
to international peace and security posed by the
acquisition and use of weapons by terrorist groups and
their links to transnational crime.

We understand that it is the primary responsibility
of States to adopt national standards aimed at
strengthening controls over the possession and use of
arms, as well as at controlling their export, import and
transit, so as to prevent and combat illicit trafficking.
We also consider that there is a shared responsibility on
the part of all States to deal with such a global problem,
whose resolution necessitates that we all cooperate.

The development of national, bilateral, regional and
international strategies forms an essential element in
such necessary collective work. However, there is also
a differentiated responsibility of States, since the very
root of the problem lies in the production of and trade
in arms. Consequently, the first responsibility lies with
the States that carry out such activities. In that regard,
I think it is worth remembering what the Uruguayan
Foreign Minister, Rodolfo Nin Novoa, expressed on
25 May in his address to the Council, which recalled that
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
had pointed out that the five permanent members of the
Security Council provided 75 per cent of the volume of
total arms exports from 2011 to 2015 (see S/PV.7951).

As we have said on other occasions, Uruguay is a
country committed to the fight against terrorism and
disarmament. Uruguay is a party to 16 international
instruments against terrorism and has signed and
ratified existing regional and international treaties on
disarmament and non-proliferation. At the national
level, Uruguay has a law on the possession and
marketing of and trafficking in firearms, ammunition,
explosives and other related materials. Among other
things, that law refers to the international trafficking in
such weapons. It criminalizes trade in those arms from
or through Uruguay's national territory to any other
State without obtaining the prior authorization of all
the States concerned.

At the sub-regional level, within the Common
Southern Market (MERCOSUR), there are legal
instruments in that domain, as well as a working
group on firearms. The members of MERCOSUR and
associated States participate in that group. Its objectives
include establishing convergent regional security
policies in order to facilitate information exchange
and cooperation.

At the regional level, the Organization of
American States has also adopted key documents,
such as the Inter-American Convention against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials,
the Bogota Declaration and the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean.

At the international level, Uruguay is a party to
the Arms Trade Treaty, which is currently the main
instrument for the international regulation of the arms
trade. For the sake of universalization, all States should
accede to the Treaty. We also recognize the importance
of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects.

The problem of illicit trafficking in arms and their
acquisition by terrorist groups and members of organized
crime requires collective approaches and efforts. To
that end, international cooperation and the provision
of assistance should be strengthened, with special
emphasis on building national capacities. Without those
elements, the complex links between illicit trafficking
in arms, terrorists and other transnational criminals
can hardly be dismantled. It is necessary to increase
cooperation among States in order to identify the routes
and mechanisms of the circulation of arms, as well as
to strengthen border controls. Uruguay reaffirms its
commitment and cooperation in that task.

