Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his briefing and for his leadership and that of his team during the current political crisis in Mali. It is especially great to see him in the Chamber today. I thank him for being here. The leadership of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) have played vital roles in stabilizing the political situation created by the 18 August overthrow of Mali's elected president. The United States condemns these actions and immediately halted our security assistance in Mali in response. Since August, progress has been made to return to constitutional order, but let me stress: the establishment of a transitional Government in Mali is only the first step. We urge the transitional Government to honour all its commitments to ECOWAS. The Security Council should be prepared to use the tools available to it should the transitional Government fail to uphold its commitments. We will not accept military control over civilian authorities, delays to elections or elections that are not credible. Former officials and all others detained without judicial process must be released. Free and fair elections must be held within 18 months. Elections must also include the full, effective and meaningful participation of women, internally displaced persons and refugees, youth populations and marginalized northern groups. The central provisions of the 2015 Algiers Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali remain relevant to the country's long-term stability and that of the region. The transitional Government must adhere to its commitment to moving implementation of the framework forward, and we hope to see continued regional engagement, including by ECOWAS. We also expect the transitional Government to ensure greater meaningful participation of women at all levels and in processes and institutions that support and monitor implementation of the Algiers accord. We remind all actors that obstructing or delaying implementation of the agreement is grounds for listingby the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali. We urge MINUSMA to continue its support for and cooperation with the 2374 Committee and the Panel of Experts. Recent events clearly indicate further need to address Mali's long-standing governance shortcomings. The transitional Government will need to follow through on its commitments to improving governance and to supporting Mali on its path towards democratic rule and sustainable peace. Malian citizens must believe that their Government is legitimate, equitable and willing to meet their needs. This means ensuring justice and accountability for human rights violations and abuses committed by security forces. If that commitment is absent, no degree of international engagement is likely to succeed. Now more than ever, we recognize MINUSMA's vital role in protecting civilians and stabilizing the country. We look forward to MINUSMA helping Mali to hold free and fair elections, supporting the transitional Government to achieve its stated goals, including fully implementing the Algiers accord, and extending the rule of law. We expect further progress in the Mission's protection work in the centre, especially responding to early warnings with specific protection for women and children. We also expect MINUSMA to continue its efforts to facilitate the return of the State presence, State authority and basic social services in the centre, which are key to the Mission's long-term exit strategy. Finally, allow me stress that the United States remains a steadfast partner of the Malian people. The United States Special Envoy for the Sahel visited Bamako last week to underscore that point with the new authorities, as well as to signal our continuing partnership with the Malian people. Two weeks ago, Secretary Pompeo announced nearly $152 million to help people displaced by conflict in the Sahel, of which approximately $54 million is for Mali.
