Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): My delegation would like
first to express its appreciation to the authors for presenting
the draft resolution now before the Council on the critical
situation in Burundi. We believe that the submission of this
draft, which was in response to the recommendations of the
Secretary-General set out in his letter of 29 December 1995
(S/ 1995/ 1068), is both timely and appropriate if Burundi is
to escape the tragic and horrible fate suffered by Rwanda.

It would be remiss of my delegation to fail to take this
opportunity to express its appreciation to Mr. Julius Nyerere
for his observations on and assessment of the situation in
Burundi, which he shared with all the members of the
Council under the Arrias formula.

From the various reports made available to it, the
Council is fully aware of the deteriorating security situation
now facing Burundi, which is marked by the persistence of
violence and an escalation in human rights violations,
which have had very adverse effects and brought
international humanitarian assistance to a halt. There have
been tragic incidents, including the destruction of economic
assets and infrastructure, about which the Indonesian
delegation cannot but express its deep concern.

In the light of these so destructive and alarming
developments, my delegation fully concurs with the view
that there is an urgent need to defuse the situation. We
agree with the Secretary-General' s observation that failure
to do so would result in further destabilization, not only
in Burundi but also in the entire Great Lakes region. My
delegation is therefore in favour of the early adoption of
the draft resolution so that a repetition of the tragic events
that occurred in Rwanda may be avoided, averting an
explosion into ethnic violence on a massive scale.

In reaffirming my delegation's full support for the
Convention of Government, I can say also that we fully
support and concur with the appeal to all the parties and
leaders in Burundi to take all necessary steps towards an
earnest dialogue to resolve their differences, and to
discard notions of violence and brutality. Dialogue
between the parties and all the leaders in Burundi is, in
our opinion, of paramount importance in this regard, and
should be urgently pursued. In this connection, the
commendable efforts by the Secretary-General and others
to promote and facilitate the emergence of this kind of
comprehensive dialogue deserve our strong and
unequivocal support.

Having said that, my delegation wishes nevertheless
to make some brief comments about subparagraph (a) of
operative paragraph 8, concerning the imposition of travel
restrictions. It has always been our firm conviction that
selective sanctions are not appropriate measures for
resolving conflicts such as the one in Burundi. Although
at the moment the behaviour of certain individuals can be
construed as exacerbating tensions and conflict, the real
possibility exists that at some future time they may play
an important role in reaching a political solution; thus, the
premature imposition of sanctions would serve only to
antagonize the perpetrators even further and lead them to
create obstacles to attaining peace and national
reconciliation.

In conclusion, while we note that the Convention of
Government is coming under increasing attack, my
delegation wishes to reiterate that implementation of the
provisions of the Convention constitutes a sound basis for
promoting a political dialogue and national debate, as a
means of fostering national reconciliation, that actively
seeks the constructive participation of all segments of
Burundi's political spectrum. For, in the final analysis,
responsibility for attaining peace and national

 

reconciliation in Burundi rests with Burundi's people and
leaders themselves.

In the light of these observations, my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution now before the
Council.

