Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset, I would like to
congratulate you and your friendly country for having
assumed the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We have cordial and solid relations with your
country. We are convinced that you will successfully
conduct the work of the Council, thanks to your skill
and efficiency.

I must also thank your predecessor,
Mr. Adamantios Vassilakis, for having guided the work
of the Council last month with skill, wisdom and
effectiveness. I would also like to thank Mr. Alvaro
de Soto for his full and detailed report on the question.

As we meet, the Gaza Strip is victim of a
ferocious campaign and brutal aggression by the Israeli
forces, which confirm the Israeli bid to expand the war
in Gaza. That is what we referred to in the letters
addressed to you, Mr. President, to the President of the
General Assembly, and to the Secretary-General. In
those letters, we drew attention to the seriousness of
the plans by Israel, the occupying Power. Indeed, Israel
occupied the border zone between Gaza and Egypt and
penetrated the Rafah region south of Gaza by several
kilometres, as part of a military campaign by the
occupying Power under Operation Rainman, which has
led to more than 29 martyrs, including women and
children.

In August 2005, Israel adopted a unilateral
measure, without coordinating with the Palestinian
Authority, when it withdrew its occupying forces from
Gaza. We then witnessed an Israeli official declaring in
the Council that

"the Palestinians had two choices. The first was
to care for their own people, raise their standard
of living, improve their quality of life, and
concentrate on the welfare and well-being of their
own people. The second was to turn Gaza into a
terror base and a launching pad for deadly rockets
into Israel. Tragically, the Palestinian leadership
chose the latter" (S/PV.5488, p. 7).
In fact, before even launching the attack against
Gaza, before carrying out its unilateral disengagement
from Gaza, Israel contributed to the worsening
economic, social and humanitarian crisis there by
isolating Gaza from the rest of the world and from the
rest of the occupied Palestinian territories. At the very
time when the occupying Power pretends to the world
that it has ended its occupation of Gaza, it has
tightened its grip on the border areas of Gaza, its
territorial waters and airspace, with the result that Gaza
has become a huge prison, completely encircled by
Israeli forces.

So where is that option that Israel was talking
about? The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly in the Gaza Strip, has
deteriorated very seriously. It is very tragic at all
levels: economic, social, political and humanitarian.
That is due to Israel's persistence in implementing its
illegal policies and practices, which we have seen
recently in the disproportionate and excessive use of
force by Israel against a besieged population in the
Gaza Strip, in extrajudicial killings, and in its
incursions into Gaza with armoured vehicles, tanks and
bulldozers to raze villages, towns and Palestinian
refugee camps. All this has led to the deaths of
hundreds of Palestinians, including women and
children, and to the destruction of the civil
infrastructure, including the only electricity company
in Gaza, electricity networks, water supply networks,
bridges and roads. Israel has blocked all crossing
points and has continued to build its military barriers
and check points, thereby turning Palestinian towns
and villages into ghettoes and causing destruction to
Gaza's economy.

Israel's deliberate acts of aggression against
Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip began on 28 June
2006 and have resulted in over 350 martyrs and more
than 1,000 persons wounded, of whom 80 per cent are
civilians and about two-thirds are women and children.
In recent days alone Israel killed more than 26
Palestinians. In addition, Israel has employed a new
approach, namely, psychological warfare, to force
hundreds of Palestinian families to flee Gaza in terror
as a result of telephone threats made by members of
the occupying forces in which they were informed that
they had a very short time to leave their homes before
they would be bombed and destroyed. That is in
addition to the deafening sonic booms caused by Israeli
planes overhead, which terrorize and intimidate the

Palestinian people, especially children. According to
the latest report of the United Nations Relief Works
Administration (UNRWA), the ongoing aggression
against civilians in Gaza has led to the displacement of
thousands of residents.

Israel has also continued its detention policy,
which has thus far resulted in the arrest of more than
ten thousand Palestinians, including elected members
of Parliament, members of the Government and several
mayors.

In addition, Israel has appropriated tax and
customs revenues owed to the Palestinian Authority,
thereby violating the Paris Protocol, which was signed
by both parties in 1994. As a result, there has been
deterioration in the economic and financial situation,
which has had a serious effect on the Palestinian
Authority. Despite numerous appeals by the
international community to release the funds withheld
by Israel, it has continued its policy to starve and
besiege the Palestinian people.

Despite all that, Israel continues to refer to the
two options available to the Palestinian people and
Authority.

During the sacred month of Ramadan - contrary
to Israel's assertion that Jerusalem is a city open to all
religions - the racist practices of the occupying Power
have prevented large numbers of Palestinian Muslims
from visiting places of prayer in the Holy City of
Jerusalem. This practice has been repeated in the case
of Christian Palestinians as well. Nevertheless,
extremist settlers have full unhindered access to places
of worship in Jerusalem.

The goal of Israel's attacks against the
institutions of the Palestinian Authority, of its outright
destruction of some of those institutions and of its
detention and imprisonment of Palestinian leaders,
officials of the Authority and members of Parliament is
to continue to carry out illegal unilateral measures in
the territory by pretending that there is no partner for
peace. The Palestinian Authority categorically rejects
any unilateral plans by the Israelis in the West Bank,
because the purpose of such plans is to annex more
territory as a fait accompli and annex the occupied
Eastern part of Jerusalem and create security cordons
along the River Jordan. That in addition to expanding
settlements and continuing to build the apartheid wall
of separation, in Violation of the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice of 9 July 2004 and
relevant United Nations resolutions. The result of that
would obviate the possibility of a peaceful resolution
in which two States live side by side in peace and
security and would lay the seeds for another war
between the two sides.

President Abbas has often spoken about the need
to resume negations towards a lasting solution based
on international law and agreements, United Nations
resolutions, the Quartet road map and the Arab peace
initiative. Those numerous appeals have fallen on deaf
ears in Israel.

Israel's land and air attacks as the occupying
Power on the Gaza Strip, as well as its illegal practices
throughout the Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, only serve to intensify destabilization and
the deterioration of the situation in the region. They
also create a fait accompli that could have long-term
negative consequences on security in the region and on
peace and security throughout the world. The Council
is the only body able to act in that regard. It has a duty
to immediately redouble its efforts to protect
Palestinian civilians and put an end to Israel's ongoing
aggression, collective punishment and blockades,
which have served to break up the contiguity of
Palestinian territory, isolating it from the rest of the
world. It must also put an end to the crimes being
carried out with impunity against the Palestinian
people by the occupying forces and bring the
perpetrators of those acts to justice.

In the light of the latest negative developments in
the region and the increasingly deteriorating situation,
Arab ministers for foreign affairs decided once again to
inform the Security Council about the situation in the
Middle East and to place this agenda item before it.
They called upon the Council to hold a special high-
level meeting on the situation. The Council, in fact,
held such a meeting last month, at which Arab
ministers and President Abbas participated, in an effort
to reaffirm the need for the Council to act immediately
and come up with the necessary mechanisms and
timetables for the implementation of relevant Council
resolutions with a View to reaching a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution in the region and bringing
about peace and stability.

That is the choice of the Arabs - the choice of
peace - as contained in the Arab peace initiative
adopted at the Arab summit held in Beirut in March
2002. The decision of the Arab ministers to come to the

Council was unanimous, despite its past inability to
adopt the measures necessary to resolve the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question and
the question of East Jerusalem, and its failure to ensure
the implementation of its own resolutions. The
ministers felt it necessary to bring this issue before the
Council, convinced as they were of its responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and of the need to help all parties to achieve a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution to the problem.
Had it responded, the Council would have discharged
its mandate with respect to international relations, the
maintenance of international peace and security and the
implementation of the provisions of international law
and international humanitarian law.

We have stated on previous occasions our firm
conviction that the Council must fulfil its
responsibilities in the maintenance of international
peace and security and the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, including the Palestinian people, who
are living under the yoke of Israeli occupation. Our
conviction is based on the principles set out in the
Charter and international law, and it is that conviction
which has prompted us to address the Security Council
on multiple occasions.

As I said at the beginning of my statement, while
Israel may claim that the Palestinian Authority has only
two choices, it is Israel itself that now must choose
between two options. The first is to end its occupation
of the Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem
and the Arab territories occupied since 1967, and allow
the Palestinian people to regain their inalienable
national rights to self-determination, create their own
independent State, and achieve a just settlement of the
refugee problem in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III). That is the way to establish a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East
and to permit the people of the region to enjoy peace,
security, stability and prosperity.

Israel's second option is to continue to entrench
its occupation, build settlements, and pursue the
construction of the separation wall and its military
aggression against the Palestinian people. Most
unfortunately, Israel has opted for that second option of
State terrorism and war crimes.
As for us, the choice of the Palestinians and the
Arabs in general is that of peace. If the Israeli
authorities truly wish to live in peace, ensure regional
stability and security, and live side by side with a
Palestinian State enjoying full sovereignty over all the
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, with its
capital in the holy city of Jerusalem, it is high time that
it chose the first option, cease its aggression, its illegal
practices and its occupation of Arab territories, and
respect international law and the legitimacy of
international resolutions.

