The President: Under the item on its agenda, the
Security Council will now begin its consideration of
the report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the Republic of
Montenegro for admission to membership in the United
Nations, which appears in document S/2006/425.

In paragraph 3 of the report, the Committee
recommends to the Security Council the adoption of a
draft resolution on the application of the Republic of
Montenegro for admission to membership in the United
Nations. I should like to congratulate the Committee on
its unanimous decision to recommend that the Republic
of Montenegro be admitted to membership in the
United Nations.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
prior consultations among members of the Council, I
propose that the Council adopt the draft resolution
contained in paragraph 3 of the report of the
Committee on the Admission of New Members without
a vote.

As I see no objection, it is so decided.

I therefore declare that the draft resolution
contained in paragraph 3 of the report of the
Committee on the Admission of New Members
2
(5/2006/425) has been adopted without a vote as
resolution 1691 (2006).

I shall convey the decision of the Security
Council recommending the admission of the Republic
of Montenegro to membership in the United Nations to
the Secretary-General for transmittal to the sixtieth
session of the General Assembly in accordance with
rule 60 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure
and the request of the Republic of Montenegro.

I shall now make a statement, in my capacity as
President of the Security Council, on behalf of the
members of the Council.

"The Security Council has decided to
recommend to the General Assembly that the
Republic of Montenegro be admitted as a
Member of the United Nations. On behalf of the
members of the Security Council, I wish to
extend my congratulations to the Republic of
Montenegro on this historic occasion.

"The Council notes with great satisfaction
the Republic of Montenegro's solemn
commitment to uphold the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and to fulfil all obligations contained therein.

"We look forward to the Republic of
Montenegro joining us as a Member of the United
Nations and to working closely with its
representatives."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2006/27.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the matter before it.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
06-40021
