Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda. We thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing on
the current judicial activities of the Court and on the
situation in Darfur, as contained in her twenty-first
report submitted to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005).

We take note of the report's contents, describing
persistent violations of human rights and the dire
humanitarian situation in Darfur, with allegations of
crimes that amount to war crimes and crimes against
humanity, on which the international community
must take a clear stance. We strongly urge the parties
involved in the conflict to put an end to the hostilities
by engaging in meaningful political dialogue conducive
to negotiations for a just, global and lasting peace in
Darfur and the Sudan as a whole.

Resolution 1593 (2005) emphasizes the need to
promote healing and reconciliation, and encourages
the creation of institutions involved in all sectors
of Sudanese society in order to strengthen, with
the support of the African Union and international
community, efforts to restore long-lasting peace in
Darfur; hence, the international community's stringent
call to assist the Sudanese people in solving their
differences through dialogue.

The ICC report expresses the position taken on the
specific case of the failure of Ethiopia and South Africa
to arrest the Sudanese President, which is primarily
based on the African Union's decision to call on the
African member States to retain their rights, taking into
account the importance of preserving and safeguarding
the dignity, sovereignty and integrity of the African
continent. The request of the African Union to the
Security Council to defer the proceedings initiated
against President Omar Al-Bashir of Sudan, has been
neither heard nor acted upon by the Security Council.

The refusal of the Security Council to act on the
African Union's request forced the African Union to
reserve its cooperation with the International Criminal
Court with respect to immunities for the arrest and
surrender of President Omar Al-Bashir of Sudan. In
this connection, we appeal to the Security Council
to consider the requests of the African Union for a
more constructive relationship between the African
Union and the ICC. Angola will uphold the position
of the African Union on this issue, while advocating
for dialogue and negotiations as the only way to solve
political disputes in Darfur, the Sudan and elsewhere.

Finally, we call on all the Sudanese parties - in
particular, those involved in the conflict in Darfur - to
make sacrifices and concessions and to negotiate, in good
faith, a peace settlement establishing accountability,
justice and lasting peace in Darfur.

