Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me first to congratulate the State of Kuwait on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to convey my delegation's appreciation for the
convening of this open debate on the working methods
of the Council. Indeed, it is an interesting topic for
discussion, which is needed now more than ever in
order to examine and identify practical and efficient
methods to confront the real challenges of international
peace and security.

In View of the time limit, I will highlight the
following points, which are based on the Charter of the
United Nations and, upon their implementation, can
improve the working methods of the Council and enhance
its efficiency in fulfilling its primary responsibility.

Closed meetings and informal consultations should
be kept to a minimum and should be the exception
rather than the rule. The establishment of subsidiary
organs, mechanisms or formats by the Council should
be in accordance with the letter and the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations. Moreover, the Council
has a responsibility to ensure that it functions within
the limits of its mandates. For example, some of the
activities undertaken by the Security Council Affairs
Division clearly fall beyond those outlined in note
S/2016/44 by the President of the Security Council
regarding tasks under resolution 2231 (2015), while
it resists undertaking activities assigned to it under
the same note. Despite the fact that the Council has
been repeatedly informed by us and some members
of the Council, those deficiencies continue to exist in
reports of the Secretary-General each time the Council
discusses this issue.

The annual reports of the Security Council to
the General Assembly should be more explanatory,
comprehensive and analytical. They should assess
the work of the Council, including cases in which the
Council has failed to act. They should also include the
views expressed by members during the consideration
of agenda items. In addition, we call on the Council to
elaborate on the circumstances under which it adopts
the various outcomes, be they resolutions, presidential
statements, press statements or other elements for
the press.

Pursuant to Article 15, paragraph 1, and Article
24, paragraph 3, of the Charter, the Council should
submit special reports for consideration by the
General Assembly. However, it does not do that.

The Council should ensure that its monthly
assessments are comprehensive and analytical. The
General Assembly may consider proposing parameters
for the elaboration of such assessments. The Council
should fully take into account the recommendations
of the General Assembly on matters relating to
international peace and security, consistent with
Article 11, paragraph 2, of the Charter. The Council
should cease its ongoing attempts to shift issues on the
agenda of the General Assembly or the Economic and
Social Council over to the Security Council and the
encroachment by the latter on the functions and powers
of the Assembly.

It is absolutely vital for the credibility of the
Security Council to reject the intentions to turn it into
a tool to pursue national political interests and agendas.
Unfortunately, it is happening. The intention to use the
Council only as a tool for more dangerous ends could not
have been made clearer than in the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of the United States

at the meeting of the American Israel Public Affairs
Committee on 5 March 2006:

"It is critical that we use the Council to help mobilize
international public opinion. Rest assured, though,
we are not relying on the Security Council as the
only tool in our toolbox to address this problem."

It seems that the current United States Administration
is even more enthusiastic now to follow that reckless
and failed pattern of regarding the Security Council as
its toolbox.

Two outrageous examples of such an approach
occurred in January. On 5 January, the United States
pushed for an emergency meeting (see S/PV.8152) on
an issue that flagrantly falls outside of the scope of its
mandate. On 29 January, the United States Mission set
up a show in Washington, DC, to present the members
of the Security Council with some fabricated evidence,
such as a Saudi-supplied destroyed, yet intact, missile.

Those examples are discredit the Security Council,
especially when recalling the increasing list of Security
Council failures to take the slightest action when it
comes to genuine issues, such as the long-standing
occupation of Palestinian territory by the Israeli regime
or the most catastrophic humanitarian situation in
Yemen after almost three years ofwar. Those failures of
the Council, attributable to the obstructionist approach
by the United States, is a matter of disappointment and
frustration for multilateral diplomacy.

Finally, Ihope this open debate will help to render the
Council more democratic, representative, transparent
and accountable in all its activities, approaches
and procedures, functioning more efficiently and
effectively, as well as focusing on its real responsibility
in maintaining international peace and security.

