Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): I should
like in particular to congratulate our colleague,
Ambassador Jones Parry, who led the Security Council
delegation in the Sudan and Addis Ababa, on the
remarkable professional qualities that he displayed
throughout our visit. Indeed, we needed those qualities
of level-headedness and firmness so that we could be
understood by our interlocutors.

Undoubtedly, sometimes we were not understood,
but that was not his fault; he was precise and expressed
our message clearly and positively. He was also firm
with regard to our principles. Therefore, I wish to pay
him a well-deserved tribute. I also appreciate his
concise presentation of the mission's report on the
mission, which in every respect reflected the work we
3
carried out on the ground in the Sudan, in Addis
Ababa, with the African Union and in Chad.

During our travels, the African members of the
Council mission informed all the interlocutors that they
fully associated themselves with the Council's
approach to the issues discussed and that they had
participated in the decisions taken. That indicated
clearly to our interlocutors that there was no kind of
plot or conspiracy against any African State behind the
Council's decisions. We wanted to stress that to our
interlocutors.

Allow me briefly to comment on several points.

First, I think that we have had confirmation that
we must indeed strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union. Proof of this
was the dispatch of the joint mission to the Sudan
immediately following the Council's decision. That is
very important, and we must continue to proceed in
that manner.

Africa has stated that it would assume full
responsibility for the decision to make the transition
from an African mission to a United Nations mission
and that it would take all appropriate measures to
ensure that understanding prevailed in its contacts with
all partners, in particular the Sudanese Government.

In that respect, I would like to announce that the
African Union's Peace and Security Council met on 27
June in Banjul at the ministerial level and adopted a
decision on the issue of Darfur. Just this morning I
signed a letter authorizing the distribution to Council
members of the decision and of President Konare's
report. Members should receive it during the course of
the day.

Also, with respect to contacts with all the parties
in the Sudan, we must continue our efforts, because
there is much work to be done. We must provide
reassurance to all our partners. This is not the time to
throw in the towel.

Let me say a few words about Chad. Ambassador
de La Sabliere has accurately summed up our concerns
with respect to that issue. At this stage, we are fully
aware of the various concerns that have been
expressed. We understand that there have been mutual
accusations of interference by Khartoum and
N'djamena. However, in that respect we referred them
to the Tripoli Agreement of 8 February 2006. I have
heard it said that the agreement was unsponsored, but it
is a fact that when we were speaking about it -
particularly when we were in N'djamena - there were
indeed observers from the countries concerned along
the borders. I would note in particular that Congolese
observers were present at Abeche, pursuant to the
Tripoli Agreement. Thus the doors are not shut. That
announcement was made to the Chadian delegation,
which went to Brazzaville immediately following our
visit there. On 14 June it was recalled to that
delegation that the African Union remained committed
and that the signatories of the Tripoli Agreement
intended to have it respected, as evidenced by presence
of the observers.

Here in the Council we also adopted two
statements on the issue. I would note that we were
waiting for the conclusions of the fact-finding mission
sent by President Konare. I can say for certain that two
days ago President Konare went to N'djamena and told
the Chadian authorities that the Commission was now
in a position to issue its report. At that time we will see
exactly what is involved. Thus work is continuing; it
was neither halted nor hampered.

Finally, I should like to echo the concern
expressed by Ambassador de La Sabliere as to the
question of international protection of the camps. I
believe it important that we consider this question, and
I, too, believe that the Secretary-General should make
recommendations in that respect.

That is what I wished to say in addition to the
outstanding presentation made by the head of the
delegation.

