The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Germany and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif
(Islamic Republic of Iran), took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Matnssek (Germany) took the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/1010, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, Germany and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

I wish to draw members' attention to three letters
addressed to the President of the Security Council from
the representative of France, contained in documents
S/2006/521, S/2006/814 and S/2006/815. I also wish to
draw members' attention to a letter addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the
representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, contained in document
S/2006/985.

In addition, I wish to draw members' attention to
the relevant reports of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, including those
reports dated 27 February, 28 April and 31 August
2006, contained in documents S/2006/150, 8/2006/270
and S/2006/702, respectively.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.


