Mr. Benitez Versen (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I
have requested the floor to reply briefly to the
comments made by the representative of the United
States a few minutes ago. The United States authorities
merely repeat again and again - as they have done
today - justifications for their actions in this case,
saying that Posada Carriles is being subjected to a
criminal trial in their country. What they do not say is
that they have never indicted him for terrorist
activities, but continue to handle the case as though it
merely involved illegal immigration and other minor
charges.

The Government of the United States possesses
all the evidence and information it needs to prove
Posada Carriles's guilt in the mid-flight explosion of a
Cubana de Aviacion aircraft, taking the lives of
73 innocent persons. It also knows that in 1997 Posada
conceived and led a series of terrorist acts using
explosives against hotels in Havana - among many
other repellant actions in the course of his long career.
The terrorist himself has publicly confessed his
horrible crimes. So, we wonder what more is needed
before action is taken.

Cuba once again calls upon the United States
authorities to try Posada Carriles as a terrorist, or to
return him to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
which for nearly four years has been requesting his
extradition.

Cuba is convinced that the only effective way to
prevent and combat terrorism is through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation among all States on the basis
of mutual respect, non-interference in internal affairs
and the sovereign equality of States. We reiterate that if
the new Government of the United States truly wishes
to demonstrate its commitment to the fight against
terrorism, it now has a chance to act firmly, without the
use of double standards, against the terrorist
organizations that for all these years have been
committing aggression against Cuba from the territory
of the United States.

The current United States Administration has the
opportunity to stop using terrorism for political
18
purposes and to put an end to the unjust and unfounded
inclusion of Cuba on the list of countries that allegedly
support terrorism - a list prepared unilaterally by the
United States Department of State.

Let me say in conclusion that it is up to the
United States Government to put Posada Carriles on
trial for what he is - a terrorist - and to move
forward on the path of cooperation rather than that of
confrontation.

