Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): Before I address the subject
at hand, I wish to extend my deepest condolences to the
families and loved ones of the victims of yesterday's
terrorist attack in Mali, as well as to the Governments
and the peoples of Mali, Togo and France. This heinous
act makes today's meetings even more pressing,
so I shall start by thanking you, Sir, for convening
this important debate and by commending Senegal
for its outstanding contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping endeavours, both in the field as one of
the major troop- and police-contributing countries and
here in the Council as the current Chair of the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. In
my national capacity, I would like to add the following
comments.

Ukraine attaches great importance to United
Nations peacekeeping, and considers it to be one of the
core tasks of the Organization and an important tool
for ensuring peace and long-term stability. Ukraine
is one of the leading European troop-contributors
to United Nations peacekeeping operations and is
proud to be a part of this important endeavour of the
Organization. Despite the ongoing aggression launched
by Russia against Ukraine, we will continue our active
participation in United Nations peacekeeping activity.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have
proven to be a highly adaptive instrument and have
contributed much to the resolution of conflicts. This
year, the Council and the General Assembly have already
considered various aspects of United Nations activities
in upholding and sustaining peace. We welcome several
important decisions adopted within the United Nations
regarding peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.

Simultaneous resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly and the Security Council on the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490) have
become a significant step forward in the implementation
of a conflict-prevention approach. The conclusions
and ambitious recommendations of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations have provided
a new perspective to the nature and challenges of
PKOs. The conferences in London and Paris on the
implementation of the 2015 Peacekeeping Summit
outcome were a logical continuation of this process. We
see our deliberations today as yet another step towards
taking forward the United Nations peacekeeping review
process outcome.

As is rightly pointed out in the concept paper
(S/2016/927, annex) before us, today United Nations
missions face enormous and often asymmetrical
challenges, including direct attacks by terrorist
groups. We commend the efforts of the Secretariat and
contributing States in enhancing the preparedness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations to face these
threats. However, a lot more has to be done. In this
regard, I would like to highlight the following points.

First, as an active troop- and police-contributing
country, Ukraine attaches great importance to the issue
of adequate force generation, which remains a challenge
for United Nations peace operations. Ukraine strongly
intends to extend the geography of its Blue Helmets'
participation in United Nations missions. Following
the 2015 high-level Summit, Ukraine has submitted its
respective pledge to the United Nations Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System.

Secondly, we support the need for abetter integration
of modern technology and intelligence capabilities into
peace operations. We call on peacekeeping operation
host countries to give due consideration to this
certainly positive practical step aimed at enhancing the
efficiency of peacekeeping activities.

At the same time, all the United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding review outcomes that
I have mentioned focus on a people-centred approach.
Therefore, thirdly, the protection of civilians is often
decisive for the success and legitimacy of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

My country is committed to the policy under which
the protection of civilians is an overarching goal of
United Nations peacekeeping. In May, Ukraine joined
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians, a
guideline based on a premise that peacekeepers must
protect civilians from the threat of physical violence,
including terrorist threats.

It is also important that troop-contributing
countries be provided with comprehensive, sufficient
and timely information on the security situation on
the ground. That is crucial if peacekeeping operation
personnel are to be well prepared, including for
making prompt decisions on the use of force in cases
of imminent terrorist threats or threats to the civilian
population. As a matter of principle, every uniformed
peacekeeper who witnesses violence against a civilian
should not hesitate to do everything possible to stop it.

In the same context, let note the importance of
drawing the right lessons from the violence in Juba in
July and the way the Mission in South Sudan responded
to it - especially helpful for preventing similar
situations from occurring in the future, wherever
United Nations peacekeepers are deployed, and for
maintaining the credibility of, and confidence towards,
the United Nations among the local population.

Fourthly, at the current stage, United Nations
peacekeeping operations are not suited for carrying
out full-fledged counterterrorist measures. Indeed,
counter-terrorist activities are a direct responsibility
of each and every Government. Asymmetrical
terrorist tactics not only threaten the population and
peacekeeping personnel directly, but also target the
critical infrastructure of host countries. In that regard,
States suffering from terrorist activities should be
provided with the necessary advice and expertise to
develop or improve their relevant capabilities and
strategies. Peacekeeping operations should play their
part in that process.

Another important aspect is the mandates given
to peacekeeping operations. We believe that missions
should be provided with clear, coherent, achievable
and, at the same time, resilient mandates, sufficient to
ensure security and public order, including stopping
the illegal inflow of weapons and mercenaries. Given
that the security situation on the ground could change
swiftly and dramatically, such mandates must include
provisions that enable peacekeeping operations to use
force when there is a direct threat to its personnel or
civilians, including terrorist threats. In that regard,
the role of the Security Council is indispensable. Clear
mandates is a primary precondition for the efficiency of
peace operations.

Peace missions also need means and resources for
the effective monitoring and verification of ceasefires,
the withdrawal of heavy weapons and full disarmament
under the United Nations disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration standards. Sustainable de-escalation
and implementation of other elements of peaceful
settlement and peacebuilding, including holding
elections, are not possible without a robust international
security presence that can ensure and monitor the
implementation of all security-related provisions until
legitimate law-enforcement institutions are established.

We believe that, when drafting missions' mandates,
we should avoid sticking to the already outdated
approach that deems most modern conflicts internal in
nature. The objective reality is that most of them are,
if not of inter-State, then definitely of cross-border or
hybrid nature. Those changes in the nature of conflicts
necessitate a review of the ability of the United Nations
to respond promptly and efficiently to new challenges
and circumstances.

Ukraine has learned lessons from its own
experience of asymmetrical threats - the terrorist
component of the hybrid war waged against Ukraine
is evident. According to reports of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) on the situation in Ukraine, civilians have
paid the greatest price for this conflict. Since 2014,
OHCHR recorded 9,640 people killed - including up
to 2,000 civilians - and 22,431 injured. The situation
in Ukraine effectively proves that terrorism can be used
as an element of hybrid war against sovereign States.

Last but not least, we believe that the United Nations
should build and enhance its strategic partnership
with regional organizations and work alongside
with them, while sharing its unique experience in
peacekeeping activities. In that regard, we see the
potential for establishing closer United Nations ties
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) that will contribute to the OSCE peace
activities on the ground, especially when missions of
that regional organization are deployed in an insecure
environment. Ukraine also welcomes the initiative to
appoint a United Nations Secretariat liaison on peace
and security in Vienna, which could contribute to
greater cooperation between the United Nations and the
OSCE on enhancing the latter's ability to enforce and
keep peace whenever such a need arises.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Ukraine's
unwavering commitment to the flagship activity of the
United Nations for the years to come.

