Mr. Magaji (Nigeria): My delegation thanks you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important briefing.
We also thank the briefers - the Secretary-General,
the Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida
and associated individuals and entities, the Chair of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Secretary
General of INTERPOL - for their briefings.

The adoption of resolution 2178 (2014) last
September was a clear demonstration of the Security
Council's determination to address the problem of
foreign terrorist fighters. The resolution obliges
States to deter and disrupt the movements that will
bring terrorists to theatres of conflict. The Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004)
contends that there are currently 25,000 foreign
terrorist fighters from more than half of the countries
of the world. The demographics of this phenomenon
show that a large number of foreign terrorist fighters
are from comfortable middle-class homes. Many are
university students or graduates, and a significant
number are women. Foreign terrorists are lured through
the internet and social media by other foreign fighters
as well as specialized recruitment centres outside Iraq
and Syria.

While much of the world's attention is focused
on the Middle East, it should be noted that Africa
has not been spared the effect of the foreign terrorist
fighters phenomenon. The increase in violence and
extremism in the area of operations of foreign terrorist
fighters has emboldened African insurgent groups to
pledge allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham
(ISIS) and other terrorist groups. Boko Haram pledged
allegiance to ISIS in March 2015. That development
coincided with the defeat of Boko Haram in key towns
in north-eastern Nigeria. The Nigerian Government
views that move by Boko Haram as a sign of weakening
operational capability. It amounts to an indirect
invitation for foreign terrorist fighters aligned with
ISIS to join Boko Haram.

Whatever the reason for the declaration of
allegiance, one thing remains certain - Boko Haram
has signalled its intention to be part of a global jihad
while it continues to pursue its locally driven agenda.
The change has led not only to a shift in strategy in terms
of copying foreign terrorist fighters' model of terror,
but also to a change in terms of ideology, recruitment
and propaganda methods. Recourse to mass executions
and public beheadings were also embraced by the group
as a terror tactic.

Growing radicalism in sub-Saharan Africa is
aggravating local conflicts. Terrorist groups are
capitalizing on ethnic tension and violence in the Sahel
and North Africa to advance recruitment campaigns and
expansion, especially within the Touareg communities
in the Sahel. That calls for greater vigilance on the part
of the international community in general and African
States in particular.

My delegation notes with satisfaction the efforts
by the United Nations counter-terrorism entities, in
particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), to contain the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters. We also note the challenges
they face, as reflected in the CTED report on the
implementation of resolution 2178 (2014) by a State
affected by foreign terrorist fighters.

We see the need to shrink the operating space of
foreign terrorist fighters rather than just deter and
disrupt their movements across borders. Foreign
terrorist fighters can only function if a theatre of
operation exists. Likewise, terrorists can only incite,
recruit and lure would-be fighters if there is a war to
be fought. We believe that no effort should be spared,
including the use of applicable international instruments
at the disposal of regional and subregional groupings,
to keep domestic malcontent local in order to shrink
the operating space for all external parties, including
foreign terrorist fighters.

Member States should earnestly address local
socioeconomic grievances through formulating
policies that ensure broad-based transformation
through job creation without discrimination, the
equalization of opportunities and expansion of access
to social services. Respect for human rights, strong
accountability and institutions, an equitable delivery
of services and political inclusion are also essential in
fostering harmony and giving a sense of belonging to
all members of society.

For our part, the Government of Nigeria has
established a presidential initiative for the north-
east within the framework of our soft approach to
countering violent extremism. The initiative seeks to
promote the sustained socioeconomic transformation of
north-eastern Nigeria into a region of safety, security
and prosperity. In so doing, the Government aims to
address the root causes of radicalism.

The problem of foreign terrorist fighters requires
the international community to work together in the
search for sustainable solutions. Nigeria stands ready to
engage with all Member States, relevant international
organizations and other stakeholders to deal with this
major threat to international peace and security.

