Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Viet Nam for
convening this important meeting. I would also like to
thank particularly the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for
her informative statement this morning and for her
very effective work in the cause of children affected by
armed conflict.

May I also thank the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, the Executive Director of
UNICEF and the Chair of Watchlist on Children and
Armed Conflict for their contributions today.

The Council has been very committed in building
a protection framework for children in situations of
armed conflict, a framework resulting from the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) three years ago.
Both the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the
Council's Working Group resulting from resolution
1612 (2005) built upon previous efforts and created
important tools to address the grave abuses against
children during conflicts. We are making strides. Task
forces are active or under way in all situations of
concern, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General has undertaken numerous visits to almost all
situations of concern and the Working Group has
considered and issued conclusions on nine different
situations.

However, when taking stock of resolution 1612
(2005), we must ask ourselves one fundamental
question: have these developments made a difference
on the ground? Canada believes the answer is yes.
Children and those charged with their protection in

cote d'Ivoire, in Sri Lanka and elsewhere have
benefited from some parties releasing children from
their ranks and others establishing action plans to do
so. We consider those results to be direct impacts of
resolution 1612 (2005).

Canada also sees indirect benefits of resolution
1612 (2005), such as much greater awareness of the
terrible plight of these children and the collective
belief that it is simply unacceptable to recruit and use
children in armed conflict. That view underpins
Canada's strong support for continuing the
implementation of resolution 1612 (2005) and for
strengthening, through a new resolution, the protection
framework that resolution 1612 (2005) created by
addressing the other grave violations described in past
reports of the Secretary-General.

Canada was proud to support the very recently
adopted resolution 1820 (2008), on sexual violence and
international peace and security. While we will monitor
very closely the follow-up to resolution 1820 (2008),
the abuses suffered by children cannot wait for yet
another report to be issued in order to trigger action.
Resolution 1612 (2005) works; let us now expand its
purview to include all categories of violations against
children. That means not only the recruitment and use
of children but also the killing and maiming of
children, rape and other grave sexual violence,
abductions, attacks against schools or hospitals and the
denial of humanitarian access to children. As the
Permanent Representative of South Africa said a few
moments ago, all six violations should have equal
weight. Canada calls on the Council to start negotiating
a new resolution to that end.

Let me recognize the very important work of the
members of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, which is ably chaired by
France with the strong support of the Secretariat. The
Working Group forms a crucial part of the international
protection framework for children affected by conflict.
The Working Group's careful consideration of the
situations brought to its attention can help ensure that
parties respect their obligations under international
law. We urge the Working Group to continue issuing
strong conclusions calling for action by the various
parties and to provide guidance on child protection to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, political
missions and country teams.
(spoke in French)

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the impressive work done in this area by UNICEF,
various non-governmental organizations and civil
society actors who contribute to the monitoring and
reporting mechanism and who work tirelessly to free
children from the burdens of war. There are
nevertheless numerous challenges to overcome. The
international community must therefore strengthen its
capacity to prevent crimes against children. It must
also improve its reintegration strategies and ensure that
those who commit violations are held fully accountable
under national and international laws. The tenth
08-42706
anniversary of the adoption of the Rome Statute, which
we are commemorating today, reminds us of the array
of legal tools at our disposal to tackle impunity.

In conclusion, Canada reiterates its strong
support for the work of the Security Council on the
issue of children and armed conflict. Our expectations
are indeed very high, but children deserve nothing less.

