Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): On
23 June, the Security Council determined here in this
Chamber that conditions had not been established for
fair and free elections in Zimbabwe on 27 June and
condemned the campaign of violence launched against
the opposition. That Government decided to ignore the
appeals of the international community. International
observers deployed by the Southern Africa
Development Community (SADC), the Pan-African
Parliament and the African Union confirmed that the
vote was neither just nor equitable. Indeed, we saw a
parody of an election and a denial of democracy.

Political violence continues in Zimbabwe. Today,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees indicated that a growing number of
refugees have had to flee their country, bearing the
scars of beatings and even of torture.

We must act to end that situation, which, as the
Secretary-General noted, threatens to destabilize all of
southern Africa. France fully supports the efforts of the
African Union, SADC and, in particular, Jean Ping and
President Mbeki to help the Zimbabweans to find a fair
and lasting solution to the crisis. The European Union
has indicated that any formula would be acceptable
that respects the will of the people of Zimbabwe as
expressed in the elections of 29 March, in which
Mr. Tsvangirai and his party prevailed.

We believe that the United Nations and the
African Union have an important role to play, but if
genuine political dialogue to end the crisis is to begin,
pressure is also necessary in order to protect the people
and to hold those who are blocking the current political
process accountable. That is why France and other
States members of the European Union have endorsed
the need to adopt a reversible sanctions regime
targeting those who have perpetrated violence and
providing for an arms embargo. France therefore
co-sponsored the draft resolution submitted by the
United States to that end.

France notes that the European Union is
considering intensifying the sanctions measures it
already has in place. Furthermore, the communique
issued by the most recent summit of the heads of State
and Government of the G8 referred explicitly to
additional phases and actions, including financial
measures.

We note that the draft resolution received nine
votes in favour from Council members. We note that it
was not adopted; each member assumed its
responsibilities. What is important now is to ensure the
victory of freedom and democracy in Zimbabwe to
which the people of that country are entitled after so
many years of misery and suffering.

