Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): It is
my pleasure to report today on behalf of the
Multinational Forces in Iraq (MNF-I), as requested by
Security Council resolutions 1546 (2004), 1637 (2005)
and 1723 (2006).

I was pleased to hear the report on the work of
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
especially in the light of the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1770 (2007) and the appointment of
Mr. Staffan de Mistura as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. We appreciated the efforts of
former Special Representative Qazi, and are ready to
work closely with Mr. De Mistura on how we can best
support UNAMI's efforts under its expanded mandate.
We look forward to the work of UNAMI in its
expanded role, especially in assisting the Government
of Iraq to implement its programme of national
reconciliation, regional engagement and humanitarian
relief.

The United States shares with the people of Iraq
the goal of achieving a secure, stable and democratic
Iraq at peace with itself and its neighbours. To reach
that goal, Iraq must overcome profound political,
economic and security challenges. Progress in those
areas is inherently linked. For example, when the
Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I) and Iraqi security
forces made security gains in the provinces of Al Anbar
and Diyala, we enabled the provincial councils to hold
regular meetings, which in turn led to progress in
restoring services, developing the economy and
executing provincial budgets. As a result, by
September the provincial government of Al Anbar had
committed 80 per cent of its 2006 capital budget and
49 per cent of its 2007 budget.

Last year, recognizing that MNF-I could help
them to eject Al-Qaida, tribes in Al Anbar began to
fight with us against extremists. As a result, the
landscape of Al Anbar is dramatically different. The
security progress has been extraordinary. Seven months
ago violence was still rampant. Residents of Al Anbar
lived in fear of Al-Qaida, and MNF-I troops were
under daily attack. Now the situation is largely stable
and quiet, permitting reconstruction to take place.
Similar scenes are unfolding in parts of Diyala and
Ninawa. More and more Iraqis are mobilizing, with the
help of MNF-I and Iraqi security forces, to evict
Al-Qaida and extremist forces from their communities.
Shia extremists are also facing rejection. Recent
attacks by extremist elements of Jaish al-Mahdi on
worshipers in Karbala provoked a backlash and
triggered calls for Jaish al-Mahdi to cease attacks
against Iraqi and MNF-I forces.

A key challenge for Iraqis now is to link those
positive developments in the provinces to the central
Government in Baghdad. The growing ability of the
provinces to design and execute budgets, and the
readiness of the Central Government to provide
resources for them, represent some of the nuts and
bolts of good governance and are success stories.

The support of the central Government is also
needed to maintain hard-won security in areas like
Al Anbar, by supporting increases in locally generated
police. The Iraqi Government has placed some 21,000
Anbaris on police rolls.

Improved security also creates the conditions for
progress in the national economy. Infrastructure is
being repaired, and markets are reviving. The Iraqi
Government has reported growth of at least 6 per cent,
with inflation slowing. The budget execution rate in the
provinces is at least twice that of last year. In addition,
the Government's 2007 budget allocates $10 billion to
capital investment. Further improvement, especially in
the countryside, could bring down transport costs for
agricultural and manufactured goods. One sign of
confidence in the future of Iraq's economy was the
recent issuance of three licenses for mobile telephones,
valued at a record $3.75 billion.

International and regional engagement are also
improving. In addition, with the adoption of resolution
1770 (2007) in August, we are seeing the International
Compact with Iraq moving forward. The United
Nations has reported progress in 75 per cent of the 400
areas Iraq has identified for action. We are also looking
forward to the next meeting of the expanded
neighbours' group, which will convene in Istanbul in
less than two weeks. Staffan de Mistura, the Secretary-
General's Special Representative for Iraq, will be in
attendance. We look forward to hearing his ideas on
how the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
can support the neighbours' group in its constructive
engagement with Iraq.

Unfortunately, some of Iraq's neighbours appear
to believe that they can benefit from instability in Iraq.
While claiming to support Iraq, Iran has provided
lethal aid to both radical Shia and Sunni militants
inside Iraq, who attack Iraqi officials, innocent
civilians and Coalition forces.

Syria is also playing a destabilizing role in Iraq.
Although Syria hosted a meeting of the neighbours"
border security working group, it continues to provide
safe haven for elements of the former regime, who now
serve as key financiers and leaders of the insurgency.
While Syria has arrested some foreign terrorists bound
for Iraq, it remains the principal transit hub for Iraq-
bound terrorists. To make credible claims to support
the Iraqi people, Syria should do more - such as
implement a screening process to make it more
difficult for foreign extremists to enter and transit to
Iraq.

On the security front, the 2007 surge has given
besieged communities the confidence to work with
MNF-I to defeat Al-Qaida and violent extremists. The
military objectives are, in large measure, being met.
Population security measures have made it more
difficult for terrorists to conduct attacks. The overall
number of security incidents in Iraq continues to
decline, because we have dealt significant blows to
Al-Qaida in Iraq, and we have disrupted Shia militia
extremists. The overall number of civilian deaths has
also declined in 2007, although the numbers are still at
unacceptable levels. The number of arms caches found
and cleared in 2007 increased by approximately 20 per
cent over the previous year. From June to September,
attacks with improvised explosive devices decreased
by about 20 per cent, as compared to the previous year.

Iraqi security forces continue to grow and to
shoulder more of the load, albeit slowly and amid
continuing concerns about the sectarian tendencies of
some elements in their ranks, inadequate logistics and
supporting institutions and an insufficient number of
qualified commissioned and non-commissioned
officers. There are now 152 Iraqi army, national police
and special operations forces battalions operating
alongside MNF-I - about two thirds of which are
capable of leading operations, albeit with some MNF-I
support. The Iraqi Defence and Interior Ministries are
employing 445,000 people, a number that could reach
519,000 by the end of the year. MNF-I has employed
counterinsurgency practices that underscore the
importance of units living among the people they are
securing. Accordingly, our forces have established
dozens of joint security stations and patrol bases,
manned by MNF-I and Iraqi forces, in Baghdad and
other areas across Iraq.
In mid-June, when all the surge brigades were in
place, MNF-I launched a series of offensive operations
focused on expanding the gains achieved in the
preceding months in Al Anbar province - clearing

Baquba and several key Baghdad neighbourhoods and
important areas in the so-called belt around Baghdad
and pursuing Al-Qaida in the Diyala River Valley and
other areas. Meanwhile, MNF-I engaged in dialogue
with former insurgent groups and tribes, in conjunction
with Iraqi officials, to broker local ceasefires and gain
their support in rooting out Al-Qaida in their
communities. We also continue to emphasize the
development of Iraqi security forces. Four provinces
have already been handed over to provincial Iraqi
control. We anticipate that several more will be
transferred to Iraqi control in the coming months.

The security situation in Iraq is being
transformed. Some of the players are changing sides.
Despite ongoing violence, we see a qualitative shift
against extremism as an improvement. Iraqis are taking
on more responsibility for protecting themselves. But,
in the coming months, we must redouble our efforts to
improve security within Iraq and prevent human
suffering, while preserving regional security and
stability. The leadership of Iraq also has a
responsibility to take concrete steps to pursue
reconciliation, so that the political track can catch up
with the improvements in security.

On 26 August, Iraq's five most prominent leaders
from three major communities expressed gratitude for
the sacrifices these forces have made for Iraq and
agreed on the need for the continued presence of the
Multinational Force in Iraq. To that end, Iraqis stressed
the importance of renewing the mandate of resolution
1723 (2006) for another year. We expect to put forth a
draft resolution in that regard before the end of the
year

