The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.

I would like to join others in thanking
Ambassador F edotov for his very informative briefing
and in congratulating him on the leadership that he has
provided at the head of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC). I welcome the recent
initiatives undertaken by Mr. Fedotov, which he
announced in his briefing, namely, the start of the work
of the task force on transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking.

Gabon also welcomes the fact that, for several
years now, the Security Council has recognized the fact
that transnational organized crime and drug trafficking
are cross-cutting threats to international peace and
security. The activities of transnational organized crime
go far beyond mere drug trafficking, to include
activities having to do with migrants, trafficking in
human beings, money laundering and corruption. These
threats destabilize regions and fragile States and
undermine the efforts of the international community
aimed at development, post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding in fragile areas.

In developed countries, as elsewhere, this same
phenomenon leads to deterioration in the security
situation. It threatens democracies and weakens the
fabric of societies and their economies. This
phenomenon has been amplified as a result of
technological advances and open borders and markets,
and this has led to new opportunities for criminal
networks.

As a result, these problems must be dealt with in
a holistic matter. This will require, inter alia, joint
efforts and a strengthening of international cooperation
through exchanges of information and experience.
Assistance to strengthen the capacities of less
advantaged countries will be part of this effort.

International cooperation also means that focus
should be placed on regional efforts and on
strengthening the implementation of existing measures
to help prevent and suppress crime - measures
derived from current legal frameworks. I would
highlight in this respect the 1961 Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs, the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic
Substances, the United Nations Convention against
Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the United Nations
Convention against Corruption.

I cannot conclude without renewing my country's
support for the praiseworthy efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in combating the
cross-cutting threats that undermine peace and security
in several countries around the world. Gabon therefore
supports the response planned by UNODC as outlined
by Mr. Fedotov in his briefing.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov to respond to
the statements made by Council members.

