Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2462 (2019) and looks forward to
a genuine international and collective commitment to its
implementation. The credibility and the effectiveness
of the United Nations in implementing such a resolution
depend primarily on the implementation of previous
Security Council resolutions related to preventing and
combating the financing ofterrorism, and on preventing
certain Governments and parties from exploiting such
resolutions to exert political and economic pressure on
other Member States.
My country, Syria, stresses that the mandate of
the resolution adopted by the Council today focuses
exclusively on preventing and combating the financing
of individuals, groups, entities and institutions that are
designated by the Council as terrorists. Based on that
clear legal understanding, the Syrian Arab Republic
categorically rejects the politicized assessment made
by Mr. Marshall Billingslea, President of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF).

The Syrian Arab Republic implemented the action
plan developed by the FATF and the Middle East and
North Africa Financial Action Task Force to address
any shortcomings in combating money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism. That was recognized by
FATF in June 2014. It declared that Syria had fulfilled
the technical aspects of the plan. However, some
members of the Task Force insisted on keeping Syria's
name on the list of the ongoing process to improve
global compliance with anti-money-laundering and
combating the financing of terrorism, under the
pretext that the Task Force was unable to visit Syria for
security reasons. Today, my country, Syria, welcomes
and expects an expert group of the Task Force to visit
Damascus in the near future to oversee Syria's full
implementation of the required reforms.

My country's Government believes that addressing
the various tools and mechanisms for financing
terrorism is a decisive factor in eliminating terrorism
once and for all. However, we and other Member
States are concerned about the inaction and inability
of the United Nations, as well as the failure of the
international community, to hold accountable certain
Governments that are directly involved in financing
and arming groups designated by the Security Council
as terrorists. Those Governments have helped to create
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters and have
fuelled extremist ideology and violent extremism,
leading to terrorism throughout the world.

The United Nations does not lack the legal
instruments necessary to combat the financing of
terrorism, even though such instruments need to be
developed and improved. Indeed, the Security Council
has adopted clear and decisive resolutions on combating
the financing of terrorism. The problem lies with the
absence of mechanisms for holding to account the
Governments involved in financing terrorism, either
directly or indirectly.

One such example is the Government of Qatar,
which has publicly violated resolutions 2133 (2014),
2161 (2014), 2253 (2015) and 2368 (2017) by providing
more than $1 billion in cash - I repeat, in cash - to
terrorist groups, such as Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front,
in Syria and Iraq, under the pretext of paying ransoms
to release foreign abductees. However, no Member State
has even lifted a finger to ensure the implementation
of the relevant measures set out in Security Council
resolutions condemning and prohibiting ransom
payments to terrorists and armed terrorist groups.

In its war against Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front
and other terrorist groups, the Syrian Arab Republic
has lost tens of thousands of Syrian lives. The Syrian
people have suffered immensely as a result of terrorism,
in addition to huge economic losses that no country in
the world can endure by itself. It is no exaggeration to
say that Syria is the main partner of the international
community in the global war against terrorism within
the context of the United Nations. Despite that fact, my
country has received no financial or technical support
from the United Nations to combat terrorism. On the
contrary, we are being subjected to an unprecedented
economic blockade imposed by the Governments that
either financed terrorism or ignored its financiers.

Unfortunately, some Member States would rush to
describe those Governments, including the Government
of Qatar, as genuine partners of the United Nations
in combating terrorism, for the sole reason that those
Governments have donated a few million dollars to the
United Nations under the pretext that it is countering
terrorism. A former Prime Minister of one of those
Governments, namely, Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber
Al Thani, of Qatar, has admitted that his country's
Government spent $137 billion in financing, arming
and training armed groups in Syria.

In conclusion, given such practices, we remain
concerned about the professional and balanced
implementation of the provisions of Security Council
resolutions on combating terrorism and financing it, as
well as the seriousness and independence of the United
Nations role in combating terrorism.

