Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my best wishes to the
Arab and Muslim nations on the occasion of the holy
month of Ramadan. I hope it will be auspicious for our
peoples and nations.

I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening today's important debate on the topic of
upholding international law within the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Judge Owada and
Judge Meron for their briefings.

The rule of law is the mainstay of the three
pillars of the United Nations - international peace
and security, human rights and development. When
it comes to international peace and security, the key
issue that the Charter of the United Nations refers to is
the achievement, by peaceful means and in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law, of
adjustments or settlements of international disputes or
situations that could result in a breach of peace.

When it comes to human rights, every human being
deserves to be treated with dignity and respect and is
entitled to the full enjoyment of human rights. Those
rights are protected by law, including international
human rights law, international humanitarian law and
other relevant international norms, and all are essential
to a life of dignity.

With regard to development, the States Members
of the United Nations, through the Declaration of the
High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels
adopted on 24 September 2012 (General Assembly resolution 67/1), have stipulated that the rule of law
and development are interconnected and mutually
reinforcing. The promotion of the rule of law at
national and international levels is vital to ensuring
sustained and inclusive economic growth, sustainable
development, the eradication of poverty and hunger
and the enjoyment of human rights, including the right
to development. Progress on all those issues further
strengthens the rule of law. After discussing the pivotal
role of the rule of law in strengthening the three pillars
ofthe United Nations, I will focus on three main issues:
the implementation of resolutions and the enforcement
of resolutions and laws on the ground, the unity of the
Council and the peaceful settlement of disputes.

With regard to the implementation of resolutions
and the enforcement of laws, when we discuss
international law in the Council, it is incumbent on us
as Council members to implement the resolutions that
we adopt and hold accountable those responsible for
violating international law. There are many Security
Council resolutions that have not been implemented
on the ground. There are many Members of the United
Nations who violate international law and the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations with full impunity.
As an example of the violation of international law,
I need only cite the Palestinian question - an issue
that has been discussed in all United Nations forums
for seven decades owing to the repeated violations
of international law and resolutions adopted by the
Council, the General Assembly and other United
Nations bodies. The unilateral measures adopted by
Israel, the occupying Power, which has sought to change
the situation on the ground in occupied Palestinian
territory, including continued settlement activities and
the expansion of existing settlements, are all illegal
and illegitimate activities. They represent a flagrant
violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the international law - as does moving diplomatic
missions to Jerusalem.

The Syrian crisis has entered its eighth year with
no substantive solution in sight. The Security Council
has adopted many resolutions on the matter, including
resolution 2401 (2018), introduced by Kuwait and
Sweden and adopted unanimously in February, calling
on all parties to halt military activities throughout
Syria to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and medical evacuations. That is another clear sign
of non-compliance with our resolutions. We must be
frank with ourselves on the Council. As the concept
note (S/2018/417/Rev.l, annex) states, inadequate
implementation of Council resolutions undermines the
credibility of the Council and encourages rogue States
to defy them, while compromising the credibility of the
Council as a tool for maintaining international peace
and security.

Secondly, concerning the unity of the Council,
we stress the centrality of unified action, especially
on the Council, so as to contribute to the maintenance
of international peace and security and the promotion
of the rule of law with the tools at our disposal. The
success of those tools depends on the unity of the
Council. For years, the failure of the Council to resolve
numerous crises owing to divisions among members has
led to the use of the veto. That was clearly evidenced
with regard to the issues of Palestine and the Syrian
crisis. Accordingly, Kuwait supports the Mexican-
French initiative and the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group code of conduct, which call
for refraining from use of the veto in cases of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.

We stress the need for the unity of the Council,
especially among its permanent members, so that it
can play its role in maintaining international peace
and security, adopt the necessary effective measures
and resolutions and strengthen the rule of law, while
ensuring accountability and preventing impunity,
especially of those responsible for genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, as well as other
grave violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, and thereby
prevent their recurrence. The Council has succeeded
on many occasions in carrying out its responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security and
strenghtening the rule of law in a unified and decisive
manner. That success includes the liberation of my
country, the State of Kuwait, in February 1991, in
what was a clear manifestation of the purposes and
principles of the Charter. That clearly demonstrates
what we can achieve when the international community
works together under the banner of the United Nations
through Security Council resolutions to promote the
rule of law and justice.

Thirdly, concerning the peaceful settlement of
disputes, the Charter provides many tools to address
the challenges of our time, especially in Chapter VI. We
must use those tools effectively in a peaceful manner to
settle disputes, including through negotiation, inquiry,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration and judicial
settlement. All of those tools help to prevent the
outbreak of conflict. Kuwait fully abides by Chapter
VI of the Charter. Our foreign policy is based on a
number of principles, including preventive diplomacy,
reconciliation and mediation so as to prevent and
contain conflicts.

In conclusion, I would like to read out part of a
statement delivered by former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan.

(spoke in English)

"Those who seek to bestow legitimacy must
themselves embody it; and those who invoke
international law must themselves submit to it. Just
as, within a country, respect for the law depends
on the sense that all have a say in making and
implementing it, so it is in our global community.
No nation must feel excluded. All must feel that
international law belongs to them and protects their
legitimate interests.

"Rule of law as a mere concept is not enough.
Laws must be put into practice and permeate the
fabric of our lives." (A/59/PV3, p. 3)

