Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
would like to thank South Africa for convening this
open debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2011/634*) and for his
statement this morning. Of course, the Security
Council, as the body responsible for international
peace and security, plays an important role in
promoting human rights.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Austria on behalf of
the Human Security Network.

I would like to recall that heads of State and
Government met here in New York in 2005 and
12-21054
adopted the World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1), in which they expressed
their commitment to promote the protection and
promotion of human rights, the rule of law and
democracy. They also highlighted the close link
between those concepts and how they are mutually
reinforcing. the rule of law must operate both in
international relations and within States. Respect for it
at the international level is an essential element for the
peace and stability of nations and for democratic
governance and development.

As the Secretary-General expressed so well in his
report to the General Assembly, respect for the rule of
law at the international level is at the very foundation
of the Charter of the United Nations. In their mutual
relations, all States must respect legal norms that are
binding upon them, submit their disputes to agreed
methods for peaceful settlement and respect the
sovereign and legal equality of States. Those are what
is meant by the rule of law at the international level.

Chile accords the utmost importance to
promoting respect for the rule of law and believes it is
crucial to strengthen it. As a country that respects
international law, we recognize and support the
principles of the Charter as essential values for any
modern society. Of course, those and other elements,
such as respect for international treaties, contribute to
harmonious development and peaceful coexistence
between nations.

At the same time, the rule of law must be
respected within States. Respect for it is a necessary
precondition for domestic peace, which is linked to
international peace. The proper functioning of national
institutions and bodies allows for the normal
development of the rule of law. Unless there is respect
for those institutions and organizations, a State cannot
develop its activities properly. In legal terms, that
means full respect for human rights and the existence
of an independent legal system that acts in a legitimate
way. It also means that anybody who commits a crime
must answer for his conduct before legal bodies, no
matter what post he occupies, and the law must be
equally applied to all.

Clearly, the primary role in the observance and
respect for the rule of law belongs to States and their
institutions, which have the main responsibility of
ensuring that the rule of law is fully implemented.
Nevertheless, the international community, and especially
12-21054
the United Nations through its main organs - the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice - must also watch over
and encourage respect for the rule of law.

Respect for the rule of law allows us to prevent
the outbreak of internal conflicts. In that regard, the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, must establish mechanisms that allow us to
avoid the outbreak of internal conflicts. In that
connection, there is a great window of opportunity for
preventive action, which can avoid many conflicts. In
cases where conflicts cannot be avoided, the post-
conflict period must be managed in a way to overcome
those obstacles to Governments implementing efforts
to attain national institutional reconstruction.

As crucial pillars of the rule of law, executive,
legislative and judicial bodies must quickly be rebuilt
in order to ensure the proper stability for the
reorganization of society. In such cases, there must be
close collaboration between Governments and the
international community, in particular the United
Nations, which must continue to work to achieve those
goals. Post-conflict peacebuilding must therefore take
into account issues related to the rule of law and to
human rights.

The role of truth commissions with regard to
respect for the rule of law should not be left outside
those peacebuilding processes. They have played a
very important role in various countries. While
respecting the particular character of each country, it is
important that truth commissions be considered as a
factor to favour peace and reconciliation.

In those processes, there must be compatibility
between justice and peace, without in any way
sacrificing any of those values. Internal peace cannot
be achieved without justice, and justice must be
exercised while taking into account that the goal is to
achieve peace. To that end, the aim should be a fully
legitimate justice system with the authority to impose
its decisions. Similarly, domestic justice system should
abide strictly by international laws and standards,
including respect for due process for all, especially the
most vulnerable sectors of society. In that connection,
peacekeeping operations must not fail to take into
account elements that promote appropriate justice.

The establishment of the International Criminal
Court represents an important element in terms of
enhancing the rule of law. The Court is called upon to

act in cases where States in which crimes under its
jurisdiction have been committed are not in a position,
or are unwilling, to undertake legal proceedings.
International ad hoc criminal tribunals have fulfilled
the same function.

In conclusion, we would like to observe that,
while it is up to each State to implement the terms of
the Secretary-General's report - in other words, to
build a just, safe and peaceful world governed by the
rule of law - it is also up to the international
community as a whole. We agree with the Secretary-
General on the need to reflect on ways in which the
international community can better carry out and
coordinate its initiatives to strengthen the rule of law.
For that reason we support the convening of the high-
level meeting that will be held on 24 September during
the next session of the General Assembly as an
example of a contribution on this theme.

