Mr. Dauth (Australia): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important and timely
meeting on an issue of deep interest to all Member
States. Like previous speakers, we thank the Secretary-
General for his statement and Ambassador Brahimi for
his comprehensive and excellent briefing.

I shall be brief, not least because of the lateness
of the hour, but let me make some points very quickly.

The first thing I wish to say, of course, is that
there should be no doubt whatsoever that coalition
actions against terrorism in Afghanistan are a
necessary response to a serious threat to international
peace and security. Australia is doing its part to address
that threat. We have committed over 1,500 military
personnel as well as substantial military assets to assist
coalition efforts. Our first objective must be to bring to
account the perpetrators of the attacks of 11 September
and those who harbour them.

But we must also focus on Afghanistan's own
urgent needs and on the international community's
obligation to assist that nation overcome its
humanitarian crisis and make a sustained recovery. The
international community's approach to Afghanistan
needs to take account of lessons of the recent past. I
want to highlight two of these.

First, countries or regions that drift beyond the
reach of international norms and international law
become havens for terrorists and international crime.
The international community cannot allow this state to
persist. Afghanistan needs a government that respects
international norms and law. In particular, it needs a
government that respects international human rights,
including the rights of women - and I am delighted
that so many others have referred to that issue in
particular - and it needs a government that works to
meet its international obligation to combat terrorism
and actions that give terrorists support and succour.
Such a government will need to be broad-based and
representative of all Afghans. Australia strongly
supports Ambassador Brahimi's efforts to facilitate the
emergence from within of such a government.

The second point I want to make is that disregard
for human rights and a hostile relationship with the
international community greatly exacerbate
humanitarian crises. The Taliban regime has a very
poor record of cooperating with international
humanitarian agencies. It has actively hindered
humanitarian and rehabilitation efforts. This must end.
Afghanistan needs a cooperative relationship with the
international community. An Afghan government
committed to rebuilding and rehabilitation, to
establishing law and order, and to creating conditions
that will enable the return of refugees and displaced
people should, and will, have the support of the
international community. The return from Iran and
Pakistan in particular of displaced Afghans should be a
first-order priority for Afghanistan, its neighbours and
the region more generally.

For its part, Australia has already allocated a total
of 23.3 million Australian dollars to assist displaced
and vulnerable Afghans in the region.

Afghanistan faces daunting challenges, but these
can be overcome. Australia remains fully committed to
playing its part in helping Afghanistan put the
tragedies of the past behind and to build a more
hopeful future.

