Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): My country's delegation welcomes you, Mr. President, and the other ministers present here. We appreciate the presidency of the Security Council selecting today's theme, which is extremely important as it is intimately related to the main mission of the Council, namely, achieving and preserving peace and security. That should be undertaken by upholding the Charter of the United Nations, whose adoption, 75 years ago, we are celebrating this year. I also thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson for their valuable briefings. The Charter was drafted and adopted after the horrific tragedy of two world wars, which led to the loss of millions of lives and unprecedented destruction. Through its principles and values, the Charter reflects the collective desire of people throughout the world to establish an institutional and legal framework governing relations among countries and guaranteeing the maintenance of international peace and security in order to save the world from repeated wars and conflicts. More than seven decades have passed since the founding of this international Organization, during which the world has witnessed - and is still witnessing - numerous accelerated events and transformations as well as disputes and conflicts, in addition to human tragedies that we had thought would never be repeated. However, new challenges have emerged, including violent extremism, terrorism, climate change, nuclear proliferation, cyberterrorism and the displacement of tens of millions of refugees. All those threats pose a serious challenge to world peace and security and have a negative impact on development and prosperity. This situation is linked to being far from having achieved the vision and objectives of the Charter. We believe that upholding the Charter as a reference, unifying and binding document is essential to achieving greater effectiveness as we tackle various situations and improve the performance of the Security Council as the primary organ entrusted with implementing the Charter's vision, especially in the area of international peace and security. The principles of the Charter - in particular the non-use of force, the peaceful settlement of conflicts, non-interference in the internal affairs of States, the right to self-determination and the sovereign equality of States - still continue to constitute the cornerstones governing international relations. Moreover, the values of the Charter - in particular equal rights, non-discrimination, tolerance and good neighbourliness - continue to be guidelines for achieving and maintaining harmony and stability worldwide. Tunisia upholds international legitimacy and respects the Charter of the United Nations. Those constitute guiding principles of our foreign policy. We have established our national legislation based on the principles of the Charter. After the revolution to guarantee freedom and dignity and chart our path towards democracy, we have been keen to conform our legislation and policies to the Charter's directives. Tunisia has returned to the Security Council after 20 years - the fourth time that we have been members of the Council. We still have the same commitments and principles that govern our foreign policy. We have a steadfast commitment and continuous contributions towards bolstering international peace and security, as well as preventive diplomacy and multilateralism. We will also continue to promote dialogue and settling disputes peacefully, rather than through the use of force. It is along those lines that my delegation calls for enhancing the measures provided by the Charter to the Council with the aim to enabling it to work more effectively, meet the challenges it faces and play its role in the peaceful settlement of conflicts and crises, while also avoiding new conflicts and stepping up measures to maintain international peace and security. Preventive and proactive work for maintaining peace and security is of particular importance. We call upon the Security Council to address crises in their initial phases while benefitting fully from Chapter VIII of the Charter by encouraging regional organizations to play their role in preventing conflicts and settling crises. In that context, we appreciate the regular and periodic meetings held between the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council. We also call for more cooperation with other regional organizations, such as the League of Arab States. On the other hand, my delegation calls for focusing on the socioeconomic and human rights dimensions while maintaining peace and security. Violating those rights will lead to conflicts. Other socioeconomic challenges, such as poverty, unemployment, marginalization, exclusion, climate change and the lack of sustainable development, also contribute to crises and conflicts. The success of the Security Council in its main mission of maintaining peace and security greatly depends on its unity and consensus among its members. Unfortunately, over recent decades we have seen obvious signs of weakness in that area, which reflects negatively on the image and credibility of the Council. That is clearly demonstrated by numerous hotbeds of tension and conflicts at the international level, as well as by many issues and crises that lack solutions to date despite their direct impact on world security and stability. They also cause human sufferings and tragedies for many people, especially in the Arab region and the African continent. Based on Tunisia's commitment to international legitimacy and the purposes of the Charter, and out of its desire for a more effective role by the Council, as well as its commitment to just causes, at the top of which is the question of Palestine, we renew our call for respecting the relevant Security Council resolutions, leading to a just and comprehensive solution enabling the Palestinian people to regain their legitimate rights, including establishing their independent State on their territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
