Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea congratulates Senegal on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November. We also appreciate Senegal's initiative in
convening this ministerial open debate on peacekeeping
operations facing asymmetrical threats, and thank
Foreign Minister Mankeur Ndiaye for coming to New
York to preside over the debate.

United Nations peacekeeping operations have
contributed significantly to the resolution of conflicts
and to the declining number of conflicts over two
decades. The Republic of Korea has long been a troop-
contributing country and financial contributor to
that essential function of the United Nations. Today,
however, we are concerned that the changing nature of
conflict and the speed of that change may outpace the
ability of United Nations peacekeeping operations to
respond. The threat ofterrorism, for instance, is placing
significant pressure on the peacekeeping system as
a whole.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the recommendations of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
observed that
"a United Nations peace operation is not designed
or equipped to impose political solutions through
sustained use of force" (S/2015/682, para. 15).

However, the unfortunate reality is that United Nations
peacekeeping operations are increasingly deployed in
Violent and asymmetrically threatening environments,
taking on an undue share of the burden. In 2016 alone,
30 peacekeepers were killed in action as a result of
malicious acts. Against such a stark background, let me
offer the following thoughts.

First, given the complexity of the challenges of
delivering on Council mandates in such threatening
environments, we must do more to address the issue
of how to improve provision of field support and use
of force enablers, including helicopters, heavy weapons
and hospitals. It is simply unrealistic to expect good
results from field missions without providing them
with adequate resources to carry out their mandate.

Among the 30 casualties in peacekeeping operations
directly resulting from attacks of an asymmetrical
nature this year, 25 took place within the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). MINUSMA is one of
the United Nations peacekeeping missions exposed to
asymmetrical threats, ranging from sporadic attacks
by terrorists to cross-boundary crimes, yet it is
insufficiently equipped and supported.

It may be no coincidence that in MINUSMA, one
out of every two medical clinics has critical equipment
gaps, including everything from integrated trauma care
to intensive care. As a part of the pledge made during the
2015 Leaders' Summit on peacekeeping, the Republic
of Korea is currently working with the African Union
and the Government of Mali to provide equipment for a
level-2 medical facility in northern Mali. Through that
medical facility, it is our hope that the Government of
Mali can win the hearts and minds ofthe Malian people
and gain an upper hand in its effort to restore order in
the region.

Secondly, intelligence capabilities and the use of
new technologies can improve the safety and security of
peacekeepers. United Nations peacekeeping operations
increasingly deploy a variety of technologies to collect,
communicate and analyse data and information to
support decision-making and coherent operational
responses. Those are part of the efforts to counter-
balance the threats from the changing operational
environment.

The Republic of Korea, in partnership with
the Department of Field Support and Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, is hosting the Third
International Partnership for Technology in
Peacekeeping Symposium this week in Seoul, Korea.
The Symposium will provide further insight into the
challenges of the modern peacekeeping environment
and offer opportunities for sharing ideas on ways to
overcome those challenges.

Finally, as highlighted in the report of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO),

"[p]olitics must drive the design and implementation
of peace operations" (S/2015/446, p. 10).

Conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
are all part of a continuum in which the transitions are
neither lineal nor strictly sequential. The pursuit of a
political settlement, by maintaining a political space for
United Nations mediation, is particularly important in a
non-permissive environment.

The HIPPO report recognizes that where
asymmetrical threats are present within the operating
environment, United Nations missions must be
provided with the necessary capabilities and training.
The Republic of Korea, as an ardent supporter of that
and other recommendations of the HIPPO and the
Secretary-General, looks forward to continued efforts
to that end.

