Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We echo the words of gratitude addressed to
the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. He'di Annabi, for
his important and very informative briefing. The
Russian Federation, on the whole, is pleased at the
progress made in the peace settlement of the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However
fragile progress is there, the situation today in that
country is a striking change for the better compared to
the picture that we observed but a few months ago.

We take note of the process - which, under the
control of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), is
now virtually complete - of the disengagement of
forces. Some foreign forces have already left the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome the
stated intention of the Namibian leadership to complete
the withdrawal of their contingent from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by 30 August, and the
intensifying dialogue between the leaders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and those of
neighbouring States on the question of ensuring mutual
security. Russia supports that process and wishes it
every success.

We view the Gaborone preparatory meeting of the
inter-Congolese dialogue as a momentous event;
participants decided on an agenda and a date for the
beginning of substantive work. Russia commends the
efforts of all parties involved in the preparations for
that event, notably the facilitator of the inter-Congolese
dialogue, President Masire. Also, we welcome the
beginning of direct negotiations between the President
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
leaders of the Rassemblement congolais pour la
de'mocratie (RCD) and the Front de liberation du
Congo, and the statements they have made, which
attest to their intention decisively and irreversibly to
abandon the path of war and to embark on that of
dialogue and national reconciliation. We expect that
those statements will very soon be translated into
concrete action advancing the peace process. For its
part, Russia intends to do everything it can to ensure
that they have the constant support of the international
community.

We believe that among the priority elements is
compliance by the RCD leadership with the demand for
the demilitarization of Kisangani, as set out in Security
Council resolutions 1304 (2000) and 1355 (2001). That
is not an end in itself; it is dictated by the broader goal
of implementing an overall concept for United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We hope that, with that in mind, the RCD
leadership will radically improve its interaction with
MONUC.

It is obvious to us that, as the inter-Congolese
dialogue and the regional dialogue move forward on
the political aspects of settling the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, a task of
increasingly high priority will be the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement of members of foreign armed groups
enumerated in an annex to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement.

We reaffirm our position that this process must be
voluntary and must have the support of all parties
involved in the conflict. We feel that those conditions
are a sine qua non for practical United Nations
involvement in measures to support the process. We
feel that it makes sense from the conceptual point of
view to attach high priority to confidence-building in
the eastern provinces, where the activities of those
armed groups are on the rise. My delegation is
prepared to give careful study to appropriate
recommendations by the Secretariat on this matter.

In the longer term, we see the prospects for a
settlement of this problem in the general context of the
democratization of political life and the normalization
of inter-ethnic relations in all countries of the Great
Lakes region.

We are concerned at the extremely depressing
information about the humanitarian and human rights
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
call on all sides to take the steps necessary to redress
the situation, and to cooperate with international
humanitarian personnel in ensuring access to those who
need assistance.

