Mr. Savua (Fiji): We join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for June.

We accept the fact that civilians are more vulnerable
than ever before in the current cycle of violence and that
this trend, despite all the efforts made thus far, shows
no immediate sign of reversing itself; the call for
decisive action is therefore timely and appropriate.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2004/43l), which clearly
shows that, despite some initial successes, there is stark
and disturbing evidence of the extent to which civilians
are still suffering because of war, with too many
instances of civilians being subjected to extreme
violence or denied humanitarian aid.

Fiji totally supports the Secretary-General's
assessment that emphasizing the regional dimension of
civilian protection is the most effective way to deal
with cross-border issues such as human trafficking and
the illegal flow of arms. Regional efforts in the area of
security and peacekeeping have been not only an
effective supplement to United Nations programmes
but also an effective means of ensuring local
participation and collaboration on important security
and development issues. Greater support should be
accorded to regional initiatives, with the intention of
strengthening such arrangements and encouraging them
to be more proactive in every respect.

The growing involvement of non-State actors in
the changing nature of war has seen a commensurate
increase in the number of civilians becoming deliberate
targets and in the use of the young as child soldiers and
of civilians as shields. Modern warfare has become less
and less a confrontation between professional armies,
and more and more a street and suburban battle
between military personnel and civilian rebels of the
same country, or internal conflicts between civilian
factions. These unconventional battles have no defined
boundaries, and are unorthodox in nature and
extremely deadly. As a result, distinctions between
combatants and non-combatants are faint, and respect
for the law is basically non-existent.

Recent attacks on United Nations personnel,
including against its headquarters in Baghdad, are clear
evidence of the increasingly fragile environment to
which humanitarian personnel are exposed - one in
which there are no security guarantees whatsoever. The
United Nations and the international community must
continue to express their abhorrence for such attacks
and to condemn them as acts of cowardice and
arrogance.

As a small island developing country, Fiji is also
concerned that more wars and conflicts are being
fought in poor and developing States, with women and
children being the main casualties. Apart from the
direct threat that this poses to international peace and
security, the impact on the sustainable development
agenda for small developing countries is enormous.
More resources and energy are being devoted to
conflict resolution and peacemaking. In addition, the
lifelong effects of the traumatic experiences of victims
are often impediments to development and growth.

Every effort must be made to mainstream civilian
protection issues into United Nations programmes,
peacekeeping mandates and operations, and the
policies of Member States. These should include
provisions in the aide-memoire for reporting human
rights abuses, together with disarmament issues and
small-arms proliferation, and special measures to
protect women and girls from rape and other violence.
Mainstreaming capacity-building by the United
Nations and Member States would ensure that efforts in
that regard would bear fruit. Member States, through
their local branches of Government, United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations, at the
national and local levels, can help bridge the divide.

Member States are to be encouraged to sign and
ratify the legal instruments that exist in the framework
of the broad protection agenda. Warring factions must
comply fully with the provisions of the United Nations
Charter and the rules and principles of international
law. The United Nations has an important advocacy
role in that regard. A culture of protection can be
achieved only if an appropriate level of coordination is
attained.

Recent events have given us a rude awakening,
painting a stark picture of the realities faced by
civilians and the United Nations in contemporary
armed conflict and the challenges these present to the
international community. It is time to act, and act
decisively. Unless a systematic and integrated approach
is taken to the prevention of conflict, the promotion of
a culture of respect for human rights, and the
eradication of impunity, the global culture of protection
of civilians that has been called for will remain a
distant ideal.

