China welcomes the participation of Foreign Minister Claudia Blum de Barberi in today's meeting. I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Massieu for his briefing. The Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace will soon mark its fourth anniversary. Over the past four years, the Colombia peace process has achieved significant progress. The disarmament and reintegration process continues to move forward, and the peace dividends are bringing increasing benefits to the Colombian people. Thanks to the efforts made in the context of "Peace with legality" by the Government of Colombia, sustainable peace is taking root and building momentum. The Colombia peace process sets a good example of conflict resolution through the joint efforts of the international community. The United Nations and the parties concerned have been committed to facilitating peace talks since the early stages of the process, and the Security Council has provided strong support and timely help by deploying the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to monitor the implementation of the peace agreement. Just last month the Council, by unanimously adopting resolution 2545 (2020), extending the mandate of the Mission for another year, once again showed its unrelenting support. At the same time, the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/943) and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Massieu's briefing pointed out that there are still challenges facing the peace process. The international community and the Security Council should step up their endeavours to help Colombia ensure a comprehensive, effective and sustainable implementation of the peace agreement, and China is fully behind all such efforts. I would like to emphasize three points. It is imperative to improve the security situation. Security is a priority for human rights and a prerequisite for the enjoyment of other rights. The report of the Secretary-General notes that violence and criminal activity are still taking place in some areas. We hope that State institutions and the security presence could be strengthened in high-risk areas. The policy on the dismantling of criminal organizations should be finalized and implemented in 2021. The sustainable reintegration of ex-combatants is key to the peace process. China commends the efforts of the Colombian Government to relocate former territorial areas for training and reintegration. There are still more than 9,000 ex-combatants living outside the areas. For them, more help is needed to push forward their political, economic, social and educational reintegration. Inclusive development should be promoted in order to eradicate the root causes of conflict. China supports Colombia's strategy to overcome the effects of the pandemic as well as the five pillars of the strategy. We hope that the Colombian Government will continue to implement the development programmes with a territorial focus and step up its efforts towards equitable, inclusive and sustainable development. The development of infrastructure for transportation, irrigation and electricity should be prioritized and strengthened in conflict-affected areas, and basic public services such as education, health care and housing should be provided in order to minimize the disparities between urban and rural areas and between various regions. China supports the work of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Massieu and the Verification Mission. We encourage the Verification Mission and the United Nations country team in Colombia to strengthen coordination and collaboration, and to play a greater role in supporting the Colombia peace process, with a synergetic effect. China will enhance its cooperation with Colombia through both bilateral and multilateral channels so as to support sustainable peace and development in Colombia.
