Mr. Henze (Germany): First of all, I should like to
express my delegation's satisfaction that the Council was
able to reach a unanimous decision on the matter of the
arms embargo against the Rwandan Government. This
resolution demonstrates the Council's ability to take
decisions on difficult issues.

My delegation voted in favour of this resolution,
which suspends the embargo against the Government of
Rwanda for one year and lifts it as of 1 September 1996.
We understand that the lifting of the embargo is more a
matter of principle for the Rwandan Government than an
issue of practical concern. We voted in favour of the
resolution because we think it is a well-balanced text. On
the one hand, it takes into account the legitimate demands
of the Rwandan Government. On the other hand, it
acknowledges the fragile security situation in the subregion.
It was therefore appropriate to link the Rwandan
Government's right to buy weapons with extensive control
mechanisms, including Rwanda's obligation to notify the
sanctions Committee of its arms purchases.
The arms embargo against Rwanda is not an isolated
question. It is closely linked to the overall situation in the
Great Lakes region. The resolution has taken this aspect
into account by requesting the Secretary-General to make
recommendations to the Council as soon as possible on a
commission to investigate the flow of arms to forces of the
former Rwandan Government. In our view, such a
commission should be established without further delay,
and we hope that all the countries concerned will cooperate
with it. In this respect, we welcome, in particular, the
commitment of the Government of Zaire to work with
such a commission. I should like to point out that, in
addition, we would still prefer the deployment of United
Nations military observers in the border regions, in
particular at the airfields in eastern Zaire. Also, the urgent
convening of a regional conference remains an absolute
priority.

The return of the Rwandan refugees remains central
to the question of stability in the Great Lakes region. In
this respect, we call upon the Rwandan Government to
intensify its rehabilitation efforts and, in particular, its
efforts for national reconciliation. We urge the
Government to start a genuine national dialogue with all
members of Rwandan society, excluding, of course, those
responsible for last year's genocide. In order to promote
a climate of trust in the country, we also call upon the
Government to address immediately the situation in its
desperately overcrowded prisons and the necessary reform
of its judicial system. Germany is ready to give assistance
to alleviate the situation of the prisoners.

The resolution we have just adopted is an important
step towards the normalization of the situation in this part
of Africa. But more remains to be done. The main
responsibility lies with the countries of the region
themselves. We are determined to assist them in their
efforts.

