Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at
the outset to congratulate the Syrian delegation on its
leadership of the Security Council this month. In
particular, I pay tribute to you, Mr. President, for your
personal role and wish you every success in your new
diplomatic post. We shall miss your professionalism,
your experience and your good humour. But since you
are only going to Geneva you will not really be all that
far away.

I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity for the
Security Council to reflect on so important a topic as
United Nations peacekeeping operations. It is no
accident that the first purpose set out in the first
paragraph of the preamble of the Charter is to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. This is
followed soon by that of maintaining international
peace and security, responsibility for which lies with
the Security Council pursuant principally to Chapters
V, VI and VII.

In our view, it must be acknowledged that since
the end of the cold war the international community
has witnessed a clear trend - reflected in the Security
Council - towards increasingly broad and effective
use of the mechanisms and means set out in those
chapters, particularly Chapters VI and VII, with the
assistance of the Secretariat and other United Nations
organs, and with that of the specialized agencies.
Consistent with that trend, we have also noted the
formulation of new doctrines and principles such as
preventive diplomacy and humanitarian intervention,
which further build on collective international action.
Those matters too call for further consideration.

Our impression is that, ultimately, the United
Nations - especially the Security Council - will be
judged or evaluated by world public opinion and by the
person on the street according to the extent to which it
prevents conflict, curbs killings, delivers humanitarian
assistance in conflict situations and mediates between
warring groups - precisely through peacekeeping
operations. Hence the pressing importance of this
subject of peacekeeping operations for the
Organization's present and future.

For that reason, on this occasion, my delegation
cannot fail to reaffirm once again my country's resolute
commitment, with the authority and legitimacy of the
United Nations, to the exercise of this responsibility of
maintaining peace and security. In our view, the
practice of participation by regional organizations in
crisis or conflict situations is a very important factor
contributing to the fulfilment of these responsibilities,
but one which must always be subordinate to the
overarching global mandate and functions of the
United Nations in these areas. Moreover, it is necessary
to adjust appropriately the application, capacity and
nature of assistance and security forces not operating
under the mandate and direct coordination of the
United Nations so that they can be very positive and
not affect or undermine the authority of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

I should like to touch on a number of new
elements of peacekeeping operations that have recently
arisen with particular force: with the metamorphosis of
the concept of security, the evolution of the very nature
of conflicts and the emergence of situations for which
traditional tools do not seem the most appropriate.

First is the concept of security. I believe it is
already commonplace to acknowledge that that concept
includes non-military threats and concerns about the
security of persons - Chile is a member of a network
of United Nations Member countries dedicated to
exploring the concept of human security - that there is
an interdependence among the various components that
apply both to rich and to poor countries, and that the
concept of security also encompasses the new
phenomenon of globalized terrorism.

As far as conflicts are concerned, it seems to me
that they have evolved from inter-State conflicts with
repercussions within other States to intra-State
conflicts with outside repercussions on other States.
That is a much more complex reality, which United
Nations peacekeeping operations must face. It is not so
easy to deal with an intra-State conflict that has a
domestic origin but that, nevertheless, spills over to
neighbouring countries or affects the international
community. In order to address these new needs, the
Secretary-General made available to Member States the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809) - mentioned by a
number of previous speakers - which recommended
that the whole peacekeeping mechanism, both of the
Secretariat and of Governments themselves, be broadly
updated. In our judgement, that report and the
resolutions to which it gave rise are an example of the
ability to adapt, with which we must face the changing
demands of peacekeeping.

Against that backdrop, we note that new
challenges have recently arisen. I have already
mentioned the increasing role of regional organizations
in peacekeeping, and I should now like to emphasize
the particular importance of better integrating the
dimension of human rights into peacekeeping
operations. That involves a number of components,
including humanitarian intervention, where we still
need to try to find a solution or an appropriate balance
between objections related to sovereignty on the one
hand and the moral obligation to protect defenceless
persons from abuses of power on the other. The time is
past when a sovereign Power can act according to
whim with regard to citizens in a globalized world,
which, furthermore, imposes commitments that
obligate us with regard to human rights.

Another point is the relationship that should exist
between peacekeeping operations and international
criminal procedures. Here is often the challenge - as
we have recently seen - of how to achieve peace in
order to avoid more deaths while, at the same time,
bringing to justice those responsible for humanitarian
situations in which the United Nations must intervene.
It is a question, then, of not forgetting to bring to
justice those who commit crimes against humanity, and
of not allowing impunity, without failing to maintain
the realism necessary in order to act appropriately and
to stop killings, which is obviously the priority for the
Security Council and the entire Organization.

Finally, the integration of human rights into
peacekeeping operations demands active cooperation
between civilians and military personnel and better
understanding, tolerance and respect with regard to the
distinct functions of each sector. That is a challenge
still facing us. But there are also other favourable
elements: not only cooperation between civilians and
military personnel, but also greater cooperation and
shared knowledge among the military personnel of
various countries, traditions, regions and cultures. My
country, at least, has benefited greatly from
participating under the command of other countries,
other military establishments. We have Chilean
military contingents under Argentine command in
Cyprus; we have Chilean military personnel under the
command of the United Kingdom in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Right now, we have Chilean military
personnel under the command of Bangladeshi troops in
the Congo. So that is another by-product of
peacekeeping operations that we must not overlook;
perhaps we should think about how we can benefit
from that experience.

Finally, the role of women in peacekeeping is also
very important for us with regard to this subject. There
has been progress since the Security Council's adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), but we believe that there is
still much to do in order to integrate women into
peacekeeping operations and peace processes and to

fight criminal violence against women in conflict areas.
Until resolution 1325 (2000), gender-related problems
were addressed in the United Nations from the
economic, social and human rights perspectives.
Perhaps it will be necessary to employ the security
dimension in gender structures - for example,
incorporating the security dimension into the mandate
of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Gender Issues, or - as has been suggested on more
than one occasion - establishing the post of special
representative of the Secretary-General for women,
peace and security, with a role similar to that of the
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict.

Another element of the question of the
maintenance of international peace and security is post-
conflict peace-building in the context of a
peacekeeping operation. Very often the easiest part is
to bring in forces to separate the conflicting sides, to
stop the killing. But the real task is achieving peace
and rebuilding the country. That is where the
responsibilities of the Security Council combine with
those of the Economic and Social Council, the United
Nations Development Programme and the international
financial institutions. The Council has been addressing
these issues for a long time without finding the right
approach which would make it possible for these
organs and institutions to work together and coordinate
their functions, both in conflict prevention and in post-
conflict reconstruction.

We believe that we should make proper use of
Article 65 of the Charter whereby the Council can call
for the assistance of the Economic and Social Council.
We need to keep in mind the multidimensional nature
of peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction
operations. It is becoming more and more necessary to
find formulas for cooperation between those organs.

The Economic and Social Council has created Ad
Hoc Advisory Groups for two countries emerging from
conflict, Burundi and Guinea-Bissau, and not long ago
there was a joint mission of the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council to Guinea-Bissau.
That is an important step, although we feel much still
remains to be done.

In short, peacekeeping operations must continue;
they must evolve; indeed they must, when necessary,
change - for the benefit of peace, security, for the
benefit of international development, and especially for
the benefit of the millions of people who are barely
able to survive and who are the chief victims in conflict
zones.

