Mr. Strammen (Norway): Let me start by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February.

Norway would like to thank Special
Representative Steiner for his briefing and the report
(S/2003/113) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) that has
been presented to the Security Council. We would once
again like to reiterate our full support for Mr. Steiner's
work, and our appreciation for the efforts carried out
by him, UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government in ensuring the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

At the 4676th meeting of the Council, held on 19
December last year, Ambassador Kolby presented the
report on the Security Council delegation's visit to
Kosovo and Belgrade. Please allow me to reiterate the
most important findings of that mission.

The mission found notable progress in several
areas as regards the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). The elections held for
the Kosovo Assembly in 2001 and for the
municipalities in 2002 have led to the formation of
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and the
new municipal assemblies. The process of handing
over power and responsibility to local institutions
continues.

There is also progress in the area of the rule of
law. Crime rates are down and security is improving.
The Kosovo Police Service continues to increase in
numbers, and the judiciary is in the process of being
established, both of them as multi-ethnic bodies.

However, despite that progress, many
inadequacies remain, as detailed in the mission's
report. Kosovo is still a long way from having truly
functioning democratic institutions and a society where
minorities can fully participate. The situation remains
fragile, and much work remains to be done, by
UNMIK, the Kosovo institutions and local
communities. That includes, in particular, the rule of
law, combating organized crime, democratization,
sustainable returns, inter-ethnic reconciliation and
cooperation between Pristina and Belgrade.

As regards the latter, the reluctance of some
Kosovo Albanian leaders to engage directly with
Belgrade officials exemplifies an isolationist tendency
that is unrealistic in both the regional and the European
perspectives. The establishment of the rule of law is
central to achieving security, a functioning democracy
and sustainable economic development. As a majority,
Kosovo Albanians must take responsibility for the
security of members of minorities and their full access
to public services. At the same time, members of
minorities must integrate into Kosovar society. Parallel
institutions have no future; integration is the only way
forward.

Allow me to further elaborate on a few important
issues also addressed in the presentation of the report.
The formulation of benchmarks for the realization of
standards is a constructive approach for Kosovo's
further development into a democratic and multi-ethnic
society. As reported, the progress achieved so far
seems to have been driven, to a great extent, by the
international community. Again, we would like to
underline the importance of making yet greater efforts
to involve local institutions and political leaders from
all communities in the practical formulation and
implementation of political goals and strategies.

The further specification and implementation of
the benchmarks must therefore be worked out in
cooperation with local authorities. UNMIK must go the
extra mile in order to secure that local ownership. But
so, too, must local political leaders. Words must
become action. The apparent reluctance on the part of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to
engage in that process is counter-productive and
undermines the further democratization of Kosovo. A
greater degree of local ownership of, and commitment
to, the achievement of the benchmarks is a prerequisite
for the ultimate successful implementation of European
standards in Kosovo.

The communities themselves also have a very
critical responsibility in that regard. Local politicians
in both the Assembly and the municipal assemblies
have repeatedly asked for more power and for an
accelerated transfer of greater responsibility. The
attitude of local political leaders in that regard raises
certain questions. They demand greater power and
responsibility, but are at the same time not able to deal
adequately with the power and responsibility that are
already within their mandate. We strongly urge local
political leaders from all communities, as well as the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, to make a
strong effort to fulfil their existing mandates. Norway
supports Special Representative Steiner's statement
that more competences will be transferred, but on the
condition that local institutions work more seriously.

The decentralization of municipal responsibilities
is a very important process. We are pleased to note that
UNMIK, together with the Council of Europe, has
initiated a process to build local ownership for a
decentralization strategy. Consultation and
collaboration with political leaders representing a
cross-section of the communities in Kosovo is of
fundamental importance in that respect. Nothing
imposed from the outside will be sustainable in the
long run.

Despite an overall improvement in the area of law
and order, we have witnessed some worrying events in
Kosovo in the first month of this year. The rocket-
propelled grenade attack on UNMIK police
headquarters and the recent spate of murders and
assaults in several places in Kosovo undermine efforts
to build law and order and represent a serious
challenge to the international community, and not least
to the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government.
This only underscores the tenuous state of the rule of
law in Kosovo, and further highlights the importance of
the benchmarks approach. We urge UNMIK and the
Kosovo Police Service, as well as local political
leaders, to do their utmost to strengthen the public's
support and respect for law and order in Kosovo. While
we note and appreciate the clear condemnations of
violence by Prime Minister Rexhepi and certain
municipal officials, the muted reaction of the majority
of political leaders can only be described as both
disappointing and unacceptable.

On the question of the final status of Kosovo, we
have seen several initiatives lately, both from Belgrade
and from Kosovo. Those initiatives are not helpful.
They represent a distraction. They deflect attention
from what we all should consider to be the main task at
hand, namely, the realization of higher standards of
government and society for the benefit of all the
inhabitants of Kosovo. That was the main message of
the Security Council mission to Kosovo and Belgrade
last December. All parties should now focus on the
realization of Special Representative Steiner's
"standards before status" approach.

