Mr. Skoog (Sweden): It is really humbling to speak
in this debate after the briefing, as always stimulating, by
the Secretary-General, and now by the representatives
of Italy and Egypt, two prominent Mediterranean
countries. I want to thank you, Mr. President, as well
as Italy, for initiating this discussion. As the Secretary-
General clearly articulated, the security challenges
in the Mediterranean region are the consequence of a
confluence of factors at play in the immediate region
and beyond.

Today, perhaps more than ever, the prosperity,
stability and security of the peoples of the
Mediterranean region and their neighbours are bound
together by challenges that are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. They include conflict, terrorism, violent
extremism, multidimensional poverty, climate change,
forced displacement, organized crime and political
instability. They are all transboundary in nature.
Overcoming them requires comprehensive approaches,
regional perspectives and new partnerships at all levels.

This is not the type of discussion we normally have
in the Security Council. Most days we meet to discuss
one report, one country, one conflict. Yet it is becoming
more and more evident that most of today's conflicts do
not exist in a vacuum, within neatly defined borders.
Likewise, we are also recognizing that modern conflicts
are being driven not by one issue, but are a function
of how different drivers - such as poverty, inequality
and climate change, to name a few - interact with one
another, and of the cumulative impact on individuals
and societies.

It is clear, therefore, that our responses must follow
a similar logic if we are to be effective. We must meet
people's present needs based on their realities, while
at the same time building resilience and investing in
peaceful societies. Protecting human dignity and
human rights is not only the surest way to prevent
conflict, but also the foundation for building peaceful,
prosperous and sustainable societies. Today marks a
welcome opportunity for the Council to zoom out and
to take a broader perspective in order to discuss the
root causes of security challenges in the Mediterranean
region and how to address them. With that in mind, I
want to make five brief points.

First, the most vulnerable within society
are hit hardest when factors such as instability,
underdevelopment and terrorism combine. It is essential
that we continue to respond to the needs of those
people in the short and medium term. That includes
providing lifesaving humanitarian assistance, while
at the same time building the resilience of individuals
and communities against future shocks. It also means
responding to the needs of those displaced as a result
of poverty, conflict and insecurity, whose human rights
must be upheld. We are particularly concerned about
the current situation for refugees and migrants in parts
of the Mediterranean region.

The Secretary-General has very often f and I think
very rightly - spoken about the need to enhance the
dignity of refugees. And he has often stressed the need
to re-establish the integrity of the refugee-protection
regime. All States must comply with the international
human rights and refugee frameworks, particularly
when it comes to detention. As I said in this Chamber
only yesterday (see S/PV.8104), the situation in Libya
is unacceptable in that regard, and further efforts are

needed to ensure that international standards are met.

Secondly, our overarching focus must be on
sustaining peace and preventing conflicts from
emerging in the first place, or when they do,
responding and resolving them quickly. Building on
the sustaining peace agenda, the Security Council and
the United Nations system as a whole must be more
effective in addressing conflicts in the Mediterranean
and neighbouring regions early on, including by
enhancing analysis, understanding of root causes
and information sharing. The Council needs to draw
upon more integrated analysis from the entire United
Nations system in order for it to effectively assess,
address, prevent and respond to conflicts and threats
to international peace and security. I very much believe
that the reform effort of the Secretary-General is meant
precisely to improve that part of our work.

Thirdly, we need to expand our ability to manage
long-term structural risks. That includes identifying
and responding to the risks of instability and insecurity
arising from the interaction of climate change and
social, economic and political factors. The Council
has already recognized the adverse effects of climate
change on stability in the Lake Chad region, and
called for adequate risk assessments, risk-management
strategies and early-warning mechanisms. The Council
must remain alert to those issues.

Fourthly, we know that many of the challenges
facing the Mediterranean region originate in chronic
underdevelopment, poverty, human rights violations and
abuses, weak governance and a lack of opportunities.
Hence, any long-term strategy needs to tackle those
issues as a matter of priority. That includes addressing
youth unemployment, social exclusion and inequality;
respect for, and enjoyment of, human rights, including
freedom of expression and of assembly; creating
economic opportunities and a society built on the rule
of law; and sustainable growth - just as you stressed,
Mr. President. Above all, we need to see dedicated and
determined implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which, with its aim to leave
no one behind, in itself constitutes a powerful tool for
prevention. There are established links between gender
inequality, political instability and underdevelopment.
For that reason, the full and effective participation of
women in decision-making at all levels is necessary
in order to create stability and achieve sustainable
development in the region.

Finally, in order to adopt an approach that is truly
comprehensive, we need true partnerships among
States, regional organizations and among people. We
are very encouraged by the ever-increasing cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations and
we support, as others have said, the Group or Five for
the Sahel in all its efforts. The European Union has a
key role to play in promoting security and prosperity
inside and outside the borders of the Union. The
upcoming African Union-European Union Summit in
Abidjan at the end of this month provides an important
opportunity to strengthen crucial partnerships, with a
timely focus on regional investment in youth.
Situated at the intersection of three continents,
the Mediterranean has acted throughout history as
a melting pot for culture, trade and people. The new
types of complex security Challenges facing the
Mediterranean region are by no means unique. They
are being replicated in different regions throughout the
world. Responding will require us to work together,
with the whole of the United Nations system supporting
national and regional efforts with a range of flexible,
integrated and innovative tools. Only by joint action
can we respond to those overlapping challenges and
ensure a better future for all.

