Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation supports activating the
role of the United Nations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The deployment of phase II of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUC) in accordance with the draft
resolution to be adopted today is designed to assist in
settling the largest conflict of modem-day Africa, in
which many of the States of the continent have become
involved.

We are convinced that if the parties render the
necessary assistance to MONUC in implementing its
mandate, the Mission will make a significant contribution
to achieving peace in that country.

By the same token, we realize the complexity of the
nexus of the varied interests that are today intertwined in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We fully stand
behind those who warn against excessive expectations for
the deployment of the peacekeeping operation in that
country. The situation is so complicated that it would be
not only naive but also dangerous to rely on its settlement
by external forces, even if those forces are United Nations
forces.

In that context, the Russian Federation underscores
the general understanding reached in the Security Council
that MONUC will not take measures to force the parties
to peace, nor to force the disarmament of irregular armed
groups in the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, either in this phase or in subsequent phases of the
operation.

All my colleagues who have spoken before me have
underscored that the main responsibility for achieving a
settlement falls to the parties that have affixed their
signatures to the Lusaka Agreement. It is precisely their
readiness to fulfil in good faith the obligations they
assumed - especially as regards compliance with the
ceasefire - that will determine how the international
community will in the future decide to act to promote the
settlement of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

 

In that connection, it is promising that at the Lusaka
summit that took place yesterday the parties to the Lusaka
Agreement confirmed their resolve to ensure the complete
and early implementation of the Agreement. It is important
to make this a reality as soon as possible.

