Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me to join previous speakers in extending our condolences to the Government and people of Oman on the passing of Sultan Qaboos Bin Said. I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing the two moments of silence. On behalf of the Government and people of Indonesia, let me in particular extend our condolences to the Government and people of the Niger over the recent terrorist attack, which claimed 89 lives. Let me also warmly welcome Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia. Her presence here today is appreciated, as it reflects the importance that her Government attaches to the Council's support for the peace process in her country. I would also like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu Aguirre for his detailed and comprehensive briefing on the recent developments. Today, I would like to make three brief points. First, Indonesia congratulates the people of Colombia on the successful and relatively peaceful conduct of the local and departmental elections on 27 October 2019, in which the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun political party and former combatants participated. The people of Colombia must build on that important step in the political reintegration process. We therefore join the Secretary-General in encouraging the newly elected mayors, governors and other officials to make sure that programmes related to the implementation of peace are high on their agenda. Secondly, Indonesia would like to underline once again that the consolidation of sustainable peace in Colombia can be achieved only through the comprehensive and consistent fulfilment by all Colombian stakeholders of their obligations under the Final Agreement to End the Armed Conflict and Build a Stable and Lasting Peace. While we, as always, welcome the many positive developments that have been achieved, as well as the advances that have been generated by the peace agreement, we continue to call on all relevant parties to redouble their efforts to deliver on their individual commitments. While it is relatively slow, as pointed out in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/988), we acknowledge the progress and efforts that have been made in resolving the accreditation of former combatants. However, that must be continued. We therefore once again join the Secretary-General in urging all partiesto make use of the National Reintegration Council to undertake strategic discussions on pending challenges in the reintegration process and take concerted action to address them by implementing the recently adopted road map. The political, legal and socioeconomic reintegration of former members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo is crucial to creating public trust and confidence in the peace process. Lastly, it is incumbent on the Security Council and on us individually as friends to ensure that every effort is made to assist the people of Colombia. The Council, in particular, should continue to provide assistance to Colombia based on its relevant resolutions. It is also important for the Council to recall that the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia was originally established in accordance with the 2016 peace agreement, in which the parties in Colombia requested the United Nations to set up a political mission. Indonesia believes thatcapacity-building and technical support, along with projects geared towards economic self-sufficiency, would contribute positively to creating a conducive environment for the implementation of the peace agreement. As we have stated previously in the Chamber, Indonesia stands ready to assist, including by sharing our experiences and best practices in reintegration as well as in programmes on crops for peace, such as palm oil. In that regard, I am happy to report that from 5 to 9 November 2019, Indonesia and Colombia, in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme, organized an international workshop on crops for peace in Indonesia. The workshop was aimed at sharing Indonesia's experience on how the palm oil industry has helped to improve the condition of infrastructure in the environment around plantations and the socioeconomic conditions of the community. In conclusion, I once again reiterate Indonesia's support for the peace process in Colombia and commend the people of Colombia for their courage to achieve peace and stability in their country.
