Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Egypt on taking
the initiative of organizing this meeting. I would also
like to congratulate the various speakers who spoke

before me for their very valuable briefings. I welcome
this opportunity afforded to me and I welcome the
willingness and determination of the Security Council
to establish strong cooperation and partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations in order
to contribute to international peace and security. My
country particularly welcomes this approach and
the efforts made by the African Union, in particular
because we know that the African continent has been
for many years the most unstable continent and the
most inclined to conflicts.

Allow me to refer to some of the statements made
by some Member States of the Security Council in
referring to the situation in my country and alleged that
the Head of State intends to remain in office. First of
all, in that regard, in numerous of our statements to the
Security Council we have made it clear that the Head
of State respects his country's Constitution and will not
modify it as has been done elsewhere.

With regard to the organization of elections, my
country has also insisted here in the Chamber on
many occasions that the elections will be held but that
they must take place under proper conditions in order
to maintain peace and security, which the Congolese
people, who have suffered so greatly from wars, greatly
value. Those who love the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must understand that and help us to that end.

Furthermore, my country is surprised by the
double-standard positions that have been taken by some
members of the Security Council. The world, which
is listening to Council members and observing them
as they conduct their deliberations in the Chamber,
are surprised by the positions taken by some Council
members with regard to some States while they indulge
other States. That could jeopardize the credibility of the
good decisions that the Council normally takes.

With regard to human rights violations, as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country said to the
Security Council, by making both the National Human
Rights Commission and the human rights liaison entity
operational, my country has resolutely indicated its
firm and ongoing determination to protect the rights of
all its citizens, even the foreigners living on its territory.
The political space in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is the most open in the entire region, and
will remain so. That can be seen in the existence of
approximately than 400 political parties as well as in
the hundreds of private radio and television stations,
which are allowed to freely determine their editorial
positions, many of which reflect those of well-known
political players who are members of the opposition.
The media is constitutionally controlled by the High
Audiovisual and Communication Council, which
supports democracy and which includes representatives
from the media in all their diversity.

It has also been clearly shown that, unlike in other
countries where if one opposes the Government one
must leave the country, practically all political leaders
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo live in the
country and engage in political activity. They can come
and go from the territory without any restrictions on
their movements owing to their opinions.

That having been said, as in any State governed by
the rule of law, where the primacy of law and the equality
of all before the law are fundamental principles, public
freedoms are to be exercised in conformity with the law
and the need to maintain public order. As guarantor of
the freedoms and rights of all, the State is obligated
to uphold these principles, consistent with the adage
that holds that the rights of one end where the rights
of others begin. An individual's rights and freedoms
do not permit the individual to flout with impunity the
legal system designed to protect the rights and safety
of all.

Accordingly, when necessary, as in any State
governed by the rule of law, the courts intervene, acting
with complete independence, to punish those who
commit crimes. Membership in the political opposition,
the political majority, civil society or the police or
the military does not release a perpetrator from legal
responsibility for committing a crime. For a country
like ours, whose people have suffered greatly from the
impunity of those who enjoy privileges derived from
their social status or standing, softness in this area does
not help to strengthen democracy, but rather serves to
undermine it. The same applies when serious human
rights violations and crimes against humanity are not
prosecuted.

My country believed it was necessary to bring
those points to the Council's attention.

The meeting rose at 3.30 pm.
