Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, and the Luxembourg
delegation on your accession to the presidency of
the Security Council this month. I thank you for the
opportunity to address the Council at this meeting.

Allow me to begin by expressing my gratitude to
Mr. Tarek Mitri, Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), for his briefing and for
his efforts in that role to assist the Libyan people in
establishing democracy and building State institutions.
I would also like to express my deep gratitude to His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
continued dedication and efforts to support the Libyan
people and authorities at this sensitive stage.I also
thank His Excellency Ambassador Gasana, Permanent
Representative of sisterly Rwanda and Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, for his
briefing on the work of the Committee in recent
months and for presenting the report of the Panel of
Experts (S/2014/106, annex). And I would like to
thank all Council members for continuing to express
their understanding of this stage of Libyan history
and the complex requirements of the situation on the
ground, as well as their continued readiness to support
the legitimate authorities in guaranteeing Libya's
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

There was a very short time period between the
date of today's meeting and the issuing of the Arabic
translation of the report of the Panel of Experts. We
were therefore unable to obtain the Government's
opinion concerning certain points contained in the
report. I will therefore confine myself to some general
remarks and preliminary comments based on the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/l3l) and the report of
the Panel of Experts.

There is no doubt that not one Libyan would deny
that the situation in Libya is not as we would desire.
More than two years since the fall of the Al-Qadhafi
dictatorship, we have yet to succeed in creating genuine
institutions. To date, we have failed to create a central
body to enforce the rule of law, deter violators and
prevent impunity. That is the main cause of the weak
central authority. Libyans - nearly all of them - agree
on the dire need to change the working methods at the
highest levels of authority and in most sectors in order
to achieve true progress.

That could appear difficult, in the light of the
political rivalries among various factions and the
excessive personal ambitions of some political leaders,
and even some military leaders. However, the Libyan
people in general are determined to correct the
situation and to achieve the objectives that made up
the foundation of the revolution. The Libyan people are
confident in the support of all friendly peoples, and I
myself am confident that a fundamental change will be
seen this year in the Libyan political scene.

Ensuring security remains the first priority for
Libyan citizens. Without security, authorities cannot
function, citizens are unable to carry out economic
activities and development remains unrealized.
However, security cannot be achieved merely by
pressuring the Libyan authorities to carry out their
responsibilities, whether such pressure is domestic or
international. What is needed is the practical support
of the international community in responding to the
requests of the Libyan Government, providing advice,
supporting and building capabilities and extraditing
fugitives.

Today, Libya faces two threats in the security
domain. The first concerns extremist groups with
international associations and linkages that seek, by all
possible means, to restructure the State based on their
own vision. They use violence and terrorism to prevent
the emergence of any legitimate force they perceive as
a threat.

The second threat is manifested by remnants of the
prior regime, including groups that have retained their
weapons in various areas of the country and are seeking
to undermine stability at every opportune moment,
with coordination and direct support from senior
officials of the former regime who now live outside of
Libya, especially those residing in Egypt, the United
Kingdom, Germany and some Eastern European States.
The events of the first week of February and subsequent
investigations of those involved have proven the extent
of the involvement of leaders of the previous regime,
especially those in the Niger, Tunisia and Egypt.

On this occasion, I cannot forget to thank the
Government of the sisterly nation of the Niger for
its quick response to Libyan demands to expedite
Abdallah Mansour - a military leader of the former
regime - and Saadi Al-Qadhafi, after those authorities
verified that they were involved in undermining Libya's
stability.

We hope that sisterly Egypt will also respond to
the Libyan Government's request and extradite the
wanted individuals who are now in Egypt as soon as
possible, especially since their destructive activities
would engage the efforts of the Libyan authorities and
keep them busy, thus undermining efforts to control the
borders and prevent weapons smuggling. That, in turn,
would have negative repercussions on Egypt's security.

The extradition of fugitives and wanted individuals
is not only a bilateral issue, but an international
commitment according to Security Council resolutions
calling upon States to assist Libya in combating
impunity. We therefore encourage the Council to not
lose sight of the matter.

I would like to point out that Libya's weak central
authority and the Government's lack of a deterrence
force have encouraged certain outlaws to disrupt oil
exporting ports by force. As a result, Libya's income
over the past several months has declined by over
70 per cent, compared to normal levels, leading to a
huge treasury deficit that is currently being off-set by
the Government's sovereign accounts. If the situation
were to continue and current spending levels remain
the same without any austerity measures, the country
could face bankruptcy, resulting in threats to and the
undermining of the social order.

Those outlaws have transgressed every boundary
in their attempts to export oil by illegitimate means.
They even succeeded recently in convincing an oil
tanker to come to the port of Sidra in order to take on
a quarter ofa million gallons of crude oil, the proceeds
of which were then diverted to that outlaw group. In
that regard, I would like to warn every party connected
to that tanker, whether the ship's flag State, the nation
to which the owner of the tanker belongs or the State
to receive the oil shipment, that they are all parties to
a violation of Libya's sovereigntyand to the crimes of
smuggling and piracy of the resources of the Libyan
people. That will have very serious consequences. The
Libyan authorities, present and future, will not tolerate
it.

In this forum, I would also like to draw the
international community's attention to the fact that
the Libyan authorities, despite their scanty defence
resources, have taken steps necessary to detain the ship
and prosecute its crew. The international community,
and the States concerned for protecting the safety of
the Mediterranean environment, should help Libya to
enforce national and international law by detaining the
ship so that we will not have to use force against it,
since such a step would definitely result in polluting of
vast areas of the Mediterranean's waters and coasts and
would require international efforts and huge resources
to bring under control. The Libyan Government hopes
that the Security Council will take a clear position
on the matter that emphasizes its support for Libya's
sovereignty over its territory and resources.

Regarding the assets freeze, I would like to
remind that Security Council resolutions oblige United
Nations Member States to identify and freeze assets
owned or controlled by individuals and entities listed
on sanctions lists. That can be carried out only if the
States involved issue directives to financial institutions
on their territories.

Unfortunately, many have not done so, despite
suspicions of the existence of assets belonging to
individuals and entities on those lists in those States'
territories. The Panel of Experts notes, in paragraph
219 of its report that it found no country among those
visited had the capability of freezing assets subject
to only a designation of individuals or entities in a
Security Council resolution. In paragraph 221, the
Panel also says that

"[t]his situation has serious implications for the
implementation of the asset freeze measures under
the Libyan sanctions regime, as well as on extant
asset freeze measures and any similar measures
that may be imposed by the Security Council in
the future. The lack of capability of some Member
States to fulfil their obligations under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations nullifies the
effectiveness of such measures."

Accordingly, Libya strongly supports the Panel's
recommendation in paragraphs 189 (b) and 190 of its
report. I should mention that Libya follows due process
regarding all frozen assets in order to prove that they
belong to the Libyan people, and demands their return
through judicial processes in the countries where those
assets are located. Libya relies on the good intentions of
the Governments involved in expediting such processes
and the return of the assets to the Libyan people as soon
as possible, as is specified in the Security Council's
resolutions.

Concerning the arms embargo, l reaffirm that any
request for approval of exports of weapons to Libya that
is not made through the Mission of Libya to the the
United Nations or with its knowledge will be considered
to be a request from a party that does not belong to
the Libyan Government, and the exporting party will
take responsibility for that before the Security Council.
I also affirm that the Military Purchases Department
of the Ministry of Defence is the party responsible for
requests to obtain arms import permits, and that the
Minister of Defence is the only official responsible for
issuing end-user certificates.

Mr. Ali Zeidan, the Prime Minister of Libya,
has sent a letter to the Secretary-General and to you,
Madam President, as President of the Security Council,
in which he requests an extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya for another
year. We hope that the Council will respond positively to
that request so that the Mission will be able to continue
in its support for the Libyan people at this critical stage
in their history. The Mission's role is indispensable at
this stage. Libyans are grateful to the United Nations
for the support the Mission provides in deferent area,
and hope that support will continue. We look forward
to increased support from the Council so that we can
achieve security, justice and national reconciliation and
transition to truly democratic rule. We hope that the
Security Council will be more responsive to the Libyan
people's aspirations by approving the following actions.

First, listing more individuals from among the
officials of the former regime on the travel-ban and
assets-freeze lists, especially those who are live in
Egypt. Secondly, demanding that all States freeze
the assets of all officials of the former regime whose
Libyan assets have been frozen and to approve the
automatic return of those assets to the Libyan people
once it has been proved that they belong to the Libyan
people, without having to refer to the Sanctions
Committee. Thirdly, responding quickly to any request
submitted by the Libyan Government for a designation
on the travel-ban and asset-freeze lists of individuals,
businesspeople and entities who cooperated with the
family of Al-Qadhafi and his senior officials.

