Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Swan, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Madeira, Chair of the Somali National Independent
Electoral Commission, Ms. Ibrahim, and Executive
Director of the Somalia Youth Development Network,
Mr. Moallim, for their briefings.

Somalia is a strategically important country in the
Horn of Africa. Maintaining its peace and stability
has a direct bearing on peace and development in
the continent.

According to the two most recent reports of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/884 and S/2019/661), the
situation in Somalia is largely stable. The Somali
Federal Government has advanced in earnest the
process of State reconstruction and made significant
progress in the political, economic and security fields.
Its campaign against piracy and armed robbery off the
coast has borne fruit. Preparations are under way for
the election schedules for late 2020 or early 2021.

At the same time, Somalia continues to face
multiple challenges in terms of peace and security. The
international community should continue to pay close
attention to the situation in the country and focus its
constructive assistance on the following areas. First,
to help Somalia improve its governance capacity, the
Security Council and the international community
should adhere to the principle of Somali leadership
and ownership and, on that basis, respect the Somali
Government's leadership, help the country advance in
its political process, enhance federal institutions and
improve relations between the Federal Government and
the governments of the federal member states, so as to
create favourable conditions for next year's elections to
be peaceful and smooth and to further consolidate the
momentum of the Somali peace process.

Secondly, to strengthen Somalia's security situation,
there must be capacity-building and renewed support
for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
in implementing its mandate to improve security in
the country. The hard part is tackling the terrorist
threat. Since its establishment, AMISOM. has been an
active force in combating such terrorist organizations
as Al-Shabaab and has played an important role in
maintaining peace and stability in Somalia. The
international community should continue to support
the Mission in delivering on its mandate, provide
it with stable, predictable and sustainable financial
support, assist Somalia in security capacity-building so
that the Somali security forces can gradually take over
security tasks and effectively assume responsibility for
maintaining national security.
Thirdly, efforts should be made to deepen
cooperation among the United Nations, the African
Union and countries of the region on issues relating
to Somalia.

The international community should support the
efforts ofAfrican countries to apply African solutions to
African problems and also support the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and other regional and subregional organizations, play
a leading role in the political settlement of the Somalia
issue and facilitate an improvement in the situation in
the Horn of Africa.

At the same time, the Security Council should send
more positive signals on the Somalia sanctions and make
timely adjustments to the relevant sanctions in keeping
with the developing situation and the requirements of
the African Union, IGAD and the Somali Government.

Fourthly, efforts must be intensified to address
the root causes of conflicts and promote Somalia's
economic and social development. The protracted
conflicts there have dealt a heavy blow to Somalia's
economic and social development and given rise to
serious humanitarian challenges. The international
community should step up its assistance in the fields of
education, health, food security and infrastructure, inter
alia, with particular attention given to the pertinence
and effectiveness of assistance, so as to help Somalia
achieve independence and sustainable development
and enable its people to enjoy peace dividends as soon
as possible.

China has always supported Somalia's efforts in
pursuit of peace and development, actively participated
in the Somali peace process and played a positive role
in the political settlement of the Somali issue.

China has sent escort vessels to Somali waters and
the Gulf of Aden and helped the countries concerned
to fight piracy. During the 2018 Beijing Summit
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, China
announced that it would provide 6,500 tons of food aid
to Somalia. Some of that aid has arrived in Somalia
and will benefit disaster-affected women, children and
displaced persons.

China stands ready to continue to play a
constructive role in the achievement of peace, stability
and development in Somalia and the Horn of Africa.

