Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): I take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Sir, on your effective presidency of
the Council for this month. I would like to thank the
delegation of Malaysia for requesting the convening of
this meeting, and all members of the Security Council
and the grieving nations for their strong support for the
idea of establishing an international criminal tribunal
to hold to account those responsible for the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17.

It is obvious that these historic times will always be
remembered, not only because of the number of vetoes
exercised by the Russian Federation, but mainly because
of the spirit of unity among the countries participating
in the joint investigation team and all who support us in
our efforts to deliver justice. A year ago, the Ukrainian
people took the downing of Flight MH-17 as a national
tragedy, and it will always remain so in our hearts. 1 still
remember the sea of flowers in front of the Dutch and
Malaysian embassies, and the hundreds of Ukrainians
who gathered around those buildings during the night.
I will never forget it.

When we heard about this incident, at the very
beginning we had some hope that lives might be saved
and immediately provided all available resources to
the rescue teams. Then we did everything possible to
prevent looting and to secure access for the investigators
to the areas controlled by the terrorists. Now, our duty
to those who died and the families of the victims is to
bring to justice those who committed this barbaric act.
We, more than anyone, feel the pain of the victims; that
is why we want the truth about this crime to emerge.
More than anyone, we want the perpetrators to be
arraigned and tried by a public international court.
There can be no reason to oppose that, unless you are a
perpetrator yourself.

I could not agree more with my friends and
colleagues, including several Government ministers
who have spoken today, but I would like to make several
points crystal clear. Resolution 2166 (2014) established
an obligation for States to cooperate fully in the course
of the investigation of this tragedy and to bring those
responsible to justice. The use of a sophisticated and
powerful weapon against a civilian aircraft constitutes a
threat to international civil aviation and to international
peace and security in general. The only effective way
to prevent such acts in the future is to punish those
responsible without delay. It is indeed an issue for the
Security Council to deal with under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

The level of support enjoyed by our draft resolution
has clearly risen, showing that we are on right track.
Our aim here is to create an effective, transparent,
unbiased and independent vehicle to bring to justice
those responsible for the crime. It is about the
individual criminal responsibility of the murderers,
and it is not about politics. That is why it is particularly
disappointing that one country - Russia, to be
precise - still mixes two completely separate issues:
its responsibility for aggression against Ukraine and its
continuous support for terrorism, on the one hand, and
the individual responsibility of the perpetrators of the
tragedy, on the other. There is no other explanation for
today's veto by Russia.

The role of Russia in the conflict is absolutely
clear and well known. Thousands of Russian soldiers
and mercenaries and tanks and every type of heavy
weaponry have been delivered across the border; that
is simply impossible to hide. Just recently, another
Russian truck full of weapons and ammunition was
captured in Ukraine. The driver is once again a Special
Forces officer. But this story is a matter for international
mechanisms.

When I look at the Russian delegation today, I feel
pity. It dared to dampen the aspirations of the entire
world, especially those of the families of the victims.
It has aligned itself with the thugs who committed this
atrocious crime. But our hope for justice is not lost.
The Russian Federation just killed draft resolution
S/2015/562, but that abuse of the veto power will not
kill the hope of those who suffered or their love for
loved ones and their relatives. It will only make all ofus
stronger and more determined and more committed to
elaborating and implementing an effective and credible
prosecution model to deliver justice.

I am reminded of a line from Shakespeare about
captive good attending captain ill; let us stop attending
captain ill - it is just not worth it. In the face of truth,
humanity and God, if one still believes in God, the
tribunal in question is about 298 innocent lives. It is
about the truth. He who is afraid of truth is definitely
on the wrong side of the issue. He who is afraid of truth
is alone here in the Security Council. "If you know
the truth, the truth will set you free." These are not
my words. They are from the Holy Gospel. They come
from a higher authority.

