Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French):
France welcomes the unanimous adoption today of
resolution 2364 (2017), which renews the mandate
of the peacekeepers in Mali for one year. France
also welcomes the constructive negotiations among
the members of the Security Council that led to this
important result. With the unanimous adoption of
this essential text, the Security Council confirms its
resolute commitment and unity with Mali in support of
the country and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
That is an essential point.

Resolution 2364 (2017) strengthens the robust
mandate given to MINUSMA by resolution 2295 (2016)
in support of the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It is also in line with
the new strategic partnership that the United Nations
intends to establish with African States and African
organizations. Indeed, resolution 2364 (2017) includes
two major advances in this respect.

First, the Security Council reaffirms and outlines
peacekeeper support for the redeployment of the
Malian Defence and Security Forces. Through the
resolution, the Security Council is strengthening the
logistical and operational support that MINUSMA must
provide to the redeployment of the Malian Defence and
Security Forces throughout the territory of the country
while respecting the Malian Peace Agreement. This
is crucial. It therefore sets clear lines of action for
MINUSMA to help restore security in Malian territory,
particularly in the north and the centre of the country,
and to fill the security gap that terrorist groups are
known to benefit from. The redeployment of Malian
Defence and Security Forces must also facilitate the
implementation by MINUSMA of its own mandate. It
must therefore contribute to the safety of peacekeepers
in Mali, to whom France wishes once again to pay a
solemn homage.

Secondly, the Security Council strengthens
cooperation between the peacekeepers, the new joint
force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
and the French forces. In the spirit of the new strategic
partnership between the United Nations and Africa,
which I mentioned previously, the Security Council
is establishing closer cooperation among MINUSMA,
the new G-5 Sahel joint force, for whose deployment
the Council expressed support in resolution 2359
(2017), adopted here a few days ago, and the French
forces of Operation Barkhane. The Security Council is
strengthening the complementarity among those forces
on the ground in accordance with their respective
mandates. The work of the G-5 Sahel joint force in
particular, deployed in the five Sahel States, will help
to secure the Sahel region from terrorist groups. It will
therefore facilitate MINUSMA's implementation of its
mandate as well as the safety of peacekeepers.

The Security Council has assumed its
responsibilities. It now falls to the Secretariat, with the
support of Member States and troop- and equipment-
contributing countries, to give MINUSMA the
logistical and human resources that will enable it to
fulfil its mandate even better.

Lastly, I wish to stress how the important it is for
the signatory parties to accelerate the implementation
of the Peace Agreement as well as the role assigned to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
that regard. Moreover, resolution 2364 (2017) recalls
the Council's readiness to consider sanctions against
persons who would impede the implementation of
the Agreement.

In resolution 2364 (2017), the Security Council is
showing its determination to support the restoration
of lasting peace in Mali. It also shows the Council's
determination to support the efforts of Mali and
the States of the Sahel region to reduce the terrorist
threat. Finally, it shows the Council's determination
to establish a strategic partnership among the United
Nations, African States and African peace and security
organizations in which the peacekeepers and forces of
African States mutually support one another.

