The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

Statistics, as the popular saying goes, can be
deceiving, but some, unfortunately, are full of sad truths.
The casualty report of the United Nations Land-Mine
Database is a 30-page-long document with an endless list
made up mostly of United Nations peace-keepers and
military or civilian personnel killed or wounded by land-
mines. There have been 19 incidents in Cambodia since
March 1996, 30 incidents in Angola since April 1995 and
97 in Bosnia and Herzegovina since April 1992, to name
just three cases. Every figure represents an individual
human being. Let me just recall the most recent deaths,
those of two Zimbabwean peace-keepers, and the severe
injuries suffered by two supervisors and a student in
Angola. Even more sadly, conflicts in which mines are
being used indiscriminately appear, despite all
international efforts, to be on the increase. Has this
everyday suffering by people who were sent out to
maintain peace been given the attention it deserves? The
answer, clearly, is no.

Moreover, land-mines, from a German perspective,
are not far away. Let me remind you that 1.3 million
mines were laid along the almost 1,400 kilometres of the
former inner German Iron Curtain. The threat and the
effect of those mines are still vivid in our memories.

That is why we are grateful that the German
initiative to hold an open debate on the topic of demining
in the context of United Nations peace-keeping met with
the consent of Council Members. Previous statements
have made it quite clear that this exchange of views is
considered to be timely and necessary, and I am looking
forward to the statements to follow. Let me seize this
opportunity to fully align myself with the statement to be
made by Ireland later today on behalf of the European
Union.

It is generally agreed that mine clearance is
necessary in order to provide security to United Nations
missions and their personnel; and, in fact, mine clearance
is already part of numerous United Nations peace-keeping

 

operations. But more could and should be done to enhance
United Nations capabilities in this area. Recent casualties
among Blue Helmets and mission personnel in Angola and
Bosnia - which I mentioned earlier - have again, in a
tragic way, underlined the importance of this task. The
United Nations Secretariat, in particular the demining unit
of the Department of Peace-keeping Operations (DPKO),
deserves to be commended for its achievements in this
field, but it needs to be given even more support. In this
respect, I would like to point to three areas.

First, as in peace-keeping in general, rapid deployment
of demining personnel and equipment is of fundamental
importance. Obviously, roads and crucial transport links
should be cleared of mines before the main contingents of
peace-keepers arrive, and not while they are already
operating. Unfortunately, to date, a far too long deployment
period of three to six months is the rule rather than the
exception. Here, the creation of rapid reaction capabilities,
possibly including a range of easily deployable demining
stand-by facilities, could be a step forward. Such
arrangements may benefit from the growing impact of
mechanical mine-clearance systems, which have proven to
be effective and efficient and will allow reductions in the
number of personnel involved. But, first and foremost,
Member States have to be willing to facilitate this task.

This brings me to my second point. Lessons learned
from past peace-keeping operations, especially from the
failures, have often highlighted the particular importance of
clear and practical mandates. This also applies to the
element of demining. Provisions for mine clearance have
often been implicit - contained, for example, in a request
for freedom of movement. This makes the task of the
Secretariat and other agencies rather more difficult. Such
provisions deserve a mention of their own. They should be
made an explicit element of mandates, wherever necessary,
in order to give clear guidance to those who are meant to
implement them.

A third area of possible improvement is the
organization of work within the United Nations system, the
rational delineation of responsibilities and clear hierarchies
in decision-making. This should apply to responsibilities
both within the United Nations Secretariat and with regard
to other United Nations agencies involved in mine
clearance. It is true that the operational task of the
demining unit of DPKO is distinct from the humanitarian
approach towards demining in the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs (DHA); and yet one may be allowed
to wonder whether some greater integration of demining
activities aimed at United Nations personnel, on the one
hand, and at local populations, on the other, combining
the shorter- or longer-term perspectives, might not be a
more efficient way of handling these issues.

Please allow me a little excursion in order to make
my point even clearer: Can one really draw a clear
fault-line between the one and the other? Does not
operational demining, at least indirectly, also benefit the
population of the area concerned? I do not intend to
challenge the somewhat different natures of peace-keeping
and so- called humanitarian demining; and, of course,
compliance with the mandates remains the first priority.
But it is my feeling that demining in peace-keeping
should not dogmatically have to limit itself to the
concerns of mission personnel. The welfare of the local
people and their protection from the danger of land-mines
should also be seen as a possible element of conflict
resolution and, thus, a task of peace-keeping in a wider
sense.

I am aware that here I have touched on the
borderline between peace-keeping and what we are used
to calling peace-building. We all agree, I trust, that
successful peace-building and the restoration of conflict-
ridden areas and war-torn societies often depend on
effective mine clearance and mine-awareness
programmes. The Secretary-General has, again and again,
emphasized this context. As early as 1992, in his Agenda
for Peace, he stated:

"De-mining should be emphasized in the terms
of reference of peace-keeping operations and is
crucially important in the restoration when peace-
building is under way: agriculture cannot be revived
without de-mining and the restoration of transport
may require the laying of hard surface roads to
prevent re-mining." (S/24III, para. 58)

I underline this with a telling example of our very
recent Council discussions, this very morning: in Eastern
Slavonia, the success of the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (UNTAES) and the recovery of the area are
seriously hampered, a major reason being that the oil
fields, a primary source of income for the region, are for
the time being still infested with mines and cannot
produce. The ensuing lack of local revenues means that
there is no money available to pay the employees of the
local administration - a serious problem with which
UNTAES has been struggling now for quite some time.

 

Moreover, lessons drawn from typical cases of
peace-building, be they in Mozambique, Angola, Cambodia
or Rwanda, show that peace-building activities usually
cannot wait for the end of a conflict. In order to guarantee
a smooth transition from peace-keeping to peace-building,
but also in order to enhance the success of ongoing peace-
keeping operations, elements of peace-building, or the lack
thereof, have proven to be of crucial importance to the
outcome of the operation. As a consequence, planning,
possibly even implementation, of such elements should be
taken into account from the very outset of a peace-keeping
operation. For reasons mentioned earlier, this particularly
applies to demining efforts. The international community
must feel the obligation to start humanitarian mine
clearance wherever and as early as possible. Any other
approach would be cynical towards the victims.

This being said, we cannot but also focus on the other
side of the equation. Thus far, I have talked about
demining, the elimination of existing mines or minefields,
within a peace-keeping context. The picture would be
incomplete, however, without an attempt to also address the
root causes of the problem - the laying of mines and the
re-mining, as stated by the Secretary-General.

We all know the terrifying statistics about the
frequency and costs of eliminating mines compared to the
frequency and costs of laying them. While striving for
improved demining, we therefore have to increase our
efforts to prevent the laying of new mines. While the
international community should be ready to step up its
assistance in mine-clearance and related programmes, the
major responsibility lies with the parties that lay the mines.
We cannot allow this simple fact to be forgotten.

This has a macro- and a micro-dimension. At the
macro-level, efforts to reach an international ban on anti-
personnel mines have to continue in other forums. The
recent Review Conference for the United Nations
Convention on Conventional Weapons fell short of this
broader target. Germany, for one, relinquished totally and
unconditionally the use of anti-personnel mines, as
underlined again in the recent seven-point action
programme on anti-personnel mines presented by our
Foreign Minister, Mr. Kinkel.

But the issue also has a micro-dimension, more
directly linked to concrete peace-keeping operations. It must
be our interest, and in particular the interest of the Security
Council, while a peace-keeping operation, including
demining activities, is ongoing, that the parties to the
conflict abstain from laying new mines. Mandates should
attach additional importance to this element and contain
provisions, wherever necessary, to prevent irresponsible
behaviour on the part of the parties to the conflict.
Affected countries must be ready to play a larger role in
tackling the problem. Peace agreements should therefore
contain provisions for the former warring parties to
actively contribute to mine-clearance efforts. In order to
facilitate this task, the international community should be
ready to provide training personnel in order to turn former
combatants into active deminers. As one step in this
direction, Germany, on a bilateral basis, is going to offer
mine-clearance training in Bosnia. Mine-clearance and
assistance programmes in Afghanistan, Mozambique,
Angola, Cambodia, Nicaragua and Laos, as well as
assistance to the Department of Humanitarian Affairs
(DHA) in establishing a mine-documentation database,
have been the other major areas of German activity in this
field to date.

Let me summarize and conclude. It was in January
1992, at the end of the meeting of 31 January at the level
of Heads of State and Government, that the Security
Council, for the last time, commented, in a broader
approach, on the impact of particular weapons and
armaments on United Nations peace-keeping and the
maintenance of international peace and security. One
issue, however, did not at that time get the attention it
undoubtedly would have deserved from our perspective
today: the issue of anti-personnel mines and their
devastating effect on innocent people within and beyond
the peace-keeping context.

Today's debate is one step towards closing this gap.
Let me simply express my hope that, on the basis of all
the constructive ideas which we have heard and are going
to hear, we will be able to come up with some concrete
proposals for practical improvements of demining efforts
in a peace-keeping context.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Canada. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

