Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me also
thank Special Adviser Lang, Assistant Secretary-
General Mathias and the representative of Somalia for
their briefings today. I especially want to thank Special
Adviser Lang for his comprehensive and creative
report (see S/2011/30) on piracy prosecution.

The United States fully agrees that to truly address
piracy we must find solutions both on land and at sea.
As Mr. Lang has rightly noted, piracy off the coast of
Somalia threatens us all. Captured crews are used as
human shields or held for ransom, and the region faces
higher prices for basic commodities. Piracy endangers
the critical delivery of humanitarian aid. The rising
sums of illicit funds flowing into Somalia through
ransom payments further destabilize the region and fuel
the growth of organized crime and terrorism.

Many members of the Council participate in the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
which has proved a flexible and efficient forum for
coordination and information sharing. Much is being
done to combat piracy, from disseminating best
practices to youth employment projects but, plainly,
much more work remains to be done.

As the report notes, industry adoption of best
management practices in naval operations off the coast
of Somalia reduced the rate of successful pirate
attacks. Several mechanisms can certify such steps -
for example, reviewing measures as part of the process
whereby a vessel's security plan is approved under the
International Ship and Port Facility Security Code.
Under other International Maritime Organization
provisions, such as the International Safety
Management Code, documentation that a vessel has
implemented the appropriate best practices can be
issued. We welcome assistance in further encouraging
the adoption of such best practices. We encourage
nations to contribute ships to patrol the waters off the
Somali coast, as several of our fellow Council
members have already done.

We also support the recommendation in the report
that targeted cooperation with Somaliland and Puntland
be increased. But the best long-term solution to piracy
is a stable Somalia. That is why the United States
supports a wide range of economic development
programmes there, including microcredit and good
governance initiatives. Tailored initiatives that actively
involve the local community may do the most good.

The United States also agrees that prevention,
prosecution and incarceration are essential elements of
any counter-piracy initiative. We strongly support the
report's recommendations that all States criminalize
piracy as defined in the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea and adopt universal jurisdiction
with regard to this grave crime. The report recognizes
the need to raise awareness, to encourage piracy's
victims to testify against their attackers and to explore
means to provide such testimony, including via
videoconference. We agree.

The United States has long encouraged flag States
and States whose crews and vessel owners have fallen
prey to pirates to pursue prosecutions in their domestic
courts to the greatest extent possible. We welcome the
call in the report for all States to strengthen their
commitment and ability to prosecute. In cases where
American vessels have been attacked, we have
prosecuted the suspects. We also recognize the need to
develop one or more reliable, practical options for
prosecution in the region. Kenya and Seychelles are
successfully prosecuting piracy cases in their national
courts. Tanzania has changed its laws to allow it to
prosecute suspected pirates captured elsewhere. The
experience of these countries indicates that prosecution
in the region is potentially viable. We should continue
to support efforts by States in the region to try
suspected pirates in their national courts. Not only does
such support help ensure that piracy bears judicial
consequences; it also enhances the judicial capacity of
the region as a whole.

As we continue to discuss additional
mechanisms, we should also support and strengthen
prosecution-related programmes in the region that are
already under way.

My Government also remains open to exploring
creative solutions to increase and facilitate domestic
prosecution. The report suggests forming specialized
piracy courts in Somaliland and Puntland, as well as a
Somali court seated in another country in the region.
We would support further consideration of these ideas,
including in the legal working group on piracy off the
coast of Somalia, which has been exploring
prosecution mechanisms for some time now.

But as the United Nations report recognizes,
incarceration may be the most significant constraint on
piracy prosecutions. The United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) are supporting prison
rehabilitation projects. But additional support and
options for long-term incarceration are needed. We
encourage States to work with and through UNODC to
develop additional facilities where convicted pirates
can serve their sentences. The lack of places to
incarcerate convicted pirates significantly hinders
additional national prosecutions and makes it harder to
ensure judicial consequences for piracy.

Finally, as the report notes, we must pay more
attention to the instigators, leaders and financiers of
piracy. We look forward to the conclusions of the next
Contact Group plenary meeting about how to move
forward. It is critical to disrupt the financial flows that
make piracy both possible and profitable. To that end,
the United States Will convene, on 1 March, in
Washington, DC, an ad hoc meeting of Contact Group
participants on the financial aspects of piracy, as called
for by the Contact Group, to develop a strategy and an
action plan on this topic.

Over the past few years, pirates having been
using more and more violence. Their tactics have
become more sophisticated, and their vessels have
hunted further and further out at sea. We must work
together and remain vigilant. In cooperation with the
international community, the United States will do its
part to combat this common and urgent threat.

