Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Head of United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. My
delegation welcomes His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim
Thaci, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, and thanks them both for
their statements.

Malaysia takes note of the overall stable security
situation in Kosovo during the reporting period. We
welcome the positive developments in Kosovo, as
outlined in the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/579)
and by Mr. Zarif. In particular, we commend the
adoption of the constitutional amendment and
legislation by the Kosovo Assembly to establish a
specialist court to try cases arising from the findings
of the European Union (EU) Special Investigative Task
Force. We view that development as an important step
for Kosovo in ensuring accountability and promoting
reconciliation and closure among the communities in
Kosovo. We are also pleased with the progress made
towards EU integration with the recent approval by
the European Commission of a Stabilization and
Association Agreement with Kosovo. We believe that
will pave the way for social and economic development
and reforms as well as the rule oflaw - all of which are
vital for the long-term stability of Kosovo.

Other positive developments have also been
made by Belgrade and Pristina in implementing the
2013 Brussels agreement during the reporting period,
including on the integration of the judiciary and
civil protection personnel and the establishment of
association of Serb-majority municipalities.

We hope the parties will remain steadfast in their
commitment to implement the Brussels agreement
and intensify their high-level engagement in the EU-
facilitated dialogue. We believe today's exchanges
could have been much more productive if they had
not revisited nationalistic narratives. In the spirit of
reconciliation, we urge both sides to move forward to
ensure stability for the region and a common space for
both communities.

Malaysia strongly supports efforts to counter
violent terrorism. In that regard, we commend the
commitment shown by Kosovo to combat radicalization
and extremism, as illustrated by its hosting of
International Interfaith Conference in Pristina in June
and by its high-level participation in the first regional
summit on countering violent extremism in Tirana last
May. Such efforts could build on the climate of trust,
confidence and harmony among the various ethnicities
and religions. Malaysia encourages further steps to
build bridges within the various communities and will
remain committed in supporting Kosovo to to that end.

In conclusion, I join my other colleagues in
reaffirming support for UNMIK, which continues
to play a key role in promoting security, stability and
respect for human rights in Kosovo. We also commend
the role of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in the continued strengthening of the Kosovo's
rule-olaw and judicial institutions. In view of his new
portfolio, my delegation would like to convey our
utmost appreciation to Mr. Zarif for his dedication
and contribution as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of UNMIK for the past
four years. Malaysia welcomes his newly appointed
successor, Ambassador Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan,
and looks forward to working closely with him to
support the work of UNMIK.

