Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): The
situation in the Sahel remains very precarious, with the
armies of the region are on the front line. The fighting
that took place on Monday at the border between Mali
and the Niger in an operation involving the armies of
both countries attests to the persistent capacities of
terrorist groups to inflict damage. The primary victims
of terrorism are the people of the Sahel themselves.
Since the beginning of the year, 1,500 people have
reportedly fallen victim to terrorism in Mali and
Burkina Faso.

The Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint
Force is the best tool available to deal with the spread
of the terrorist threat. France welcomes the gains made
in its operationalization. The Joint Force has conducted
11 operations since the beginning of the year. The most
recent, Operation Bourgou IV, culminated last week
and mobilized 1,400 men from the armies of Burkina
Faso, Mali and the Niger, with the support of forces
from the French-led Operation Barkhane. The results
are clear: 25 terrorists were neutralized or captured;
several vehicles were recovered or destroyed, including
64 motorcycles; a workshop for the manufacture of
improvised explosive devices was dismantled; and
weapons, ammunition and more than a 100 telephones
were seized. Progress has also been made within the
human rights compliance framework, which is essential
to ensuring that the Joint Force is more effective and
does a better job of protecting civilians, especially
society's most vulnerable members, such as women
and children.

If the Joint Force is to succeed, it needs a sustained
commitment based first and foremost on the engagement
of the G-5 countries themselves, but also, crucially, that
of international partners. At the donor conference held
in Brussels in February 2018, €414 million was pledged
to the Joint Force, with the European Union, its member
States and the United States being the main donors. We
estimate that half of that support has been disbursed so
far. The Joint Force battalions have received a number of
vehicles as well as equipment for countering improvised
explosive devices. France encourages donors that have
yet to honour their commitments to do so as soon as
possible. I also welcome the fact that the United Nations

Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali has implemented logistical support for all of
the Joint Force contingents. Resolution 2480 (2019)
broadens that support to cover contingents deployed
outside the borders ofMali, and we can see how valuable
that is to the Joint Force. France supports the G-5
countries' requests for increased multilateral support.

However, those essential efforts are not enough, as
terrorism is now spreading throughout the subregion.
France and Germany's initiative of a Partnership
for Security and Stability in the Sahel is intended
to strengthen the Joint Force, while broadening its
scope to include the countries of the region and other
sectors such as internal security and justice systems.
At the Extraordinary Summit of the Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) on 14 September, ECOWAS
committed to combating terrorism more effectively. In
Mali, starting in 2020, a European special forces unit
named Takuba will also be deployed as part of Operation
Barkhane to support the Malian armed forces on their
path to autonomy and resilience.

It will be impossible to achieve sustainable security
for the Sahel without development, and France calls for
redoubling efforts to that end. We are doing our part
in that regard by allocating €522 million in funding to
the G-5 Sahel Priority Investment Programme for 2019
and 2020. We must do everything we can to meet the
growing humanitarian needs in the region, particularly
in Burkina Faso, and to ensure safe and unhindered
humanitarian access for those who need assistance. The
crisis in the Sahel is not just about development. The
urgent humanitarian situation must compel all of us to
do more.

