Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Let me start by
welcoming you, Mr. President, in the Chamber and
commend the Ivorian delegation for holding another
very active debate on cooperation in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. My delegation expresses
its appreciation to Secretary-General Guterres,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission Moussa
Faki Mahamat and the President of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Commission, Mr. Jean-Claude Kassi Brou, for their
substantive statements.

The theme of today's open debate is very timely.
The Charter of the United Nations states that the
responsibility for peace and security in the world rests
with the United Nations. We observe, unfortunately,
that contradictions are increasing day by day, thereby
threatening the stability and security of States and their
people. Unresolved disputes usually become the cause
of armed conflicts and undermine international peace
and security. Given that conflicts of whatever nature
threaten domestic, regional and global security, the
role of States, regional organizations and the United
Nations in conflict resolution is essential. As one of
the most representative and authoritative international
organizations in the world, the United Nations has to
play a central role in this sphere.

But we should not be limited to resolution, we
need to elaborate more on conflict prevention. That
will require strengthening the United Nations system
as a whole. Investments in sustaining peace should
begin early to avoid conflict and ensure early action
rather than early warnings. Without that, stability can
be uncertain, fragile and vulnerable to new shocks.
We could not agree more with the Secretary-General's
observation that,

"Instead of responding to crises, we need to invest
far more in prevention. Prevention works, saves
lives and is cost-effective."

In that regard, we commend the determined efforts of
the Secretary-General to reform the United Nations
and adapt it to the new realities, but the United Nations
cannot succeed in that endeavour alone. It will require
commitments by Member States and strong partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations.

The prevention of conflict remains a primary
responsibility of States. It includes the protection of
civilians and respecting and ensuring the human rights
of all individuals within their territory. Since gaining
its independence, 27 years ago, Kazakhstan has been
at the forefront of preventive diplomacy, conflict
prevention and confidence-building measures, which
are the core principles of our foreign policy. This
is not a political declaration, but rather the working
methods of my country. We have a mechanism in
place that demonstrates how we have realized those
principles in reality. An outstanding example is the
initiative of President Nazarbayev to create the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia, which has been successfully functioning
in the Central Asia region for the past 10 years. The
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel - both regional organizations - have been
productively operating in Africa on a preventive agenda
for a number of years, a model that could be replicated
in conflict areas globally.

Regional organizations are particularly important
actors in the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
as indicated in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Kazakhstan founded the Conference
on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in
Asia (CICA) as an intergovernmental forum to promote
peace, security and stability in Asia. In that context, I
would like to recall the recent initiative of my President
to establish a collective security organization in Asia.
CICA could be the foundation for the future organization
for security and cooperation in Asia. In cooperation
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), such an organization could contribute
to the creation of a security zone throughout the
Eurasian subcontinent. Regional and subregional
organizations such as OSCE, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization have accumulated
significant experience in conflict prevention and
resolution. Peace, security and development are
essential components of conflict prevention. Security
is complemented by sustainable development, and vice
versa. We must therefore increase cooperation and
coordination between the security and development
pillars of the United Nations at Headquarters and in the
field to achieve effective results on the ground.

We are grateful to the Ivorian delegation for inviting
the Chairperson ofthe AU and President of ECOWAS as
briefers today. My delegation is in full agreement with
both of them that security and development synergy is
key to alleviating and resolving conflicts.

It is in that vein that during our presidency, in
January, the Security Council adopted presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/1, which was submitted by
Kazakhstan and which, for the first time, highlighted
the importance of conflict prevention and sustaining
peace in a regional perspective and underscored the
need to utilize measures to rebuild trust and achieve
a world free of violent conflicts by the United Nations
centenary, in 2045. It includes in particular preventive
diplomacy tools and the strengthening of strategic
cooperation and coordination among the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations, an
innovative three-pronged strategy. That document also
puts emphasis on sharing best practices and formulating
forward-looking recommendations and strategies in
the light of the increasingly transnational nature of
the causes, consequences and contributing factors of
conflict, including terrorism, armed group activities,
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
organized crime and illicit trafficking in conventional
weapons.

We therefore need to continue to support the
peaceful settlement of local disputes through regional
arrangements, or by regional agencies, and continue
strengthening strategic dialogue, partnerships, a more
regular exchange of views, analyses and information
at the working level to build national and regional
capacities in relation to the preventive diplomacy tools.

We should ensure stronger and closer cooperation
by the United Nations with regional and subregional
organizations, because it is regional and subregional
organizations that have the knowledge and will to deal
with the conflicts in the areas concerned. In that regard,
we firmly support the growing United Nations-African
Union partnership and look forward to enhancing that
relationship in peacekeeping and peacebuilding spheres
as well.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan believes that a more
holistic approach should be taken to further improve our
action in the prevention and resolution of conflicts. With
that in view, Kazakhstan will continue to promote the
comprehensive threefold strategy I mentioned earlier,
which includes strengthening the security-development
nexus, a regional approach and coordinated efforts by
United Nations agencies and structures.

