Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): In
resolution 1402 (2002), the Security Council requested
Israel to withdraw its forces from the Palestinian towns
and villages that it had reoccupied. It called on Israel to
seek peace by returning to the negotiating table. The
Israeli response to that resolution was to escalate its
acts of aggression against the Palestinian people,
causing further death and destruction among
Palestinian civilians. Within less than a week, in view
of the seriousness of that escalation and Israel's
intransigence in refusing to implement resolution 1402
(2002), the Security Council adopted resolution 1403
(2002), calling on Israel to implement the Council's
previous resolution without delay.

While Council members, the Secretary-General
and the heads of the States concerned, including the
United States president, understood that the phrase
"without delay" meant that Israel should withdraw
immediately from the Palestinian territories, Sharon
had his own interpretation of the resolution. He
announced that he would accelerate the invasion and
ordered his forces to finish their operations in the
territories in fulfilment of his objectives and in clear
defiance of the resolution. The time has come for the
Council to put an end to Israel's disregard for Council
resolutions. It should force Israel to implement them.

The humanitarian tragedy of the Palestinian
civilians is deepening. The aggression against the
defenceless Palestinian people is escalating.
Humanitarian organizations, including the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, medical and humanitarian
personnel, ambulances, and the press are being
prevented from reaching the Palestinians, in clear
violation of all international norms and laws, in
particular the Fourth Geneva Convention. Despite
Israel's media blackout on the massacres it has carried
out against the Palestinian people, it has become clear
that its actions in many Palestinian towns and villages,
including Nablus and Jenin, are war crimes.

In commenting on some statements made
yesterday, the delegation of Lebanon would like to put
some facts before the Council, which are as follows.

First, the Security Council, in 1978, adopted
resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978) against Israel in
view of its invasion of the territories of Lebanon,
contradicting all international laws and norms,
including the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

Secondly, the Government of Lebanon has
reaffirmed its respect for the Blue Line and has
explicitly declared that it has no intention of escalating
the conflict or opening a new front. Accordingly,
Lebanese forces have detained some out-of-control
elements responsible for certain incidents near the
border, and have referred them to military courts for
legal prosecution. In that context, Lebanon reserves its
right to liberate its territories in the occupied Shebaa
farms using all possible means.

Thirdly, Lebanon has made a formal apology and
expressed its regrets at the highest level to the United
Nations and the members of the Security Council for
the tragic event in which four United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) personnel were involved in
southern Lebanon. We have committed ourselves to do
everything possible to prevent the recurrence of such
an event, and have decided to refer all those
responsible to Lebanese justice for legal prosecution.
Lebanon values the role that UNIFIL has played in
southern Lebanon and highly appreciates the sacrifices
it has made since 1978. We value that role out of our
concern for peace and security and for our innocent
civilians, who are constantly threatened by Israeli
forces, even after the occupation. We have resolved to
value that role out of respect for the partnership we
have worked so hard to develop with the United
Nations peacekeeping force since 1978.

Lastly, the party that should be considered
responsible for the current escalation of the conflict is
Israel, which has, since May 2000, deliberately and
repeatedly violated Lebanon's sovereignty on land, in
the air and on the sea. Israel has even bombed some
liberated villages in Lebanon, using lSS-millimetre-
calibre howitzer cannons.

