Ms. Rodriguez de Ortiz (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
you, Madam President, for this second opportunity to
take the floor, and we apologize to those present for
once again taking the floor. However, for the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, this Council is an
important forum in which to address these issues,
36

which are indeed a priority for our country. We do not
share the opinion of the Mission of the United States
that this is not the appropriate forum. Yes, this is the
appropriate forum.

What the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is
again requesting in this Council is compliance with
commitments undertaken by States under international
treaties. We do not understand why the United States
cannot comply with the extradition treaty that has been
signed by our two countries. They are simply
disregarding an extradition request that we have put
forward, which complies with all the requirements that
the treaty establishes. Why do they ignore our request
for extradition, and try the terrorist Posada Carriles
only for immigration violations? We reject the
argument that Posada Carriles cannot be extradited to
our country because he could be tortured there. We
reiterate that Venezuela complies with the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment. Our country always
guarantees due process. The torturers are others.

The Government of the United States has all the
necessary documentation to prove the terrorist nature of
the activities of Posada Carriles. Their concern in this
case therefore makes a mockery of justice, the memory
of the victims of terrorist acts and the suffering of their
families. It is also an example of the double standards
of a Government that says it fights against terrorism,
but in its actions supports terrorist methods.

The Security Council must examine the case, and
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) must verify
compliance by the Government of the United States
with its commitments in fighting terrorism in
accordance with international law.

