Mr. Gusmao: First of all, I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for granting me the honour of
addressing the Council, thus giving us an opportunity
to share some of our major concerns with the Council
at this stage of the transitional process in East Timor.

Three main issues have been recurrently raised by
the Council. We bring these issues to the Council's
attention because they are yet to be resolved and
continue to deserve our attention and concern. Those
issues are justice and reconciliation, the security
situation and the prospects for development as a whole.

The East Timorese leadership is often questioned
on its stance regarding the accountability of the
perpetrators of the crimes committed in 1999, both
before and after the United Nations-organized popular
consultation. Just as often, we have stated that justice
and reconciliation are two components of a process that
must proceed alongside each other. This responsibility
is equally shared by the international community and
ourselves. The crimes committed in East Timor have
caused immense grief, great suffering and endless pain,
first and foremost to the children, women and men of
our country. However, they were also an affront to the
international community, which was already committed
to the consultation process and was mobilizing to
enable our people to freely choose their future. We
therefore believe that the international community
should take primary responsibility in bringing about
justice, while we, the East Timorese, will bear the
responsibility for, and concentrate on, the
reconciliation process.

The international community and, indeed, the
East Timorese have been understanding towards
Indonesia and have repeatedly given it opportunities to
implement that which has been promised so many
times, namely, the punishment of the perpetrators of
the Violence. Unfortunately, as of today, the response
has not been satisfactory, as shown by the appalling
verdicts given to the confessed authors of the murder
of the three staff members of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).

We wish to reaffirm before the Council that we
remain greatly committed to the reconciliation process.
Last week, a meeting was held in Bali, and next week
another one will be held in East Timor, with leaders of
the pro-autonomy factions. We have been extending an
olive branch for some time, and we will continue to do
so; for we are aware that this will be a long process.
However, we believe that the much-needed stability in
East Timor will face great difficulties if we do not
carry that process to success.

At this point we deem the security situation in
East Timor to be under control. To avoid confusion,
however, a distinction must be made between the
violence and offences presently being committed in
East Timor and the infiltrations and attacks at the
border. The nature and causes of each of these types of
security situations are substantially different. One type
is often reported in a dramatic tone; but official civilian
police statistics and analysis easily prove that it stands
at levels far less dramatic than in the overwhelming
majority of capital cities throughout the world. The
present socio-economic situation of the population is
undoubtedly a decisive contributing factor.

The situation at the border is a different issue
altogether. The militia groups continue to reign with
impunity and control the remaining refugees in West
Timor. The incursions and infiltrations through our
common border are still occurring, and very recently
five new ones took place. After a year and a half of
hoping that a change could be brought about, stern
action is needed. This is a major concern to all of us,
given the impact it still has in destabilizing our
process.

We seek a good-neighbourly relationship with
Indonesia, based on mutual respect and understanding.
The East Timorese leadership has often met in Jakarta
with members of the Indonesian Government and other
institutions, with the goal of normalizing these
relationships, bridging existing gaps and gaining
mutual understanding and respect. We also wish to
state that this will continue, for both countries are in
need of peace and stability, and both peoples deserve
them. We are sure that Indonesia understands that we,
as a small country with a small population, not only do
not constitute any threat to neighbouring countries, but,
more importantly, are truly committed to building a
new relationship with our neighbours, looking towards
the future.

In this context, I wish to ask the Council
members to continue their support for East Timor. We
are aware of the demands placed on the Council by so
many other unfortunate and difficult situations around
the world. We are equally aware of how much the
international community has invested in keeping peace
in East Timor. We are very thankful. But because we
know that the Council is engaged in making East Timor
a successful case, I urge the members of the Council to
keep the peacekeeping mission in our country. We
understand that a mission such as this would have to be
downsized after independence is declared. However,
we will continue to need the assistance of the
international community both at the security level and
in assisting and advising the future leaders during the
initial phase of independence.

The success of this mission is the success of the
international community as much as it is that of the
East Timorese. Together we can uphold the values of
peace, justice, democracy, human rights and abidance
by international law.

For us East Timorese the success of this mission
means, above all, ensuring our preparedness to take up
the responsibility of governing our sovereign country
in a democratic and sustainable manner. We will
achieve that only with peace and stability, and for that
we need the continued support of the international
community. I can assure the Council that in some
years' time, the East Timorese will address this
Council and will express their gratitude for having
trusted us when we made our requests. We will be
proud to come to the Council with an expression of
gratitude from our people, stating that we will stand
with the Council as a member of the international
community that relates to its partners like any other
country, but that no longer needs to ask for continued
assistance. Only then will we be able to share with the
Council the joy of true freedom.

Our process is moving ahead, and we will soon
enter yet another stage - a decisive and determining
one for us: the turning point, which will be the
elections and the establishment of democratically
elected institutions.

The election results will be a reference for the
establishment of a Timorese Government, whose
structure we are tuning and finalizing. As soon as it is
designed, the resources allocated to its institutions will
be more efficiently used, for they will be targeted
according to a previously agreed administrative
architecture. It will be a moment of paramount
importance in that it will represent the first step
towards taking full responsibility for our country.

East Timor still lacks a structured economic
system. Important steps have been made in part of the
regulatory framework, and there is a consensus among
the political forces on the open and free-market
economic system to be set up. However, we have yet to
define the vision for future development.

I am pleased to inform the Council that we will
soon set up a group to work full time on strategic
development planning for the short, medium and long
term. This is an East Timorese initiative that has the
support of World Bank President Jim Wolfensohn and
the full involvement of other interested parties.

This task is one we had intended to initiate
sooner, after the three conferences held by the East
Timorese to that effect. The demands of the process,
and the lack of human and material resources in the
country to enable a full-time commitment to it
hampered our initial intention. I will be personally
involved in this process, and I assure the Council that it
is also in our best interest that investments made by the
international community be efficiently used. We wish
to design the strategic guidelines for the development
of East Timor as the most effective means to correctly
allocate both human and material resources and to
obtain genuine sustainable development for the newly
emerging independent nation.

As we have often stated, development is a hollow
concept in the absence of democracy and freedom.
However, our people, who have fought and suffered for
so long, deserve only the very best that we, hand in
hand with our partners in the international community,
can offer them.

The international community has been assisting
us generously in maintaining freedom. We will
reciprocate by building a democratic country that will
contribute peace to the region and the world.

