I have the honour to congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month and to thank you for judiciously guiding its work. I would also like to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenoyv, for his valuable briefing. The quarterly meetings of the Security Council concerning the Palestinian question have continued, and so does the suffering of the Palestinian people under occupation. Since the last meeting, before our very eyes, unilateral Israeli steps to expand settlements have gathered pace, undermining the prospects of a two-State solution, increasing the pressure on the Palestinian people and further curtailing its rights. The international community should embark on an effective endeavour to end the occupation, bring an end to the suffering of the Palestinian people and achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive peace on the basis of the two-State solution through direct and genuine negotiations with a view to the establishment of an independent State of Palestine on the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with international law, the internationally recognized resolutions, the agreed terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative. There is an urgent need for the international community to take a stand and press Israel to refrain from annexing occupied Palestinian territory and declare a permanent end to such annexation, which contravenes international law and the resolutions of the United Nations, including Security Council resolution 2334 (2016) and undermines the prospects of peace and a two-State solution. Israel must put a stop to its illegal unilateral measures, including settlement activities, which violate international law and the internationally recognized resolutions. Jordan condemns the ongoing Israeli unilateral measures including the threat of annexation of Palestinian territory, the construction and expansion of illegal settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, the confiscation of property and demolition of homes, and breaches of the holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem. Those provocative actions violate international law and are pulling the region towards greater tension and conflict. We also condemn the Israeli Government's decision to build 4,900 new settlement units in the occupied West Bank, in violation of international law, and to persist with its illegal steps that undermine the two-State solution and the prospects of a comprehensive peace. We call for a clear international stance rejecting those steps and pressing for their cessation, for the sake of peace and international law. A just and lasting peace based on the two-State solution, in accordance with the internationally recognized resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, would do justice to all the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. It is a Jordanian, Palestinian and Arab strategic choice. Jordan will keep working with Arab States and their partners in the international community in order to fulfil that goal. Mindful of the Hashemite dynasty's duty of custodianship, it will also continue its efforts to protect the Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem and to preserve the city's legal and historic status. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) must continue to provide its services to Palestine refugees pending a solution to the Palestinian question that would uphold their right of return and compensation in accordance with the internationally recognized resolutions, particularly General Assembly resolution 194 (IID), in the context of a comprehensive solution to the conflict on the basis of a two-State solution bringing an end to the occupation that began in 1967. Jordan will continue to cooperate with its partners in the international community and to make every possible effort to garner international political and financial support for UNRWA, enabling it to continue fulfilling its functions, in accordance with its United Nations mandate, for 5.5 million Palestine refugees. In the middle of this month, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Jordan and Sweden hosted the third ministerial strategic dialogue to garner support for UNRWA, discuss joint efforts in that regard, and find practical ways and means to confront the financial challenges facing the Agency. We urge all States to comply with their commitments as soon as possible, and to increase them if possible, in order to ensure that UNRWA can continue to provide its services and meet urgent needs arising from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In coordination with its partners in the international community, Jordan will continue to make every possible effort to achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting peace and to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Such a solution is a condition for the realization of security, stability, welfare and prosperity for peoples that aspire to better living conditions and a brighter future. The solution before us is clear: a two-state solution leading to the establishment of an independent State of Palestine, alongside Israel, with East Jerusalem as its capital. This is the only way to achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive peace acceptable to the peoples of the region.
