Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): We consider today's
public meeting on Kosovo to be most appropriate,
following last weekend's visit of the Security Council
mission to the area. We thank you, Sir, for organizing
this important meeting. We also thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing this
morning. As a member of the mission to Kosovo, I
wish to place on record my warm and sincere
appreciation and thanks to you, Sir, for the quality of
leadership you provided to the mission, which was the
first ever to include all 15 Security Council members.

The report of the mission in document
S/2001/565 broadly sums up the important work
accomplished by the Security Council mission during
the brief three-day visit to Kosovo and Belgrade. The
visit not only provided us with the opportunity to see
first hand the actual situation on the ground in Kosovo,
but also gave us clearer insight into the deep-rooted
issues that have bedevilled the territory and its people.
We have come back better informed as a result of the
discussions we had with the various parties, including
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hans Haekkerup; officials of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK);
the Commander of the Kosovo Force (KFOR);
members of the Interim Administration; representatives
of the Albanian and Serb communities; civil society;
and, in Belgrade, with President Kostunica and
members of his Cabinet. We hope to be able to
contribute more substantially to the efforts of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General to restore
peace and stability in the area.

The Kosovo crisis has been a real human tragedy
of our time. The lives of hundreds of thousands of
innocent people have been completely shattered.
Although the conflict is largely over, the people of
Kosovo continue to live in a situation of bitter ethnic
divide, mutual hatred and fear. The minorities, both
Serbs and Albanians in many communities, remain
confined to their homes due to fear. Employment
opportunities are extremely scarce, depriving people of
the means to earn their livelihood, and hundreds of
thousands of people are living outside their normal
homes, either as internally displaced persons or as
refugees. Worst of all, children, having lived through
the trauma of death and devastation in the civil
conflict, are unable to attend school unless
accompanied by KFOR soldiers.

In such difficult circumstances, UNMIK and
KFOR are valiantly engaged in maintaining peace and
security and they deserve to be not only commended,
but also fully supported by all of us in all that they are
doing in Kosovo to restore confidence among the
people, to engage them in a political process, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), and to rebuild a society based on multi-
ethnicity and the rule of law and justice for all. This
task is as daunting as the situation is complex. The
immediate and most important challenge before
UNMIK is to organize elections with popular
participation for the administration of Kosovo as an
autonomous region within the sovereignty of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The election has to be
inclusive in order to have the credibility required in
today's difficult situation in Kosovo.

In this regard, we have two important concerns.
First, the security situation must improve in order to
facilitate the full participation of all eligible Kosovars
- Albanians, Serbs and other minorities - in the
process. Secondly, every effort must be made to ensure
that voters, in particular Serb voters, both inside and
outside Kosovo, have the opportunity to register to
vote without any hindrance. The other important
challenge before UNMIK is to initiate the process of
economic reconstruction in Kosovo. While some work
is already being done to rebuild infrastructures, it is
necessary to start a number of small projects which can
provide employment to job-seekers from both the
majority and the minority communities. We appeal to
the international community to extend all possible
assistance for the economic reconstruction of Kosovo.

Our visit to Belgrade and the discussions we had
there with President Kostunica, the Minister of Interior
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs have convinced us
that Yugoslavia is not only prepared to fully cooperate
with the Security Council and UNMIK, but that it is
already doing so, for example, by officially
encouraging the Serbs to register to vote, in spite of its
serious reservations on certain provisions of the
recently adopted legal framework for Kosovo. We
appreciate this positive attitude of Yugoslavia.

We call upon all the people of Kosovo -
Albanians and Serbs alike - to shed extremism, which
has already brought so much misfortune and suffering
to them. The future of Kosovo lies in the multi-ethnic
coexistence of all communities, and that should be the
goal they must work for together. Indeed, almost all
nations of the world, including mine, Mauritius, have
multi-ethnic societies that have learned to live in
harmony. There is no reason why Kosovars should not
be able to do the same.

