The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Colombia.
My delegation thanks Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his detailed
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine. This is the moment to reiterate
that the search for a peaceful and fair settlement to the
Israeli-Palestinian situation requires a resolution on all
core issues of the dispute, including security,
strengthening Palestinian institutions, the definition of
borders and settlements in the occupied territories. We
therefore welcome what has been expressed by the
Quartet - that, if the Palestinian Authority continues its
institution-building process, it will be in a position to
establish a State in the near future.

On the other hand, we regret that powerful
existing tensions continue to cause civilian casualties,
affecting the general population. We call on the parties
to exercise restraint and do their utmost to bring to
justice those responsible for those acts of
destabilization.

My delegation urges all parties to fulfil their
obligations under international humanitarian law and to
take all necessary measures to protect civilians,
especially children, from direct and indirect violence.

My delegation calls for the resumption of talks
between the parties on the basis of mutual respect,
recognition of the identity and rights of each people
and the fulfilment of obligations under existing
agreements recognized by both parties.

Colombia advocates a comprehensive solution to
the unstable situation in the region and the cessation of
the threat or use of force and of terrorism. Given the
upheaval in the region, my country approaches this issue
comprehensively and with a commitment to the lofty
goals of international peace and security, as we have
demonstrated on the many occasions when we have
fulfilled our responsibilities within various United
Nations bodies. We therefore support the Organization's
efforts aimed at achieving real progress towards
Palestinian unity and peace in the region. We must also
take advantage of this renewed momentum and the
winds of change blowing in the region, so as to provide
an effective solution to this long-standing situation.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Jordan.
