We would like once again to give special thanks to Ms. Stephanie Williams for her exceptional work in leading the United Nations political process in Libya. Since the Council last met to discuss the situation in Libya in September (see S/PV.8758), that work has borne considerable fruit. The Libyans have agreed on a nationwide ceasefire and come together to conduct the first round of the United Nations-facilitated Libyan Political Dialogue Forum. We applaud the agreement reached by the Forum participants on a road map to holding national elections on 24 December 2021, which will enable all Libyans to choose their country's leadership and direction. Those developments demonstrate the broad consensus among Libyans that an inclusive, negotiated political solution is the only way to end the conflict. They also validate the United Nations political process as the only viable way to achieve peace and national reconciliation. Over the past two weeks, a large and diverse group of Libyans have been meeting in Tunis to take part in the Political Dialogue Forum, and we would like to thank Tunisia for its facilitation efforts. The Libyans agreed on a pragmatic agenda that outlined the parameters for achieving peace, including setting a date for national elections, the establishment of a new executive authority, an agreement to unify key institutions and the provision of enhanced support to the High National Elections Commission. We call on all members of the Council to adhere to their Berlin process commitments and to genuinely and actively support the United Nations political process, especially as momentum remains on our side. The Libyan announcement of a nationwide ceasefire served as the foundation for the Political Dialogue Forum. Yet the successful implementation of the ceasefire depends on every member of the Council. We all agree that the solutions must be Libyan-led and Libyan-owned. It is therefore incumbent on us to support the Libyans' decision to stop the fighting and to do so on their own terms. An externally imposed alternative that aims to partition Libya and establish a long-term foreign military presence is utterly unacceptable. The international community must honour the Libyan agreement that all mercenaries and foreign fighters should depart Libya and all military units and armed groups withdraw from lines of contact and return to their bases within 90 days of the 23 October ceasefire agreement. We welcome the Libyan Joint Military Commission's recent meetings on Libyan soil, in Ghadames and at the new headquarters in Sirte, with a view to operationalizing the ceasefire agreement. The international community should also hold accountable any spoilers of Libya's peace, security and stability. We must send out a strong message that the international community will take meaningful action to put an end to the culture of impunity that has fuelled the conflict in Libya. Towards that goal, the United States, Germany, the United Kingdom and Estonia have nominated some of the most egregious abusers of human rights in Libya, including Mohammed AI-Kani and the Kaniyat militia, to the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. The United States will continue, through appropriate mechanisms, to be a strong supporter of meaningful accountability and justice for victims of atrocities. We welcome the creation of the International Fact-Finding Mission to document the atrocities and other human rights abuses in Libya. Accountability will help to promote justice for victims and secure lasting peace. We also support the National Oil Corporation as it fulfils its apolitical and technocratic mandate and resumes nationwide oil-and-gas sector operations and commend the steps it has taken to ensure full transparency regarding all revenues received. As Libyans seek to improve governance, it is shameful that certain Libyan and external actors have sought to politicize and undermine economic institutions, such as the Libyan Foreign Bank, and to plunder those revenues. The leadership of the Libyan Foreign Bank must be clarified. The Council has been clear that Libya's wealth must be safeguarded for all Libyans, and we must redouble our efforts to ensure that no funds are misappropriated or diverted during this very critical period. The United States will remain keenly focused on this developing situation, and we will do our part in helping the Libyan people to finally build a future based on peace and the opportunities that come with it. Lastly, at this consequential moment in the political process, it is critical that the Special Envoy position be filled quickly with an individual who has a strong track record in negotiations. Mr. Nickolay Mladenov is the right choice for that role. We look forward to consulting with the Secretary-General and the Council on potential African candidates for the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) coordinator position. We will continue to support Ms. Stephanie Williams in her commendable leadership role of UNSMIL until a new Special Envoy is appointed, and we greatly appreciate her willingness to continue to extend her mandate as the United Nations works to fill that post. Again, we wish to thank Ms. Williams. We really are very grateful for everything she has done for this Libyan-led process.
