Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on convening a debate on the links between humanitarian effects of environmental degradation and international peace and security, with a special emphasis on the Sahel region. The humanitarian implications of natural phenomena - the elevation of average temperatures, rising sea levels, hurricanes, earthquakes, draughts, desertification and erosion of soils, among others - require close attention and scrutiny by the international community. Member States, with the support of multilateral and regional organizations, are duty-bound to assist vulnerable countries, in particular small island developing States (SIDS) and landlocked countries, to the best of their capacities in order to ease suffering, especially that of the most destitute people. Prior to considering the international community's responses to the humanitarian effects of environmental degradation in peace and security, it is also important to highlight the State's sovereignty over the management of natural resources and its primary responsibility to ensure that activities within their jurisdiction do not cause damage to the environment of other States or areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction. Brazil is cognizant of the fact that natural phenomena - man-made or otherwise - might be, on a case-by-case basis, a factor in exacerbating security challenges. The humanitarian consequences of environmental degradation have been especially dire in the Sahel region, where other factors such as poverty, social inequality, weak governance, ethnic divisions, food insecurity, transhumance and violent extremism also play a key role. This confluence of factors has resulted in the record number of 24 million people - half of them children - needing life-saving assistance and protection in the Sahel as of last June, according to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. In the face of this complex and multifaceted reality, the aggravating impact of environmental degradation on conflict and post-conflict situations must be dealt by the Security Council on a case-by-case basis, taking into account national and local specificities. Resolution 2349 (2017) was a milestone in that respect as it pioneered the recognition that environmental factors might play a role in the deterioration of the security environment specifically in the Lake Chad Basin region. One must be cautious not to jump to hasty conclusions in mistaking correlation for causation when it comes to the links between the environment and the international peace and security agendas. Rather than emphasizing the impact of environmental degradation on peace and security, Brazil considers it all the more important to understand the adverse consequences of armed conflicts on the environment and how it, in turn, affects the population. Furthermore, peacekeeping operations must take into account their potential impact on the environment, with a view to reducing their environmental footprint on the ground and contributing to the health, safety and security of local communities. In the light of this, we think of efforts to establish guidelines for environmental practices in missions under the aegis of international organizations, based on Brazil's successful experience in the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. Moreover, from Brazil's perspective, climate change and environmental challenges are phenomena that can have no possible military solution. These are challenges that must be dealt with primarily through development tools, avoiding the risk of undue securitization. The United Nations system relies on a roster of forums and agencies tasked with handling environmental issues: the Economic and Social Council, the Second Committee of the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification rank among them. A similar reflection must be undertaken regarding the strictly humanitarian aspects of the matter at hand. Humanitarian crises require close cooperation among humanitarian, peacebuilding and development actors, and this is especially true in the Sahel. We must also recognize, however, that any blurring of the lines between humanitarian assistance and military operations poses a risk to principled humanitarian action and, indirectly, to humanitarian access and the safety of humanitarian personnel. In armed conflicts, it is important that all parties abide by their obligations to environmental protection in accordance with international humanitarian law and other applicable legal regimes. Ina report dated May this year, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs stated that politicization and militarization constitute major threats to humanitarian action in the Sahel. Humanitarian crises associated with armed conflict have, of course, already been discussed in the Security Council, mostly in connection with humanitarian access issues in specific conflict situations. While the Council has an important role in this regard, as is the case with environmental issues, the international community has at its disposal forums and agencies designed to address all aspects of humanitarian issues, such as General Assembly's Third Committee or the annual humanitarian affairs segment in the Economic and Social Council, which this year included an event on the interconnected challenges facing the Sahel, in which the Niger's own Minister for Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management contributed greatly to the debate. In addition, the International Law Commission is currently studying the topic of the protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts, an issue whose complexity cannot be overestimated. It is incumbent on Member States to be watchful of the division of labour among the different bodies of the United Nations system, seeking synergies and complementarities, while retaining their respective mandates and competencies. It can never be underscored enough that the Security Council is mandated to respond to concrete threats to international peace and security requiring immediate attention from the international community. While connections do arise between the Council's activities and environmental and humanitarian issues, other forums that boast a wider and more representative membership hold the primary mandate to address these issues in a comprehensive manner. Diverting the Council's attention to issues beyond the mandate entrusted to it in the Charter, however critical such issues might be - and they often are - is counterproductive and potentially detrimental to the proper functioning of the multilateral machinery.
