Mrs. Alvear Valenzuela (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile would like to thank the British
presidency of the Security Council for its initiative in
convening this meeting to deal with an issue vital to
the work of the United Nations, namely, how to
provide the world with more stability, peace and
security.

The rule of law, democracy and human rights are
the core values of our Organization and the guiding
principles of the international system. The drafters of
the Charter assigned to justice and the rule of law a
pre-eminent place in an international system that
aspires not only to be predictable, but also to make real
the idea ofjustice. The rule of law stands as a bulwark
against arbitrariness on two levels: first, with regard to
relations between States and, secondly, with regard to
relations between States and individuals.

In the Millennium Declaration, our heads of State
and Government reiterated their commitment to
promoting respect for the rule of law in international
and national affairs.

One of the most important principles enshrined in
the Charter of the Organization seeks to ensure the rule
of law through the peaceful settlement of disputes.
That is one of the cornerstones of contemporary
international law. Under Chapter VI, the Charter gives
the Security Council broad responsibility in the
settlement of disputes. One current challenge is how to
adapt the application of that principle to intra-State
conflicts, which are gaining increasing importance on
the international agenda over inter-State conflicts.

The concept of sovereignty has evolved from a
supreme, absolute and unlimited jurisdictional
authority to an authority that is equal to that of any
other independent State, but limited by international
law, humanitarian law and human rights law and based
on the free will of the people of the territory in
question. In other words, as a distinguished Latin
American jurist has ably argued:

"In organizing itself freely, a State is limited
by the rights of free people, which must always
be respected, based on the principle that the State
is at the service of men and of the universal
morality that infuses and gives meaning and
foundation to any legal order."

The international community, therefore, cannot
remain passive in the face of massive violations of
human rights, ethnic cleansing or humanitarian crises,
and must act both to put an end to such violations and
to prevent those responsible from going unpunished.

The achievement of international justice is a
requirement in an international society that rejects the
commission of crimes against humanity. In response to
that demand, the Security Council created two
important institutions to ensure respect for the law and,
ultimately, the maintenance of international peace and
security. We refer here to the international criminal
tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda,
created to prosecute and punish those guilty of the
grave crimes committed in those territories.

The Council must continue its work in this field,
using the tools that the international community has
given it. An important function was assigned to the
Council in this regard when it was given the power to
refer situations to the International Criminal Court in
order for the Court to try cases involving crimes over
which it has jurisdiction.

Chile reaffirms its commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court, an institution that embodies this
universal aspiration to the rule of law and the
achievement of justice.

Post-conflict situations pose a challenge to the
United Nations, but they also represent an opportunity
to rehabilitate societies fractured by war and to
contribute to the moral and material reconstruction of
their institutions.

The Brahimi report has already recommended
that elements of the rule of law be mainstreamed into
complex operations in post-conflict situations.

The consensus of the international community
today is that comprehensive approaches are required to
provide support to a society during the reconstruction
phase until it becomes self-sustaining and until the
bases for preventing a return to conflict are established.
Only then can the United Nations consider its mission
complete. To that end, it is necessary to devise an
appropriate exit strategy.

The post-conflict process requires close
institutional cooperation among the various organs of
the United Nations system and the international
financial institutions.

The consolidation of peace in post-conflict
situations is a collective effort that involves not only
the parties and the United Nations, but also civil
society, which also has a key role to play in post-
conflict situations to ensure viability of the new
institutions.

Truth and reconciliation commissions can play a
constructive role in this regard, as has been the case in
Chile, where our society, in the wake of a divisive past,
can now look to the future with a sense of unity and
national identity.

It is also important for this process to include a
gender perspective, as provided for in resolution 1325
(2000), of 31 October 2000, which, inter alia,
reaffirmed the need fully to implement international
humanitarian and human rights law that protects the
rights of women and girls during and after conflicts.

The security of humanitarian and United Nations
personnel is one of the essential requirements for
implementing a strategy of reconstruction that upholds
the primacy of law. That is why Chile welcomed the
unanimous adoption on 26 August last of resolution
1502 (2003), aimed at enhancing the protection of
United Nations personnel, associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel.

One of the areas in which the Council can make a
contribution to the rule of law and international justice
is that of sanctions imposed pursuant to Chapter VII. It
is necessary to reduce to a minimum the negative
impact which economic sanctions can have on innocent
civilian populations and to address the issue of the
adverse impact of sanctions on third countries. One
interesting model is the Al Qaeda and Taliban
sanctions Committee, whose sanctions are not directed
at countries but at persons and organizations belonging
or related to a terrorist network.

This accumulated experience should be reflected
in future Council mandates. The possibility should be
considered of strengthening the elements that ensure
democratic governance in the elaboration of
instruments to govern the political process. In that
sense, in designing the exit strategy, the follow-up to
the political process through indicators of democratic
governance can be agreed upon with the host
Government in a way that would link the United
Nations with the quality of democracy in the country,
beyond the formal end of the mission in question.

The rule of law offers the Security Council the
possibility of basing its work on a concept that
embodies the core values of the United Nations in
addressing material and moral needs in post-conflict
reconstruction. The Council should explore the
possibility of actively incorporating regional
organizations into this task, taking into account their
experience and the specificity of each conflict.

The United Nations must intensify its action in
this area, which represents one of the most notable
achievements of the Organization in the promotion of
universal values and in the construction of a world in
which the rule of law and justice will prevail.

