Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Special Representative Yamamoto and the
other briefers.

Earlier this week, President Trump unveiled a new
United States national security strategy, which embodies
the concept of principled realism. Nowhere is that
approach more evident than with this Administration's
regional strategy towards Afghanistan. The strategy
demonstrates clearly this Administration's commitment
to Afghanistan and to a peaceful future for the region.
The American people are justifiably impatient with the
conflict in Afghanistan, which has been ongoing for 16
years now. The President's policy makes it clear that
the United States does not seek a permanent military
presence in Afghanistan.

We will continue to support the Afghan
Government and security forces in their fight against
Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
and the Taliban. We will continue to work to ensure
that terrorists do not exploit Afghanistan's territory
as a safe haven. But, critically, our support will not
come with an artificial time limit. We will instead base
our support on a realistic assessment of conditions
on the ground. The additional military resources and
authorities ordered by President Trump are having an
impact on the battlefield.

The United States, working closely with our Afghan
partners, has made significant progress against ISIS
in eastern Afghanistan. Together we have maintained
persistent pressure on ISIS, while significantly reducing
its territory and eliminating one third of its fighters.
Enhanced United States support has also bolstered the
confidence and ability of our Afghan partners. For the
first time since 2014, the fighting season has passed
without the Taliban threatening to seize a provincial
capital. The United States does not intend to prolong the
war through its military games, but rather to accelerate
the peace.

We are committed to an Afghan-owned peace
process. Our strategy recognizes that the path to
peace is through negotiations. The Taliban and other
spoilers cannot win on the battlefield. Our actions on
the battlefield make that plain. Peace will come only
through political settlement that results in the Taliban
abandoning violence, cutting ties with international
terrorism and accepting the Afghan Constitution. In
other words, the United States, the Security Council
and the international community stand united in their
pursuit ofthe same overarching goal in Afghanistan - a
durable political settlement that leads to a lasting peace.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan will play an important role in the process.
As the Mission has done so much to document, it is the
Afghan people who continue to pay the highest price for
the war. United Nations support for civilians, including
electoral reforms, strengthening Afghan institutions,
human rights and women's issues, will continue to be
critical in the years ahead. Afghanistan's neighbours
must also help.

Our South Asia strategy recognizes that there
can be no enduring peace in Afghanistan without its
neighbours being fully engaged and actively committed
to that goal. The United States has reinvigorated
regional diplomacy to support our commitment to a
negotiated settlement. We stand ready to work with any
nation ready to play a constructive role in Afghanistan.
We will partner with any Member State willing to
contribute to Afghanistan's security, stability, economic
development and fight against terrorism.

It is also clear that there remains much to be done
to combat opium production, which fuels instability
in Afghanistan. We share the Secretary-General's
deep concern about the shocking 63 per cent increase
in poppy cultivation in Afghanistan between 2016
and 2017. Increased poppy-growing means increased
revenue for the Taliban and extremist groups to wage
their insurgency. The United States supports the Afghan
Government's efforts to curtail opium production,
bolster law enforcement and expand alternative
economic opportunities for the Afghan people. We call
on all nations to join in that effort.

As our President stated, America will lead. We
will not impose our way of life but we will champion
our values, without apology. We will seek partnerships
based on those values. We will seek alliances based
on cooperation and reciprocity. We will hold our own
partners in the Afghan Government to account for
implementing the reforms and taking the steps necessary
to lay the foundation for a comprehensive peace. That
is our contribution to finding a political solution in
Afghanistan. We share the world's impatience to end
the conflict there. But that impatience can be an asset,
if it is directed towards renewed efforts to bring peace
to the people of Afghanistan.

