Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to apologize to the Security Council
for asking for the floor at this late hour.

I did not really want to deviate from the topic under
discussion. However, the representative of the Syrian
delegation referred to Kuwait more than once, and
presented some documents that are merely newspaper
articles. The objective is clear - to attack Kuwait in an
attempt to characterize the crisis in Syria as a terrorist
crisis. The representative maintains that the main
reason for the crisis in Syria is terrorism. However, it
was not at all a terrorist crisis at the beginning.

The little clips that he presented, such as those
published in Kuwaiti newspapers or the article in
the New York Times, were all published in 2012 or
2013. He likes to refer to clippings of such articles
in every meeting. I wonder why my colleague the
Syrian representative enjoys repeating what has been
published in newspapers. I would have preferred him
to talk about Kuwait's formal position so that we could
respond, instead of referring to announcements made
by individuals seven years ago and attempting, in one
way or another, to link the Kuwaiti Government with
terrorism. He claimed at last meeting (see S/PV.8609)
that he is attached to the Government of Kuwait more
than I am, but it is clear that the main objective is to
defame Kuwait.

I have already responded to the information on
terrorists and individuals he brought up from 2012
and 2013. I said that if Ambassador Ja'afari has any
proof or evidence, he should bring it forward. Why has
the Government of Syria not provided those documents,
if they were reliable, to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)? If such individuals
are terrorists and have committed gross violations,
such as genocide or crimes against humanity, he can
present the evidence to the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, established
by the General Assembly. Such documents can always
be presented to that well-known Mechanism so that
everyone who has committed a crime in Syria can be
held accountable.

We are among those countries that adopted
General Assembly resolution 71/248, establishing the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
so as to ensure that people are held accountable for
crimes they commit in Syria. However, Syria rejected
that Mechanism that is now functional. It is therefore
up to Ambassador Ja'afari to present any evidence he
wants. As I said last time, I wish that he would refer to
United Nations documents and not just press cuttings
that are not wholly accurate. At times, the New York
Times publishes articles in favour of Syria, but in many
instances it publishes articles that are critical of the
Government of Syria. I do not want to address these
articles. We always rely on statements issued by the
United Nations and its various organs, in particular
concerning the gross violations committed in the various
governorates of Syria. Crimes have been documented
that have been confirmed by satellite images. There are
documents and witnesses; they cannot be challenged.
Therefore, we would like Ambassador Ja'afari to rely
on such documents. If there is an individual or group
ofpeople who he thinks have committed crimes against
the people of Syria, he should present evidence to the
sanctions committee or to the Mechanism, which his
country voted against it.

Ambassador Ja'afari criticized the penholders at
length from the beginning of his statement. He claimed
that Israeli aggression was not under the spotlight. We
constantly condemn Israeli aggression against Syria and
underscore the security, sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria. When the United States
endorsed the sovereignty of Israel over the Golan, we
were among the countries that called for discussions
here at the Security Council and for the adoption of
a draft resolution pertaining to this issue. However,
Syria opposed this request and did not want us to come
to the Security Council. Members did not want us to
come to the Security Council in order to present a draft
resolution that would have condemned the sovereignty
of Israel over the Golan.

