Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today to consider the
deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory. The situation has reached such a low that it
has become impossible for the Security Council - the
conscience of the international community and the
voice of international legitimacy - to remain silent
with regard to what is happening.

The bombing, violence, destruction and death
which the Palestinian people are living through in the
West Bank and Gaza, the siege imposed on the
legitimate leadership of the Palestinian people, the
flagrant violent acts to which thousands of Palestinian
civilians are exposed daily, the victims, killed and
injured, are all due to the Israeli Government's belief
that violence and repression alone are capable of
suppressing the Palestinian people's legitimate rights to
self-determination; that the Israeli occupation of

S/PV.4478

 

Palestinian and Arab territories can continue; that the
popular rising of the intifada seen in Palestine during
the last 18 months can be put down by brute military
force; and that violence can be perpetrated against
innocent and unarmed Palestinians.

Peace in the Middle East cannot be permanent
except through the full implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and the complete
withdrawal from occupied Arab territories and the
respect for the principle of land-for-peace according to
the concept established in the Madrid Conference of
1991.

Bringing about a permanent peace in the Middle
East requires recognition of the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and the establishment of
an independent, Viable and secure Palestinian State on
the occupied territory in the West Bank and Gaza, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

Security cannot be the monopoly of one party. It
should be equitable for both Palestinians and Israelis at
the same time, so that both Palestinians and Israeli
citizens can sleep at night in security and peace. The
destruction of Palestinian institutions and the killing of
Palestinian leaders and citizens will not halt the spiral
of violence in the Middle East. The destruction of the
Palestinian economy and infrastructure in the occupied
Palestinian territories will not end the will of the
Palestinian people to continue their struggle.

Therefore, the Security Council faces a real
challenge today - a challenge to the credibility of the
international community's conscience, its capacity for
fact-finding in the Palestinian territory and its ability to
intervene to end the flagrant violence perpetrated by
the Israeli occupying forces.

The whole Middle East is aspiring to a permanent
and comprehensive peace. For this peace to be
achieved and to be permanent, Egypt stresses the need
for the following elements. The first is a full Israeli
withdrawal from Palestinian and other Arab territories
occupied after 5 June 1967. Secondly, the Palestinians
should be given the right to self-determination and the
establishment of their own independent and viable
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Thirdly, there
should be mutual recognition of the right to security of
all the peoples and States of the Middle East through
agreed arrangements that are equitable for all parties.
Fourthly, good-neighbourly relations and constructive
cooperation among all people and States of the region
should be established in all areas.

These final and just objectives for a satisfactory
settlement should be acceptable to all parties. We are
fully confident that the Palestinian and Arab parties
have adopted such an approach in all the stances and
positions they have taken since the Madrid summit of
1991.
What is left to be done is that the Israeli side
should also announce its adoption of this approach.
Any attempt to implement the final objectives in a
conflict that has lasted for more than 100 years
requires the return of the parties to the negotiating
table. They also need to consider how to implement
these objectives pragmatically.

This naturally leads us to demand once again a
halt to all armed confrontation and the start of
implementation of the Mitchell recommendations and
the Tenet arrangements and all security plans and other
agreements between the two parties in all their aspects.

My country, Egypt, will continue to uphold this
clear vision of how to achieve a just and
comprehensive settlement to this conflict. It will
continue to uphold its obligation to work seriously and
constructively in order to effectively contribute to
bringing about this noble objective - a comprehensive
and just peace for all the peoples and States of the
region.

