Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): I thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel,
Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, for her briefing on
the progress towards implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. I also wish to
commend the United Nations Office for West Africa for
its dedicated efforts in the region.

It is encouraging that the United Nations, as well as
the African Union (AU) and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), has developed
integrated strategies addressing the multiple challenges
of the Sahel. These strategies must be operationalized
in a coordinated manner to ensure the most effective
impact on the security, governance and resilience
of countries in the Sahel region. Strengthening
coordination and increasing collaboration with and
among the countries of the region as well as among
different stakeholders remains key. The third meeting
of the Ministerial Coordination Platform, held on
18 November in Bamako, was another positive step in
that regard.

For its part, the European Union (EU) is actively
engaging in the Sahel and, in view of the significant
developments in recent months, is updating its strategic
approach. Considerable EU efforts are focused on
strengthening security sector reform, via, namely,
the European Union Training Mission (EUTM) to
contribute to the training of the Malian Armed Forces,
and the civilian missions - the EU Capacity Building
Mission (EUCAP) Sahel in the Niger and the recently
deployed EUCAP Sahel in Mali. As part of the EUTM,
my country continues to contribute to these efforts.

Since last June, when Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Sellassie first briefed the Council
(S/PV.7203), we have witnessed further deterioration
of the political, security and humanitarian situation
in the Sahel region. Humanitarian and development
challenges, as well as adverse effects of climate change
and the threat of an Ebola outbreak, pose significant
threats. Over 24 million people face food insecurity,
6 million children are malnourished and at least
3.3 million are displaced. The unemployment rates
are high and people, especially youth, are at risk of
being recruited by terrorist groups. The circulation of
and much too easy access to illicit arms compounds
continuing violence, disrupting and damaging civilian
lives and fuelling human rights violations.

The scourge of terrorism remains a major threat
across the Sahel. Weak governance, porous borders,
cross-border organized crime and the spread of terrorist
groups, notably Boko Haram, are the very acute
challenges that could further destabilize the situation
in the region. The recent attacks at Kano Central
Mosque in Nigeria left scores of innocent civilians
dead or injured. During the past months, terrorist
attacks throughout northern Mali have also claimed
lives, including those of United Nations peacekeepers.
As activities of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and
other Sahel terrorist groups are increasingly financed
by drug dealing and smuggling, the nexus of drug
trafficking and terrorism in the Sahel is an increasingly
disturbing trend.

The foregoing are huge challenges for the region,
requiring complex, well-coordinated responses and
consistent engagement of regional and subregional
organizations, the United Nations and the international
community at large. In particular, further enhancement
of cooperation and coordination of intelligence
and information sharing, reinforcement of existing
mechanisms, in particular the Sahel Fusion and Liaison
Unit, and regular meetings of the heads of intelligence
and security services in the countries of the Sahelo-
Saharan region play a key role in stepping up efforts to
counter the spread of the threat of terrorism.

It is essential that the United Nations counter-
terrorism machinery, in combination with the efforts of
other relevant international organizations, continue its
focused and needs-based assistance to countries in the
region. It is also important that the countries ofthe Sahel
region increase their individual and collective efforts
against cross-border security threats, including by
strengthening border controls and curbing the flows of
arms, as well as the movement of illegal armed groups,
across the region. We welcome the commitment of the
African Union and regional partners to strengthening
relevant mechanisms, including the Nouakchott Process
on security cooperation across the Sahel and the efforts
of the Group of Five Sahel.

The crisis in Mali affects the whole Sahel and can
be resolved only through a comprehensive, inclusive
and transparent peace process. It is regrettable that
the ongoing negotiations in Algiers have not yet
concluded in a sustainable peace agreement. Further
delay of such an agreement will only exacerbate the
security situation in northern Mali and, eventually, the
region. The United Nations, regional mediators and the
international community should send a strong message
of expectation that the Algiers process should lead to
durable peace, within the agreed parameters and with
full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Mali.

As the situation in Libya remains dire, enhanced
efforts should be focused on finding a political solution,
bringing all parties to the negotiation table and putting
an end to the bloodshed and division in the country.
Absent the progress on the political and security
tracks, Libya risks becoming just another hotbed of
radical extremism and terrorism, with most serious
consequences for the entire region.

My delegation commends the joint efforts of the
United Nations, the AU and ECOWAS in Burkina
Faso, which led to the signing of a charter for the
transition and appointment of the civilian President of
the Transition in Burkina Faso. We will remain vigilant
on the political situation in the country and on the
transition leading to the elections in November 2015.

An implementation plan of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel with a focus on
governance, security and resilience has been developed.
It is now essential to ensure its swift implementation
through coherent and systematic activities on the
ground and the delivery of tangible results that ensure
the genuine sustainable development of the region and
benefit all its people.

