Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, sir, on your assumption to the
presidency of the Security Council this month. The
delegation of Brazil is confident that your presidency
will be successful and is willing to assist you
throughout this period. I thank you for the words of
welcome that you and all delegations addressed to the
newly elected members of the Council.

I would also like to thank you for your second
oral assessment, as chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267(1999), and encourage you and the Committee to
pursue your work this year with the same dedication as
that shown in 2003.

International terrorism remains a major threat to
international peace and security, and despite serious
efforts, Brazil believes that the menace presented by Al
Qaeda, the Taliban and its associates continues to be
one of the most evident manifestations of this. Even
when the commission of acts of terrorism is avoided,
recent measures affecting international travel are a
clear reminder of how this constant affliction impacts
the daily lives of us all. The repudiation of terrorism
contained in the Brazilian Constitution is one of the
guiding principles for our country's international
relations. Brazil's participation in the work of the
Council will faithfully reflect this constitutional
provision.

The work of the 1267 Committee is fundamental
to countering the peril we are facing by gathering
information that might lead to the development of
strategies and mechanisms that could reduce and,
ideally, eliminate this scourge. It is unfortunate to note,
however, that less than fifty per cent of the Members of
the Organization have presented reports on the
implementation of the relevant sanctions. A careful
assessment of the reasons for this lack of conformity
should be made, so that its causes can be corrected and
redressed. Measures to encourage greater conformity
must be studied and included in the resolution that we
should be adopting by the end of the week.

Your missions, Mr. President, as Chairman of the
Committee, and those carried out by the Monitoring
Group to selected countries are useful tools for
gathering information regarding the implementation of
the sanctions on the ground. They also permit direct
contact with high-level officials in charge of the
application of the measures, which raises awareness
about them in the countries in question, and allows the
Chairman to receive, firsthand, expressions of concern
regarding the difficulties in applying certain aspects of
the sanctions. The practice of carrying out missions to
Member States should certainly be continued this year.

Brazil was an elected member of the Council
when resolution 1267 (1999) was adopted, back in
1999. Various additional resolutions relating to these
sanctions, approved since then, reflect the Council's
awareness of the need to update the tools designed to
fight terrorism. The 1267 Committee has become a
singular instrument of the Council, with little in
common with the traditional sanctions system adopted
by the Council over the years as a measure of last
resort.

The very nature of the 1267 sanctions regime has
led to difficulties in the implementation of the
sanctions that go beyond the aforementioned lack of
consistency in reporting. Some of these have been
highlighted in your presentation: the possible conflict
between the sanctions regime and basic international
human rights standards, such as due process; the
difficulty in implementing the freezing of non-financial
assets; the resurfacing of listed entities under new
names; the use of charitable institutions as fronts for
the financing of terrorist activities and the necessity of
preserving legitimate charitable institutions from
controls intended to target false charities; and the
necessity of providing legitimate alternatives for
traditional users of alternate remittance systems. All
those aspects constitute hindrances to attaining the
objectives envisaged.

Those questions and others will have to be
addressed in the timely improvement of "the measures
imposed", as proposed in resolution 1455 (2003). Full
consideration of the global nature of the struggle
against terrorism, and of the need to capitalize on the
international community's unity of purpose in that
fight, must be maintained as a main objective during
this effort.

In that context, the announced commitment to
continue to promote efforts aimed at ensuring
transparency in the Committee is a step in the right
direction. Initiatives to improve cooperation with
international organizations - such as Interpol - are
also a potentially advantageous path to be explored. In
addition, efforts to increase and enhance cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee, as well as with
other United Nations organs involved in the fight
against terrorism, should be continued. That is
especially relevant because measures to address
shortcomings identified in the Committee's structure
are being studied at this very moment.

As we consider ways and means to improve the
measures imposed by the 1267 Committee, three
essential considerations, in our view, must be kept at
the forefront. The first is that, given the transnational
nature of the terrorist threat, cooperation among the
entire international community is an indispensable
component of success in this struggle. Secondly, it is
fundamental to ensure that measures adopted to fight
terrorism are in conformity with international law and
with the commitments undertaken by Member States in
that regard.

Finally, while terrorism is certainly a scourge, it
must be understood that security-related measures
alone will not enable us to prevail in the fight against
terror. As the Secretary-General aptly put it at the
opening of the general debate of the General Assembly:

"a world in which many millions of people
endure brutal oppression and extreme misery will
never be fully secure, even for its most privileged
inhabitants". (A/58/PV.7, p. 3)

The Council may not be the ideal body in which to
address several of those afflictions of mankind, but it
should be aware of the relationship between the threat
represented by international terrorism and the living
conditions of a great part of mankind if we are to win
this war on terrorism.

