Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor and
for allowing us to participate in this important meeting.
I would also like to reaffirm our joy at the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA), whose mission charges it
with maintaining security in the Abyei Area, which it
does in an excellent mannder. I should therefore like to
express our thanks and appreciation to the sister country
of Ethiopia and to its Government for performing that
duty.

Unfortunately, what we have heard from the
representative of the State of South Sudan goes against
the very spirit that currently prevails between our two
countries. My brother representative speaks of a reality
that is entirely removed from the spirit of cooperation
and solidarity that exists between the Presidents of our
two countries, the Sudan and South Sudan. The reality
is that everyone is working constantly to normalize
relations in order to open borders and facilitate the
movement of citizens and trade. Unfortunately, what we
have just heard rings with echoes of war and a culture
of war that refers to events already far back in history.

That leads me to wonder whether we are in the
Council as representatives of our States, of our narrow
regions according to our national affiliations, or of our
wider affiliations, interests and demands? The answer
is that we are here to defend our national interests - the
interests of the Sudan in its entirety, from the far North
to the far South, and the interests of South Sudan, from
its far North to its far South. What we have heard today,
however, speaks of narrow and, unfortunately, personal
interests that are not in tune with the reality that exists
between our two countries.

We all know that the region of Abyei, as per the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and its clear and
indisputable provisions, is part of the Sudan and will
remain so until its final status is decided. Therefore,
the use of such terminology as "aggression" and
"occupation" is technically incorrect. I would therefore
ask my colleague, the representative of the State of
South Sudan, not to use them, especially since he is
an experienced diplomat. The terms "occupation" and
"aggression" are incorrect because the Abyei region is
part of the Republic of the Sudan, whereas occupation
usually occurs when foreign forces invade and occupy
a certain area that does not belong to them.

We are completely committed to the provisions
of the Abyei Protocol requiring the holding of a
regional referendum to determine its fate as belonging
either to the Sudan or to South Sudan. However, it
would be unacceptable for the referendum to be held
unilaterally - which the Council, the African Union
and the Presidents of both countries have rejected - and
even more so when it is called for from a singular,
personal perspective. It undermines the security and
stability of the region, the Sudan and South Sudan. It
also sets back the normalization of relations that we
seek, that is now at hand and that is being improved and
developed on a daily basis.

We support the provisions of resolution 2126
(2013) extending the UNISFA mandate because we
believe that the continued delay in establishing and
building the temporary administrative institutions
and arrangements in Abyei is exacerbating tensions in
the region. We are ready to agree immediately, today,
to the formation of such temporary administrative
mechanisms and arrangements. Those who are hesitant
to set up those mechanisms must be encouraged to
move forward towards their establishment so that they
can pave the way for the two Presidents to agree on the
final status. Those are the agreements that have been
reached and signed between the two countries.

We strongly support the resolution just adopted,
in which the Security Council expresses its concern
with regard to the Ngok Dinka decision to hold a
unilateral referendum, which would run counter to all
signed agreements between the two countries and the
two Presidents and has been rejected by the Security
Council and the African Union.

In conclusion, we need wisdom and self-restraint.
We do not need to add fuel to the fire or to propagate
a culture of war. What we need from the Security
Council is support for the efforts of the two Presidents.
Those efforts are making progress on a daily basis and
upholding the interests of both countries. We do not
need to take a path that undermines those agreements
and could lead to war and conflict.

