Mr. Inderfurth (United States): I shall begin by
welcoming the Permanent Representative of Rwanda to
the United Nations to the Council's deliberations, and
express our appreciation for his statement here today. It
is good to see him again in the Council Chamber.

 

Today the United Nations peace-keeping operation in
Rwanda draws to a close. Tomorrow the United Nations
begins a new era of relations with the Government of
Rwanda, a relationship founded on mutual respect for
human rights and a mutual commitment to peace.

When the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda (UNAMIR) was created, it was to oversee a peace
agreement, the Arusha Accords. However, the former
Rwandese government did not honour the Arusha Accords:
instead, Rwanda spiralled downward into the worst
genocide in Africa.
Rwanda has not fully recovered from that genocide.
Indeed, it will take years for that to happen, especially for
Rwanda's children. An article in today's New York Times,
by Barbara Crossette, is instructive in this regard. It is
entitled

"U.N. Assesses Psychic Scars Left on Rwandan
Children by Killings."

The article reports on a survey conducted by the United
Nations Children's Fund of 3,000 Rwandan children who
witnessed violence up close, more than a quarter of whom
saw parents or other family members killed, many of them
beaten or hacked to death with machetes. As the Times
reports, no aspect of the war left children untouched, and
experts say that to heal the deep psychological wounds,
Rwanda's children will need some sense of community and
a taste of normal life. It is my Government's hope that, as
we enter the post-UNAMIR period, the international
community and the United Nations will be able to help
contribute to the sense of community and normalcy that is
so desperately needed by Rwanda's children.

Despite formidable obstacles, the Government of
Rwanda has made great progress in bringing peace and
security to its country. UNAMIR has made a significant
contribution to that progress. The international community
must continue to help with the hard tasks ahead. The
resolution lays a solid foundation for continuing cooperation
between the United Nations and Rwanda in a new form.
After UNAMIR departs, the United Nations will maintain
a political office in Rwanda headed by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The Special
Representative will have the authority to coordinate United
Nations agencies that will be involved in reconstruction and
development activities, and will play an active role to
promote national reconciliation. We hope that the Special
Representative will vigorously exercise his authority to head
the United Nations programme in Rwanda.

There cannot be long-lasting peace and stability for
Rwanda - indeed for the entire region - unless the
1.7 million Rwandan refugees return to Rwanda. The
Special Representative should encourage repatriation as
one of his highest priorities as he coordinates the work of
all United Nations agencies in Rwanda, including the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the United Nations Development
Programme.

Human rights monitors have played an important
role in maintaining international confidence in the
protection of human rights in Rwanda. It is a significant
sign of the commitment of the Government of Rwanda to
human rights that it not only accepts human rights
monitors in Rwanda, but that it welcomes them and has
asked them to stay. This decision is concrete evidence in
support of the Government's public statements that it
wants all Rwandans to return home.

Rwanda's needs are many. One of them is for
justice. We must ensure that sufficient resources are
available to the International Tribunal for Rwanda so that
it can accomplish its difficult task with as much speed as
justice permits. The Tribunal will need additional funds
to provide United Nations security guards for its
personnel. We welcome the agreement of the Government
of Rwanda to allow UNAMIR forces to continue to
provide this security during the period of withdrawal. The
thousands of prisoners in Rwanda's jails must also receive
speedy trials.

We also note the important work of the Commission
of Inquiry to investigate reports of the sale or supply of
arms to former Rwandan government forces. The
Commission has been doing excellent work and is also
fulfilling an important deterrent function, but the
Commission has not had the benefit of full cooperation
from all Rwanda's neighbours. We call on all States to
offer the Commission their fullest support.

As the UNAMIR mandate expires and the draw-
down of personnel enters its final phase, we note that
differences remain between the Secretariat and the
Government of Rwanda concerning the disposition of
equipment, and concerning financing. We urge them to
resolve those differences as soon as possible on a
mutually satisfactory basis so that they will not interfere
with the work of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative and his political office as the new
relationship of the United Nations and the Government of

 

Rwanda begins. The new relationship should start off on
the right foot for all concerned.

Today's resolution marks an important, positive step
in the journey of the Rwandan people out of the abyss of
genocide. The international community is replacing soldiers
with teachers and trainers to help with the new challenges.
The new United Nations political office is a symbol both of
how far the Rwandan people have come and of our
commitment to help them go the rest of the way. We look
forward to a future when all the Rwandan people live
together in peace.

Lastly, on behalf of the United States Government, I
would like to pay a tribute to all the United Nations
personnel who have served in UNAMIR, under difficult and
at times dangerous conditions, and especially the leadership
provided by the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Mr. Shaharyar Khan, and the gallantry of the Force
Commanders, two brave soldiers of Canada, General
Romeo Dallaire and General Guy T ousignant.

