Mr. Bishnoi (India): Mr. President, we congratulate
you on your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and we thank you, Sir, for personally
presiding over this open debate on "Peace operations:
The United Nations-African Union partnership and its
evolution". We also thank the Secretary-General and
President Pierre Buyoya, High Representative of the
African Union for Mali and the Sahel, for their remarks.

At the outset, we join the Secretary-General and
other speakers in condemning in the strongest possible
terms the horrific attack on innocent school children in
Pakistan. We cannot but feel a sense of deep revulsion
and horror. Our hearts go out to the grief-stricken
families of the innocent children killed or injured in
this barbaric attack.

Our relationship with Africa is rooted in history.
It goes back even to long before our common struggle
against colonialism. With a strong political foundation,
it has over the past many decades also acquired a
vibrant economic dimension. At the same time, India
is the largest overall contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Having sent more than
170,000 Indian troops to 43 of the 69 United Nations
peacekeeping operations mandated so far, we have
considerable experience in the field. We therefore feel
we are well placed to comment on the subject at hand.

We recognize the role of regional organizations,
particularly the African Union (AU), in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We also support the
strengthening of cooperationbetween the UnitedNations
and African Union for the enhanced effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations. At the same time, we also
need to emphasize that, while regional arrangements
can play an appropriate role in assisting the United
Nations in maintaining peace, the primacy of the
United Nations cannot be denied. The United Nations
cannot disengage with the continent by contracting
peacekeeping to regional arrangements, whose role
must be to reinforce rather than to replace that of the
United Nations. We also need to start worrying if the
impartiality of the United Nations forces is called into
question, which is a possibility that cannot be ruled
out with the regionalization and subregionalization of
peacekeeping.

The concept paper prepared by the presidency
(S/2014/879, annex) usefully draws attention to
the financing of AU peacekeeping operations. It
is undeniable that the provision of sustainable and
predictable financial support is at the core ofthe success
of any peacekeeping operation. The Prodi report
(S/2008/813) recommended an option in which funds
from the United Nations assessed peacekeeping budget
could be used to support United Nations-authorized AU
peacekeeping operations for a period of no longer than
six months, with each decision taken on a case by case
basis, with approval by the Security Council and the
General Assembly, and with the AU mission making
a transition to United Nations management within six
months.

The logic for meeting the expenditure from the
United Nations peacekeeping budget seems clear as
the AU mission is doing only what is required to be
done by the United Nations and is so doing because
the United Nations has requested it to do so because it
does not itself have the capacity for doing so rapidly.
Our recommendation would therefore be for the
Security Council to request the Secretary-General
to draw up a road map for the implementation of
the recommendations of the Prodi panel. However,
it may be fruitless for us to express our views if the
Council adopts an outcome document - as it has done
today - before opening the floor to non-members of
the Council. While we greatly appreciate the tradition
of open debates, we cannot but question the utility of
this practice of hurriedly adopting outcomes.

We have closely perused the recommendation
given in the section of the concept paper that deals with
managing mission transitions. These recommendations
deserve serious consideration. Also important, however,
is the very useful contribution to this objective already
made by the strengthening ofthe United Nations Office
to the African Union in Addis Ababa. The strengthening
of that Office has helped to smooth transitions, which
is an example of how simple actions on the ground can
yield disproportionately significant benefits.

Enhancing collaboration between the African
Union Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council is another area that could, in our View, benefit
from simple actions on the ground, rather than anything
more grandiose. We note the suggestion that elected
African members of the Security Council should be
provided with special observer status in the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union. It would,
however, be beyond the remit of this Council to make
any recommendation on the manner in which an AU
institution should be structured.

In conclusion, we would like to commend the
African Union for its cooperation with the Security
Council. We also take this opportunity to urge both
organizations to further strengthen their cooperation
with the objective of maintaining of international peace
and security.

