Mr. Koudougou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): We should like at the outset to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing following his visit to
Myanmar, the second of its kind within a year, to better
see first-hand the development of the socio-political
and humanitarian situation on the ground and to jump-
start the reconciliation and democratization process.
We also thank the Permanent Representative of
Myanmar for his statement.

We welcome the Secretary-General's meeting
with the main political and national actors, particularly
General Than Shwe, and development partners,
including the diplomatic corps and non-governmental
organizations. However, we regret that it was not
possible for him to meet with the opposition leader
Aung San Suu Kyi.

In the political area, we should like to urge the
Government of Myanmar to continue the release of
political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi, to
establish ongoing dialogue with all political actors, and
to create an environment conducive to the holding of
pluralistic, free and transparent elections in 2010,
which is a necessary element for the return of lasting
stability, peace and development to the country.

Given the importance of the elections, we should
like to emphasize that it will be essential to adopt in
the near future appropriate legislation establishing a
competent structure for organizing and managing the
elections and, when the time comes, to accept the
assistance of the international community, in particular
the United Nations. We are encouraged by the
commitment of Myanmar's authorities in that regard,
as expressed earlier by the Permanent Representative
of Myanmar.

In the humanitarian area, my delegation
welcomes the meeting between the Secretary-General
and the Tripartite Core Group, which is responsible for
rebuilding the areas devastated by Cyclone Nargis. We
welcome the progress made in the Ayeyarwaddy Delta
and, given the challenges yet to be addressed, we
request the Government to further facilitate
humanitarian access to those areas so that the
population can receive the assistance needed to
improve their living conditions.

We call on the Government to facilitate the
establishment of the national economic forum by
focusing on priority sectors, such as agriculture and
income-producing activities, that could improve the
population's living conditions. We should like to
encourage the armed groups that have chosen to
observe the ceasefire to honour their obligations,
including the cessation of all recruitment and use of
children, and we urge other groups that have not yet
done so to join the process.

My delegation would like to recall that the path
towards national reconciliation, peace and lasting
development is long and requires the firm and
substantial commitment of all national actors and the
assistance of the international community. That is why
we call on the Government to take all appropriate
measures to find a lasting consensus solution to the
concerns expressed by the Secretary-General.
Ultimately, it is primarily up to the people of Myanmar
as a whole to overcome the obstacles to building a
prosperous nation.

In conclusion, we reiterate our thanks and
encouragement to the Secretary-General and his
Special Adviser for their efforts to help Myanmar
emerge from the impasse. We also call on the other
countries of the region, particularly the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, to maintain their spirit of
solidarity towards Myanmar.

