Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Mr. President, let me start
by saying that it is an honour for me to participate in this
debate under your distinguished presidency.

Expectations were high when the Dayton Peace
Agreement was reached two years ago. Here and there, they
might have been too high, which has caused frustration and
impatience in many quarters. Against this background, it is
important not to lose sight of what has actually been
achieved.

After the success of military implementation, we
have witnessed the establishment of a collective
presidency and a Council of Ministers. We have seen
increased freedom of movement, economic revival in
certain areas and progress in the field of arms control and
confidence- and security-building measures. The media
situation has improved. Three major elections have been
held - parliamentary in September 1996, local elections
in September 1997 and, most recently, special elections in
the Republika Srpska. In phases, the election processes
have increased the possibilities of advancing the civilian
implementation of the peace accords. Of particular
importance is also the recent increase in the number of
indictees held in custody by the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.

Although far from sufficient, recent developments
have at least opened the perspective of a viable future for
hundreds of thousands of individuals, and paved the way
for further progress. In Bosnia and Herzegovina today,
islands of normality do exist, both in political and civic
life.

This progress is mainly due to the improved
coordination of the international community's efforts, with
guidance from the High Representative, the Contact
Group, the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council and the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

As regards the United Nations Mission, I want to
pay a special tribute to Mr. Kai Eide, under whose skilful
leadership the Mission has effectively carried out its
mandate. I would particularly like to highlight its
successful programmes for reform and restructuring of the
local police, both in the Federation and more recently in
Republika Srpska. The close cooperation and efficient
distribution of responsibilities between the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) and the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) should also be mentioned. By extending the
mandate of the United Nations Mission, including the
IPTF, the Security Council will send a clear signal of its
continued commitment to peace implementation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

When looking at the progress in peace
implementation, due respect should also be given, of
course, to the thousands of initiatives and decisions taken
by individuals and non-governmental organizations in

 

Bosnia and Herzegovina. Together, they have demonstrated
that there does indeed still exist a Bosnian identity,
transcending ethnic lines.

Unfortunately, the contribution to the process by the
leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina has so far not been
convincing. It is disappointing that many of the key issues
are still unresolved, mainly because the political leaders
stick to old nationalistic approaches.

From the very outset of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Sweden has stressed the importance of having a long-term
perspective of its implementation. After so many months of
suffering and destruction, it does take time to rebuild
confidence and acceptance among ethnic groups to live
together again.

Although that long-term perspective cannot at all times
be expressed in binding resolutions, Sweden is satisfied
that, in practice, the international community increasingly
acts with this perspective in mind. The determination that
was expressed through the Bonn declaration last week is a
clear indication of this. Among the tasks ahead is to ensure
that the elections in September 1998 will be free and fair.
The issues of freedom of movement and functioning
nationwide communications have to be moved forward. In
this connection, continued demining activities and removal
of illegal checkpoints are of major importance.

Like the High Representative, Sweden believes that
efforts in 1998 should be focused on free media and on a
democratically controlled police. It is also essential to
enable refugees and displaced persons to return to their
homes, including those in so-called minority areas. The
success of refugee return during 1998 will be crucial for the
whole reconciliation process. Of particular importance is the
call, at Bonn, for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to introduce a
regional approach for refugee return, covering Croatia and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as well. In this context,
we noted with satisfaction the declaration in Geneva
yesterday by the representative of the Republika Srpska that

"all spontaneous minority returns from asylum
countries as well as from the Federation are
supported".
I am convinced that when this is put into practice it will
trigger similar movements elsewhere in the region.

The setting up of functioning common institutions as
well as the adoption and implementation of key pieces of
legislation are already overdue. These matters need to be
addressed fully and without further delay.

Last, but certainly not least, the indicted war
criminals have to be brought to the Tribunal in The
Hague. It is increasingly disturbing that some of them are
allowed to continue to exercise decisive control over
political life in Pale.

The time has not yet come to relax the international
involvement in securing the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. My country is committed to continuing its
full support for the peace process in Bosnia and in the
region at large. We remain convinced, however, that the
success of all our efforts in the civilian implementation,
including through the IPTF, is contingent upon the
continued existence of a credible international military
force in Bosnia. Sweden is prepared to continue to
contribute to such a force after SFOR, provided that it is
still United Nations-mandated, led by the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) and with United States
participation on the ground. In this context, we warmly
welcome the statement made today by the President of the
United States, Mr. William Clinton.

