Mr. Riveros (Chile): We, too, wish to express our
gratitude for the initiative of convening this meeting,
given the relevance of the issue that we are addressing
here today.

On behalf of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Chile, Heraldo Munoz, and of our Government, I am
here to cast a clear vote of solidarity with Iraq and to
send a message of encouragement to the Administration
of Prime Minister Al-Abadi, who has shouldered the
crucial task of defending the integrity of his State. He
is called upon to preserve not only its freedoms but also
the ethnic, religious and cultural diversity that has for
millennia been one of its characteristics.

Chile has expressed its strongest condemnation
of the barbaric methods used by the self-styled
Islamic State to impose its violent, Manichean vision
of the religion of peace and tolerance that is Islam.
Its disregard for life, for freedom of religion and, in
general, for the fundamental norms of civilization such
as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
calls for a forceful but legitimate response from the
international community. Such response should come
from this body, whose task it is to maintain international
peace and security, in accordance with the Charter of
our Organization and international law.

Iraq has always been a central power in the Middle
East. Its territorial integrity and democratic viability
are prerequisites for regional stability and international
peace and security. That requires scrupulous respect
for the constitutional and civil rights of the ethnic and
religious communities that make up its social fabric.

Democratic governance in Iraq requires a
Government of national unity that implements
genuinely inclusive policies and presents a united front
against terrorism and intolerance. That is the main task
to be undertaken by the new Government, and it has our
full support in that respect.

The United Nations has a duty to assist Iraq in this
endeavour by putting behind its people the full weight
of the collective security actions legitimized by the
Charter and adopted by its membership, represented for
this purpose by the Security Council, in keeping with
Article 25 of the Charter.

Resolution 2170 (2014), which we unanimously
adopted in August under Chapter VII and which Chile
co-sponsored, is another step towards the consolidation
of the counter-terrorism architecture of the multilateral
system, as it provides a clear impetus for international
efforts in the fight against terrorism, in particular in
the Middle East, by putting into place new measures to
deal with terrorist groups that are seriously affecting
the security of the region.

Another part of that counter-terrorism architecture
will be the draft resolution on foreign terrorist fighters
to be discussed and adopted by this body on Wednesday,
24 September, at a special meeting at the level of Heads
of State and Government.

The solidarity of the international community must
include an effective humanitarian dimension in order
to assist peoples affected by terrorism and violence.
It is also vital to continue implementing the sanctions
regime established by resolution 1267 (1999) against
Al-Qaida and the Taliban strictly and diligently.

Chile reiterates that it is essential that any collective
action against the Islamic State be sanctioned through
the legitimacy conferred by conformity to the Charter
of the United Nations. We must act together, and
hopefully with the Council's unanimous backing, so
that the counter-terrorism efforts can rely on the firm
support of world opinion. Such legitimacy will allow
Iraq to integrate more smoothly into a regional and
global community that needs it as a privileged partner,
in order to restore peace and security in a region
that has too long been battered by war, barbarity and
oppression.

