Mr. Carmon (Israel): I would like to thank the
members of the Security Council for their patience. I
would like for a moment to briefly clarify for the
record an important factual matter referred to earlier
today. However, I wish first to underscore that my
delegation values the time and patience of the members
of the Council. As such, we will not respond to the
aggressive and offensive anti-Israel rhetoric used by
the representatives of some Member States, in
particular - and not surprisingly so - that of the
representatives of Syria and Iran. That rhetoric was
offensive not only to Israel, but also to the Security
Council.

The matter I would like to raise is one of facts
and substance. In that connection, I am referring in
particular to the respectable Lebanese Ambassador's
statement earlier today, where he referred to Israel's
refusal - in the context of the Secretary-General's
appointment of a facilitator in the matter of the
abducted Israeli soldiers - to

"solve the long-standing issue of the Lebanese
detainees who have been ageing in Israeli prisons
for decades". (S/PV.5736, (Resumption Z))

First, those detainees are not innocent bystanders
languishing in Israeli prisons; rather, they are
murderous terrorists with blood on their hands who
have very cruelly and unjustly taken the lives of
innocent Israelis in terror attacks over the years.
Indeed, one of those terrorists is Samir Kuntar, who in
1979 landed a rubber boat off the coast of Nahariya, a
city on the northern coast of Israel, and carried out a
vicious terror attack on the Haran family. Samir Kuntar
shot the father, Danny Haran, in the head, and smashed
the daughter's head with his rifle. The mother of the
family, Smadar Haran, who was hiding under a
crawlspace with her infant daughter, smothered her
baby while trying to keep her quiet and save their lives.

Men like Samir Kuntar are not simple prison
detainees; they are murderous terrorists who, if not in a
prison cell, would continue to intimidate, maim and
murder Israelis. Full-fledged due process of law was
carried out. Samir Kuntar and the others in the group
were lawfully accused and convicted for their crimes.

Secondly, for a good reason, resolution 1701
(2006), as well as the report (S/2007/392) of the
Secretary-General on its implementation, do not make
an equation between the abducted Israeli soldiers and
Hizbollah terrorists. In fact, those terrorists are in good
condition and receive the appropriate care reserved for
detainees as a consequence of war. They have also
been accorded standard due process. That includes
visits by the Red Cross and other agencies, appropriate
medical care, contacts with their families and so on.
Yet, nothing is known of the abducted Israeli soldiers
Eldad Regev and Ehud Goldwasser. It is therefore
baffling that a respected ambassador could even
insinuate a comparison between the terrorist criminals
serving their terms in an Israeli prison and the
abducted Israeli soldiers, whose conditions and
whereabouts are unknown. There can be no equation of
the plight of the Israeli soldiers kidnapped by
Hizbollah with that of the terrorists arrested for and
convicted of acts of terror or that of those detained as a
result of the hostilities.

