The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

At the outset, I will make ajoint statement on behalf
of the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004). Following this joint statement, the
Council will hear briefings by the Chairs of those
three Committees.

On behalf of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities;
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism; and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), I have the honour to brief the Security Council
on the cooperation among the three Committees and
their respective Groups of Experts.

The Committees and their Groups of Experts share
a common understanding of the seriousness of the threat
posed by terrorism and the challenges presented by
terrorists and their organizations. This was reiterated in
the eighth report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/ 103)
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da'esh) to international
peace and security and the range of United Nations
efforts in support of Member States in countering
the threat, prepared by the prepared by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, in collaboration with the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism and other United Nations entities
and international organizations.

The Committees and their Groups of Experts also
share an understanding that despite its progressive
military defeat ISIL remains a global organization
with centralized leadership, which continues to
resource and instruct its affiliates within its reduced
ability. Returning and relocating for foreign terrorist
fighters poses a potential threat and requires tailored
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration methods
that are consistent with international law and take into
account gender and age considerations.

Against this background, the Committees continue
to raise awareness among Member States of their
obligations with regard to effectively implementing
relevant Security Council resolutions, to cooperate
on joint visits and to hold joint committee meetings.
Their Groups of Experts have continued to enhance
their cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations and United Nation bodies,
including within the framework of the newly-
established United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact.

The Committees also continue to augment
information-sharing through joint briefings such as
today's meeting. Since the last joint briefing to the
Council on 3 October 2018 (see S/PV.8364), the 1267
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) conducted two joint informal meetings - in
December 2018 and in February 2019 -to hear briefings
by the United States Department of State and the
Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation. On
26 April 2019, the CTC and the Committees established
pursuant to 1267 (1999) and 1988 (2011) co-organized
a special meeting on the nexus between international
terrorism and transnational organized crime. The
meeting provided an opportunity to address regional
specificities, strategies, responses and lessons learned
in addressing the Committees' linkages as well as the
challenges to strengthening domestic, regional and
international cooperation in this field. The Groups
of Experts of the three Committees maintain regular
contact and continue to share relevant information
where appropriate, discuss matters of common
concern, coordinate action and exchange analysis on
particular issues. The Monitoring Team and CTED
continue to conduct quarterly meetings for coordination
and information exchange.

As requested by the Council in resolution 2396
(2017), on returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters, in February 2019 the CTC held an open
briefing on the Madrid Guiding Principles on foreign
terrorists fights, adopted by the CTC in December
2018. The briefing, which was also attended by the
Monitoring Team, was aimed at raising awareness and
strengthening the understanding of the 17 additional
good practices to assist Member States in their efforts
to respond to the evolving phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters.
As an example of that cooperation, I would like
to highlight the support that the Monitoring Team
and the 1540 Group of Experts jointly provided to
Zimbabwe for the organization of a workshop held
from 10 to 12 October 2018 in Harare. Attended by
representatives of the Government, as well as the
private sector, the workshop contributed to raising
awareness of ISIL (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions and
provided a platform for discussions on the obligations
contained in resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004)
for Member States; the distinctions among resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004); the global
threat assessment and terrorism financing risk in the
eastern and southern Africa region; Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) recommendation 6; and other
important topics.

From 29 to 31 October 2018, the Monitoring
Team participated in a CTED-assessment visit to
the Republic of Mali to monitor and facilitate the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and follow up on the progress made by
Mali in implementing the Committee's 2006 and
2009 visit recommendations. The three Committees
believe that such coordinated activities are important
for strengthening their dialogue with Member States
in order to ensure the implementation of the relevant
United Nations resolutions. The Groups of Experts
of the three Committees plan to continue organizing
similar events in 2019.

The adoption on 28 March of resolution 2462
(2019), on countering the financing of terrorism, laid
the groundwork to further enhance coordination among
our Committees. I would like to particularly welcome
the role that the resolution assigns to CTED and the
Monitoring Team in providing consultation to the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and other stakeholders,
especially on how to enhance coordination with the
aim of delivering integrated technical assistance
on counter-terrorist financing measures, including
assistance that will improve the capacity of Member
States to implement that resolution.

The resolution requests that the CTC and the 1267
Committee hold, within 12 months, a joint special
meeting on terrorist financing threats and trends,
as well as on the implementation of the provisions
of the resolution. It also requests that CTED and the
Monitoring Team prepare, ahead of the joint special
meeting, a report on actions taken by Member States to
disrupt terrorist financing.

Resolution 2462 (2019) comes at a critical
time, and by setting new tasks for the CTC and the
1267 Committee it will help to further enhance our
cooperation. The Committees, through their Groups
of Experts, remain engaged with relevant international
and regional organizations to explore ways to further
strengthen interaction to complement efforts in the
implementation of our mandates.

The Groups of Experts continued to interact with
the Financial Action Task Force, including its regional
bodies: the Middle East and North Africa Financial
Action Task Force, the Eastern and Southern Africa
Anti-Money Laundering Group, the Asia/ Pacific Group
on Money Laundering, the Financial Action Task Force
of Latin America, the Eurasian Group on Combating
Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism and
the Inter-Governmental Task Force against Money-
Laundering in Central Africa. In February, the Experts
attended the FATF plenary and working groups
meetings in Paris to discuss the efforts deployed by
the FATF to monitor and take action against terrorist
financing and countries' progress in addressing their
deficiencies in countering the financing of terrorism
and strategic anti-money-laundering.

In the reporting period, the expert groups continued
to participate in platforms of common interest offered
by regional organizations, such as the Eurasian Group
on Combating Money Laundering and Financing
of Terrorism, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism, INTERPOL, the Anti-Terrorism
Centre of the Commonwealth of Independent States,
the Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and others. CTED recently
signed a memorandum of understanding with the
Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization aimed at enhancing the
strategic framework of cooperation between the
two entities.

The three Committees and the expert groups also
continued to use the platforms for interaction provided
by Member States. From 7 to 8 November 2018, the
experts of the Committees and CTED attended the
17th Meeting of Heads of Special Services, Security
Agencies and Law-Enforcement Organizations, held in
Moscow and organized by the Federal Security Service
of the Russian Federation.

The three Committees will continue to strengthen
cooperation and effective coordination, where relevant
and possible, with the support of CTED, the Monitoring
Team and the 1540 Group of Experts, and will continue
to provide guidance and direction to their expert groups
in enhancing their collaboration and cooperation in
the light of the requirements of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The three Committees and their expert groups will
continue to strive to ensure the effective implementation
of specific counter-terrorism measures in the areas
of sanctions, the financing of terrorism, border
management and non-proliferation, among others, in
regions and Member States of common interest, and
in full compliance with international law, including
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law. Only through
strong collaboration and targeted efforts can we achieve
concrete results in our fight against terrorism.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now provide a briefing in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities.

On behalf ofthe Committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities, I would like to give a brief overview of
developments in the work of the Committee since the
joint Council briefing in October 2018 (see S/PV.8364).
This briefing will also satisfy the requirement of
resolution 2368 (2017) to report to the Security
Council at least once per year on the overall work of
the Committee. I shall focus mainly on the following
elements: first, the evolving threat to international
peace and security posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant/Da'esh, Al-Qaida and affiliates; secondly,
the response from the Committee; and thirdly, the
Committee's engagement with Member States.

On the evolving threat to international peace
and security posed by ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and
affiliates, in its latest, twenty-third report (S/2019/50),
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
assesses that ISIL and its affiliates continue to pose
the main and best-resourced international terrorist
threat, while Al-Qaida remains resilient and active in
many regions and retains the ambition to project itself
more internationally.

Despite a substantial reduction in the number of
global attacks, ISIL continues to evolve into a global
covert network, a process that is more advanced in Iraq
than in the Syrian Arab Republic. In Iraq, ISIL has
already started to organize cells at the provincial level,
and there is currently a net flow of ISIL fighters from
the Syrian Arab Republic to reinforce the emerging
network in Iraq. If the objective to survive and resurge
in the core area is achieved, ISIL may be expected to
revive its focus on external terrorist operations, but
for now the ISIL core lacks the strength to conduct
coordinated international attacks.

Meanwhile, Al-Qaida remains active in many
regions and there is a concomitant risk of Al-Qaida
growing stronger by taking advantage of the lull in ISIL
strategic terrorist activity and staging a major attack
of its own. The Monitoring Team further reported that
there is a possibility that ISIL foreign terrorist fighters
will choose to join Al-Qaida affiliates in regions where
they are the dominant brand.

Following the military defeat of ISIL, the
Monitoring Team updated the Committee to the effect
that the evolving threat continued to be substantially
as anticipated in the twenty-third report, with the issue
of detainees and refugees in north-eastern Syria an
increasingly urgent concern.

Regarding the Committee's response, the evolving
threat is also reflected in the Council's adoption of
a new resolution, which has expanded the work of
the Committee and the Monitoring Team. Through
resolution 2462 (2019), adopted in March, the Council
reiterated the obligation of Member States to prevent
and suppress the financing of terrorist acts to ensure
that any person who participates in the financing of
terrorist acts is brought to justice and that terrorist acts
are established as serious criminal offences in domestic
laws and regulations. The Council further requested the
1267 (1999) and the Counter-Terrorism Committees to
hold a joint special meeting on the terrorist financing
threats within 12 months and their expert bodies to
prepare, ahead of that meeting, a report on actions
taken by Member States to disrupt terrorist financing.

Under the resolution, it is crucial that Member
States engage with and provide updated information to
the Committee and the Monitoring Team on the evolving
nature of the threat, listed individuals and entities and
the status of implementation and enforcement of the
sanctions measures. Such information is fundamental
to the operation of the regime.

To enhance the full and effective implementation
of the sanctions, the Committee also undertakes visits
to selected countries. In that context, the Chair visited
Uzbekistan, from 31 October to 1 November 2018,
to participate in the sixth International Conference
on Combating Terrorism - Cooperation without
Boundaries, organized by the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
The Chair was accompanied by representatives of the
Monitoring Team and the United Nations Secretariat.

On 7 to 8 November 2018, the Chair, accompanied
by the experts of the Monitoring Team, visited Moscow,
Russian Federation, to participate in the seventeenth
Meeting of Heads of Special Services, Security
Agencies and Law-Enforcement Organizations,
attended by representatives of 68 countries and 10
international organizations. The Chair and the experts
used this opportunity to raise awareness regarding the
1267 and 1988 sanctions regimes and advocated for
their active use by Member States. On the margins of
the event, the Monitoring Team conducted a series of
bilateral meetings with national delegations.

The Committee continuously strives to ensure
that its sanctions list is as updated and accurate as
possible in order to facilitate the implementation of
the sanctions measures. Since the last joint briefing
in October 2018 (see S/PV. 8364), three individuals
and two entities have been listed and five individuals
and one entity have been delisted. The Committee
approved amendments to the existing entries of eight
individuals on its sanctions list. The Secretariat has
also implemented technical amendments to 81 list
entries prepared by the Monitoring Team based on the
2017 annual review process.

Since the lastjoint briefing to the Security Council,
the Committee has considered two comprehensive
reports presented by the Ombudsperson. Currently,
six requests for delisting are pending with the
Office of the Ombudsperson; four cases are in the
information-gathering period and two cases are in the
decision period.

Regarding the Committee's engagement with
Member States, I hope that, in accordance with the its
rules ofprocedure, all Member States will continue their
engagement with the work of the Committee and the
Monitoring Team, as that is essential for maintaining an
up-to-date and dynamic sanctions list and fundamental
to the efficacy of the sanctions mechanism.

In that regard, I would like to note that the
Committee is in the process of conducting its annual
review for 2018, which considers if names on the list,
especially those that have not been reviewed in three
or more years, remain pertinent and addresses cases
where sufficient identifiers do not exist, individuals are
deceased or entities are defunct. I thank the Member
States that have provided information, as it has proved
challenging to obtain responses from all relevant
Member States.

In addition to the regular reviews, the Monitoring
Team updates list entries based on information
provided by Member States. We encourage Member
States to keep the Team informed, as the Council and
international community can target their response
effectively only if they have up-to-date information. I
also urge those Member States that have not done so to
submit the implementation reports mandated under the
relevant resolutions.

As the Monitoring Team keeps the Committee
apprised ofthe evolving threat posed by ISIL, Al-Qaida
and their affiliates, the Committee will also work closely
with key actors, including the other relevant Security
Council sanctions committees. As Chair, I would like
to thank all Member States for their cooperation with
the Committee, its Monitoring Team and the Office of
the Ombudsperson.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to Ambassador Gustavo
Meza-Cuadra of Peru, in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism.

