The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Nigeria.

My first thoughts must be to express our
profound condolences to the Government and people of
Turkey for the grave loss of lives following an
earthquake, and to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the
passing of Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud.

My delegation utterly condemns the senseless
grenade attack in downtown Nairobi yesterday that
caused numerous civilian injuries.

I wish very much to thank Mr. Pascoe for his very
useful and comprehensive briefing on the current
situation in the Middle East.

It is clearly evident from the various opinions
expressed during this debate that the situation in the
Middle East remains not only sensitive but also
complex and daunting. Indeed, the mixed reaction to
the application for membership of the United Nations
by the Palestinian Authority illustrates the complex
challenges in the path of closure on that issue.

Yet, it is undeniable that progress is imperative.
The most tangible means of achieving progress is for
all of us to take genuine and concerted action to bring
the parties to the negotiating table, seizing the
momentum offered by recent developments, including
the statements of Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas at the General Assembly committing
to peace (see A/66/PV.19), the statement of the Middle
East Quartet, and the prisoner swap that saw the
release of Gilad Shalit and brought freedom to over
1,000 Palestinians.

Nigeria views the Quartet statement proposing a
new timetable for reaching a peace agreement before
the end of 2012 as a credible attempt to reopen the
stalled talks. The parties should embrace the proposal
as a basis for substantive engagement to bridge their
differences over common and status issues. Indeed, the
26 October meeting in Jerusalem between the Quartet
envoys and Israeli and Palestinian officials offers an
opportunity for the parties to develop an agenda for the
negotiations. We reiterate that direct talks remain vital
to fostering good and normal relations between the two
neighbours and for sustaining peace in the Middle East
long after the two-State solution has been realized.

Let me affirm unequivocally that Nigeria believes
in a two-State solution as the best option for resolving
the protracted conflict in the Middle East, consistent
with the numerous resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Council. In recognizing the State of Palestine
27 years ago, we were certain then that the Palestinian
Authority had achieved a high degree of institutional
performance that is sufficient for independent
statehood, and we are even more certain now. Indeed,
the people of Palestine deserve the right to live in
freedom and dignity and to enjoy the full benefits and
privileges of statehood.

In the two-State solution matrix, we must
acknowledge that the independent State of Israel
deserves the recognition of its neighbours. Israel has
the right to existence as a peaceful and secure country
without the threat of annihilation.

Achieving two viable States will require the
parties to take a number of specific actions. They must
now find and strengthen their common bonds and
renew their commitment to engage in negotiations
based on mutual trust, and without preconditions.

Israel must take concrete steps to freeze all
settlement-related activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. It must avoid military incursions into Gaza
and ease the blockade of the territory. In the same vein,
Palestinian leaders must deal with militancy and
actions that endanger Israel's security, including firing
rockets into southern Israel. They must also utilize only
lawful channels to transport people, goods and
materials out of Gaza.

Nigeria will continue to maintain close relations
with both Israel and Palestine. We will also continue to
support all efforts that can lead to a peaceful resolution
of the conflict. We believe that the Security Council
should be consistent and remain an impartial peace
broker whose efforts must encourage Israel and
Palestine to return to direct negotiations.

With respect to Lebanon, we support its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We welcome the
progress being made by Prime Minister Najib Mikati's
Administration and its commitment to the
implementation of Council resolutions 1701 (2006) and
1559 (2004), as well as other international obligations.
We urge Israel to halt further incursions into Lebanese
territory. The parties must maintain calm along the
Blue Line.

On Syria, we remain concerned about the
deteriorating security, human rights and humanitarian
conditions in the country. We encourage the Syrian
authorities to implement the promised reforms, address
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and
engage in genuine, credible dialogue with the
opposition. Nigeria will continue to work with other
Council members to achieve peace and stability in
Syria.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Egypt.

