Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes
for his briefing on the humanitarian situation in the
Sudan and Chad. We would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Chad for his presence and
his remarks.

China has followed closely the security and
humanitarian situation in the Sudan and Chad. Armed
conflicts result in the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation. That is common in many hotspot regions.
Experience has shown that it is only by establishing a
peaceful environment that humanitarian crises can be
resolved comprehensively.

The humanitarian situation in the areas along the
border between the Sudan and Chad is closely linked to
their bilateral relations. When those relations improve,
the tension in the border areas of the two countries can
be expected to ease. We welcome the efforts of the
Sudan and Chad to improve their bilateral relations.
They have completed the process of normalization and
the exchange of ambassadors. Both sides also plan to
conduct joint patrols along the border, which we hope
will help to improve the humanitarian situation there.

We are concerned about the safety of
humanitarian relief organizations and personnel. We
condemn attacks on them and urge all parties
concerned to refrain from attacking international
humanitarian relief organizations and personnel and to
facilitate their access. We also call on the international
community to continue to provide humanitarian
assistance to the Sudan and Chad.

The humanitarian crisis is one aspect of the
Darfur issue. Its root cause is the armed conflict in that
region. The most urgent need in Darfur is to achieve a
comprehensive ceasefire and to seek a political
solution to the crisis. We support the mediation efforts
of the United Nations and the African Union to find a
political solution to the Darfur conflict. We hope that
the concerted efforts of all sides will create the
peaceful environment necessary to alleviate the
humanitarian situation in Darfur.

