Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are also grateful to Ambassador Peter
Kolby for the report he has submitted to the Council
and for his very skilful leadership of the Security
Council mission in its trip to Ethiopia and Eritrea.

The situation in the area of the conflict remains
calm. This is a major achievement of the peace process.
First, it reflects the good will of both parties, and it is
also the result of the joint efforts of the Security
Council, the Secretary-General, the leader and
members of the Security Council mission to Ethiopia
and Eritrea and the Organization of African Unity.

The Council mission to the area of the conflict
contributed in a concrete manner to United Nations
actions in this sphere. We support the recommendations
of the mission and, together with other members of the
Security Council, we are prepared to work
constructively on their implementation.

The Russian Federation has consistently
advocated a peaceful settlement of the territorial
dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea on the basis of
the principles of the United Nations Charter and in
strict compliance with the norms of international law.
We are very pleased that, during the mission's stay in
the region, the leaders of both countries, Meles Zenawi
and Isaias Afwerki, again confirmed their unfailing
commitment to the peace agreements and their
readiness to comply with the forthcoming decision of
the independent Boundary Commission.

We believe that the future work of the Security
Council should focus on ensuring favourable
conditions for the implementation of measures on
demarcation and delimitation of the border. It is
important for both parties to the conflict to continue to
follow the spirit and letter of the Algiers Agreements
and not to undertake any unilateral acts that might
jeopardize peace and security in the Horn of Africa.

An enormous responsibility rests on the shoulders
of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE), which has already undertaken serious
efforts to maintain security. But it must do even more.
It must work vigorously, and supervise the
effectiveness of the separation of the armed forces of
the parties in the Temporary Security Zone until the
boundary demarcation measures have been fully
implemented.

The actions taken to restore the climate of trust
and good-neighbourliness between the people of
Ethiopia and Eritrea, so badly affected by war, deserve
our special encouragement. A beginning has been
made, and we hope that efforts in this direction will
continue.

The forthcoming verdict of the Boundary
Commission is intended to remove the deep-rooted
reason for the bloody conflict. It will be an important
milestone in the settlement process. We call on the
United Nations to provide all necessary assistance to
the Boundary Commission, as well as all necessary
resources through the fund set up by the Secretary-
General.
