Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa is
deeply concerned about the deteriorating political and
humanitarian situation in Libya, which is fast
becoming a full-blown civil war. It is our hope that the
situation in Libya will be resolved in a peaceful
manner, in accordance with the will of the Libyan
people. A holistic political solution must be found that
will respect democracy, political reform, justice,
human rights and the socio-economic development
needs of the people of Libya, in order to ensure long-
term peace and stability. That solution must also
preserve the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Libya.

It is in that context that South Africa commends
the decision of the African Union Peace and Security
Council to dispatch an ad hoc high-level committee to
Libya to intensify efforts towards finding a lasting
political solution to the crisis in that country, in the
best interest of its people. We urge that committee, of
which South Africa is a member, to work closely with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to Libya
and the League of Arab States in coordinating the
search for a political solution in that regard.

In adopting resolution 1970 (2011), the Security
Council had hoped that the Libyan authorities would
act responsibly and stop committing more acts of
violence against their own people. The authorities have
defied that resolution and have continued to kill and
displace numerous civilians while continuing to violate
their human rights. We believe that the United Nations
and the Security Council could not be silent, nor be
seen to be doing nothing in the face of such grave acts
of violence committed against innocent civilians.

We believe that by adopting resolution 1973
(2011), which South Africa voted in favour of, the
Security Council has responded appropriately to the
call of the countries of the region to strengthen the
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011), and has
acted responsibly to protect and save the lives of
defenceless civilians, who are faced with brutal acts of
violence carried out by the Libyan authorities. We
believe that the establishment of these additional
measures, including a ceasefire and a no-fly zone, as
authorized by this resolution, constitute an important
element for the protection of civilians and the safety of
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to those most
vulnerable and those desperately in need of such
assistance.

As a matter of principle, we have supported the
resolution, with the necessary caveats to preserve the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Libya and reject
any foreign occupation or unilateral military
intervention under the pretext of protecting civilians. It
is our hope that this resolution will be implemented in
full respect for both its letter and spirit. This is
consistent with the African Union Peace and Security
Council decision to respect the unity and territorial
integrity of Libya and its rejection of any foreign
military intervention, whatever its form.

In conclusion, South Africa will continue to work
through the Council, the African Union and other
multilateral and bilateral platforms to contribute to a
speedy resolution of the Libyan crisis in a manner
consistent with the aspirations of the people of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
10
