Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Let me
at the outset thank you, Madam President, for giving us
this opportunity once again to consider the question of
children affected by armed conflict, in particular in the
light of the report of the Secretary-General, which is
replete with useful information and relevant
recommendations.

I wish also to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the commendable work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, who has devoted himself tirelessly to
promoting the cause of children in situations of armed
conflict and that of all actors in this field. I should like
also to thank Ms. Bellamy, the Executive Director of
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), for her
clear and lucid presentation of UNICEF's continued,
unremitting and laudable efforts to assist children.

In recent years a tremendous amount has been
done to promote the cause of children and to protect
them and safeguard their rights during and after
conflicts, in particular by strengthening the legal
framework in this area and by organizing humanitarian
and other activities in the field. However, despite the
undeniable progress that has been achieved at both the
legal and institutional levels, the situation on the
ground is still extremely disquieting. The horrifying
record of children victimized and targeted by atrocities
perpetrated in times of war and armed conflict is
eloquent testimony to that fact.

Given this situation, whose gravity is
comprehensively illustrated by the Secretary-General
in his report and confirmed by UNICEF and other
United Nations agencies, we cannot confine ourselves
to a theoretical discussion whose sole purpose would
be to express our frustration and indignation.

This discussion should aim to produce results. We
must take this opportunity to fulfil our collective
responsibility, which, in our opinion, is to devise
practical measures, accompanied by implementation,
monitoring and follow-up mechanisms. In this regard,
we believe that the primary responsibility in this field
lies with the United Nations and the Security Council.
In this connection, my delegation would like to pay
tribute to the Council's commitment, as expressed in its
resolutions and in particular resolution 1261 (1999),
which recognizes the effects of the situation of children
in conflict on international peace and security. That
commitment is reflected today in our continued
discussion of this issue, and we are certain that the
debate will culminate in the adoption of an appropriate
decision.

I should like now to comment on certain aspects
of the question on which specific measures could be
envisaged.

First and foremost, there are the aspects relating
to a question of principle, namely compliance by the
parties to an armed conflict with their commitments not
to target civilians, including children, and not to
impede or block access to or delivery of humanitarian
aid and assistance. The need to fulfil those
commitments is part of the framework of respect for
the rules of humanitarian law, which were rightly
developed to be used in times of war.

In this regard, measures could be considered to
exert pressure on the parties to an armed conflict to
oblige them to fulfil their commitments, particularly
vis-a-vis children, including the suspension of all
assistance to parties to an armed conflict who violate
the fundamental rights of children, public
condemnation of such acts and the imposition of
sanctions on those who profit from ongoing conflicts.

The second aspect of concern to my delegation
relates to the effects of sanctions resulting from
conflicts and which seriously affect that fragile
component of society - children. While we reaffirm
the importance of the Security Council's current study
of sanctions in general, it is highly desirable that we
respond urgently to the alarming plight of children in
countries targeted by sanctions. In this regard, we
endorse the Secretary-General's recommendation that,
before sanctions are imposed, the Security Council
should assess their impact on the civilian population,
and children in particular, both in the targeted countries
and in neighbouring and third countries.

In conclusion, we remain convinced that finding a
remedy to this situation will require concerted,
common, coordinated and sustained action. That action
will be crowned by the desired success only if adequate
resources are mobilized. We appeal to the international
community to give the necessary priority to assistance
in this area.

