Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing by Assistant Secretary-General Alexandre
Zoue, and for those by the Police Commissioners
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as that by Ms. Tuesday Reitano.

The United Nations defines police work as a
function of governance responsible for the prevention,
detection and investigation of crimes, the protection
of persons and property and the maintenance of public
order and security. Two years ago, the Organization
received a report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/952)
that included 14 recommendations on the work of the
police, which, within the framework of resolution
2185 (2014), stressed the ever-greater importance of
police forces for international peace and security. The
Secretary-General's approach has made it possible to
identify priorities and measures aimed at strengthening
the work of the police detachments deployed in the
various peacekeeping missions, with the aim of
establishing a coherent and adaptable system to tackle
new conflict and post-conflict situations.
In addition to assisting in planning transition
processes and developing integrated approaches on
the rule of law in the countries where they carry out
their activities, the work of the police also fulfils a
wide range of tasks, including, inter alia, advising on
the reform, restructuring and strengthening of police
institutions, contributing to the training and mentoring
of police forces in countries, law enforcement,
providing assistance and security in electoral processes,
disarmament and demobilization, community-based
policing, patrolling, border management and the fight
against transnational organized crime. The role and
importance of that work has been demonstrated today
in the briefings delivered.

The roles ofUnited Nations police in terms oflevels
of security are well established in practice and involve
the strengthening of local police and Government
institutions and access to justice. That is done through
the promotion of dialogue and commitment and the
creation of a secure environment. However, we believe
that the role of United Nations police is not yet clear
with regard to the physical protection of civilians.

We value the efforts of the Organization to ensure
that police-contributing countries meet the necessary
standards, although there are still challenges regarding
deployment, capacity and specific tasks. We believe
that those difficulties must be overcome with the
improvement of performance-management frameworks
in the field, and that is not exclusive to military
components, but also covers police and civilian
components. On the other hand, within the framework of
peacebuilding, it is imperative to reinforce the work of
United Nations police with regard to the transition and
transfer of full responsibilities to the police in the host
State, in addition to ensuring mission exit strategies.

In that understanding, and turning to our region,
we commend the role of the police component of
MINUJUSTH, which provides operational support to
the Haitian National Police in terms of reducing crime
and of activities related to law enforcement, having
completed the first joint annual review of the Haitian
National Police development plan for the period 2017-
2021, which focuses on improving the capacity and
operational readiness ofthe National Police in the areas
of prevention and response.

We also welcome efforts to promote the
incorporation of a gender perspective into United
Nations police components, which reaffirms, assures
and promotes the equal participation of women in the
area of peacekeeping operations, including an active
role in prevention, mediation and dialogue in order to
achieve solutions on equal terms.

In conclusion, Bolivia reaffirms its support
and commitment to peacekeeping operations and is
grateful for the work of United Nations personnel, as
well as the personnel of police- and troop-contributing
countries - men and women who risk their lives every
day in order to consolidate a lasting and sustainable
peace in fulfilment of the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.

