Mr. Lowcock: This is my second briefing to the
Security Council on the humanitarian situation in
Syria. In Amman today I have discussed the position
with the Jordanian authorities and the United Nations
humanitarian leadership team based in the region.
One conclusion is obvious: the impact of the Syria
crisis continues to be profound. My briefing today
focuses on the humanitarian issues inside Syria. High
Commissioner Grandi will speak to the Council on the
refugee situation on Thursday.

More than 13 million people inside Syria still
need humanitarian assistance; 6.3 million of them
are exceptionally vulnerable and in acute need as a
result of displacement, hostilities and limited access
to basic goods and services. Conflict and violations
of international humanitarian law continue to be the
principal drivers ofhumanitarian need, with civilians in
many parts of the country enduring massive suffering.

Military operations and hostilities in some parts
of the country, particularly in the east, continue
to drive displacement. The number of long-term
internally displaced persons (IDPs) has decreased from
6.3 million to 6.1 million over the past year, while IDP
returns, especially of those temporarily displaced,
have been increasing in some parts of the country. But
levels of new displacement remain high, with some
1.8 million people reported to have been displaced
between January and September.

I want to flag some specific current problems which
particularly concern me, and then I will summarize
where we are on the humanitarian response.

I am worried about the impact of fighting and
airstrikes on civilians and civilian infrastructure in
Raqqa governorate, with scores of civilians reportedly
killed in recent months. The Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) may be largely pushed out of Raqqa,
but after years of oppression and almost a year of
intense fighting, humanitarian needs will continue to
be large for some time to come. Since the beginning of
the anti-ISIL offensive in November last year, airstrikes
and clashes have resulted in more than 436,000 people
being displaced from Raqqa to 60 different locations,
including in neighbouring governorates.

I am also concerned for the safety and protection of
civilians at risk from unexploded ordnance throughout
Raqqa city, particularly those trying to return to their
homes. The United Nations anticipates that, despite the
directive issued by local authorities for civilians not to
return to the city until it is deemed safe, people will
go back to try to check on and protect their homes and
their personal assets. Further to the east, in Deir ez-Zor
governorate, heavy fighting and airstrikes continue to
result in civilian deaths and injuries.

Large-scale displacement also continues, with the
International Organization for Migration reporting
some 350,000 people displaced since August, including
more than 250,000 in October alone. In mid-October,
in Mayadin city and surrounding areas in Deir ez-Zor
governorate, around 15,000 people were reportedly
without access to health services following air strikes
on the city, rendering hospitals and medical points
inoperable. UNICEF and the World Health Organization
(WHO) report that the attacks on Mayadin destroyed
a vaccine cold room, with at least 140,000 doses of
United Nations-provided measles and polio vaccines
lost. Until a new cold room is built and the required
cold-chain equipment - including solar fridges, cold
boxes and vaccine carriers - are delivered, routine
immunization for vulnerable children in the area will
be delayed. This is a particular setback for efforts to
check one of the world's largest polio outbreaks in
recent memory, an outbreak which continues to plague
Deir ez-Zor in particular, with new cases continuing to
be reported.

In Homs governorate, over a period of 20 days this
month, ISIL reportedly executed at least 128 people in
reprisal killings, accusing them ofcollaboration with the
Syrian Government. And an estimated 50,000 Syrians
remain stranded in the desert in Rukban, in an area
known as the berm, along the Syrian-Jordanian border.
In the past year, there have been only two distributions
of United Nations humanitarian food assistance to
these people, and it has been four months since the last
partial distribution. As limited commercial supplies are
reaching Rukban, access to food is precarious and the
overall situation remains dire. As the winter months
approach, the situation will become even more acute.
Ongoing assessments and data collected through the
United Nations health clinic underscore the fragility of
the situation. A long-term durable solution to the plight
of these people has to be found.

Meanwhile, immediate access to enable life-saving
assistance for the civilian population is critical. Clearly
the best approach is to find a solution from within Syria.
We are straining every sinew to do that. Whatever
happens, it is our collective duty to avoid yet another
humanitarian catastrophe in Syria.

Nearly 3 million people in Syria continue to live in
besieged and hard-to-reach areas. In eastern Ghouta,
daily shelling continues to be reported in recent weeks.
Humanitarian access to eastern Ghouta - one of the
four de-escalated areas where nearly 95 per cent of
Syria's besieged population lives - has been severely
curtailed for months. Since the start of the year,
110,000 people have received food assistance, out of
an estimated population of nearly 400,000. Today the
United Nations and partners delivered food, nutrition
and health assistance to 40,000 people. An alarming
number of child malnutrition cases have been recorded
there, and more than 400 people with health problems
require medical evacuation. Ijoin the call of the World
Food Programme (WFP) and others for unimpeded
humanitarian access.

Against that background, the United Nations and
our partners continue to implement in Syria one of
the largest humanitarian operations in the world. We
are reaching millions of people on a monthly basis.
For example, in September the WFP provided food
assistance to more than 3.3 million people, UNICEF
reached over 1.5 million people, and the WHO reached
over 800,000 people. We have just completed a major
piece of work to analyse implementation of activities
so far this year, and I have separately made available
new data on that.

I would like to update members on the position
on humanitarian assistance to areas controlled by
the Government of Syria, cross-line activities and
cross-border activities. Between January and August,
United Nations and non-governmental organization
programmes, in close cooperation with various line
ministries of the Syrian Government, have reached
an average of well over 4 million people a month in
Government-controlled areas of the country. Those
programmes continue to represent the vast majority of
our work inside Syria.

Next, on cross-line activities, we continue to face
considerable challenges in meeting the humanitarian
needs of people in hard-to-reach and besieged
locations. As the Secretary-General points out in his
monthly report (S/2017/902), there is an expectation
that progress in de-escalation will result in increased
humanitarian access. While we continue alongside
others to work hard on the issue, this has yet to
materialize. Since the beginning ofthe year, on average
fewer than a quarter of the United Nations inter-agency
cross-line convoys requested under the monthly and
bimonthly plans have been able to proceed. Thus far
in October, inter-agency convoys have collectively
reached fewer than 200,000 people. On average, only
10 per cent of people in besieged locations have been
reached with United Nations assistance each month
this year, and that is also the total thus far for October,
including today's deliveries.

The removal of life-saving medicines and medical
supplies continues. We have briefed the Council on that
before. I hope that, in the coming days, real and tangible
progress can be made on cross-line activities, through
the trilateral coordination mechanism in Damascus.

As I said last month (see S/PV.8058), it remains
our view that cross-border assistance, as provided
for in resolution 2165 (2014), has been a lifeline. That
assistance has allowed the United Nations to reach
millions of people in need in northern and southern
parts of Syria. Since United Nations cross-border
operations began in July 2014, we have deployed
more than 16,400 trucks, carrying assistance through
authorized crossings into Syria. On average, aid was
delivered to 2.76 million people a month through cross-
border operations between January and August this
year. A considerable proportion of the many millions
in need in both northern and southern Syria have
been regularly reached - not just once or twice, but
consistently and systematically throughout the last
three years. Our experience with cross-line operations
from within Syria, which I have just referred to, leads
us to believe that it would be impossible to reach those
people in a sustained manner from within Syria. I
therefore regard a renewal of resolution 2165 (2014) as
essential. Millions of people depend on the activities
it mandates.

