Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you, Mr. Minister, for coming here to be with us. I also thank all the other ministers who have honoured the Security Council with their presence today. I would like to say how nice it is to once again have Mary Robinson representing The Elders. I thank her for all the work The Elders do to uphold the Charter of the United Nations. We very much welcome as well the spirit of collaboration that the Permanent Mission of Viet Nam has brought to this enterprise, including on presidential statement S/PRST/2020/1, which the Council adopted today. We have heard many quotations from the Charter. Nobody could accuse the founding Members of a lack of ambition when they drafted the Charter. But at times, the United Nations has often suffered from an almost unbridgeable gap between the power of its central vision and the actual actions that it has been able to carry out. By "United Nations", I do not just mean the United Nations bodies, but also, we, the Member States. And yet the United Nations takes action that directly affects the lives of millions of ordinary citizens. The United Nations has 13 peacekeeping missions operating in regions that are home to 1.8 billion people. The World Food Programme delivers food to nearly 87 million people in 83 countries, providing 15 billion meals. In 2018, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees supported 20.4 million refugees, and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East supported a further 5.5 million Palestinians. The World Health Organization vaccinates hundreds of millions of people. In 2018, it vaccinated almost half the world's children, and it has eradicated smallpox and is close to eradicating polio - the world is 98 per cent free. If the United Nations did not exist, we would have to create it. The Charter makes very clear the emphasis on States cooperating to harmonize actions to attain common ends. I hope that we can remember that Article of the Charter as we deal with some of these intractable issues of peace and security on the Security Council. I was very struck by what Mr. Kofi Annan said in his farewell address to the United Nations in 2006. He said: "Together we have pushed some big rocks to the top of the mountain, even if others have slipped from our grasp and rolled back. But this mountain, with its bracing winds and global views, is the best place on Earth to be. (A/6//PV.10, p. 3) The rules-based international system, which the Charter embodies, is the best prescription to those bracing winds and the rocks rolling back down the hill. The United Kingdom has the honour of being a founding Member of the United Nations, like some other members here today. We share the belief in the rules-based international system and the United Nations role at the apex of it. As we leave the European Union, the United Kingdom looks forward to having the United Nations as an even more important stage for British foreign policy, as an active and independent force, and we very much hope, as my Foreign Secretary has said, as a force for good so that we can cooperate with other colleagues to strengthen the security and prosperity that the United Nations has helped create over recent decades. In a world in which change is moving at an ever- increasing pace, the Charter should be seen as a framework around which we can construct our responses to those challenges. It should be an enabler, a point of reference and the constant source to which we turn in a world burdened with increasing complexity and uncertainty. Used in such a way, as we heard from the Secretary-General and others today, the Charter gives us what we need to help us head of crises, de-escalate confrontations and develop effective responses to conflict. Again, I draw the attention of our colleagues to the things that we are battling with in the Council, notably Libya, Yemen, Syria and tensions in the Gulf. We should not regard the Charter as a straitjacket. We want to have options for collaboration and action. We do not want to reduce those options artificially, because if we do we bring only detriment to the people we represent and serve. The Secretary-General and other colleagues have highlighted peacekeeping. If I may, I would like to pay tribute here to Brian Urquhart, who will be 101 next month. He did more than many people to set up the United Nations peacekeeping arrangements, and that is something which, like special political missions, does appear not in the Charter; rather, they are an excellent example of Member States working together within the framework of the Charter and in the context of the Security Council to address the challenges of yesterday and today. We believe that we need to retain that forward- looking spirit as we look for ideas to tackle the challenges of tomorrow, such as the rise in new technologies, which my Prime Minister referred to in his General Assembly address (see A/74/PV.4), the challenges of antimicrobial resistance or the impacts of climate change. Those were not foreseen by the drafters of the Charter, but they very much remain on our minds. While we face new threats that the founders of the United Nations did not see, the responsibility that all parts of the United Nations hold remains, and the Secretary-General drew attention to that as well. It is a well-worn phrase, but with great power comes great responsibility, and I think that it is also something that we should bear in mind. The Security Council has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, but others, including the Secretary-General, through Article 99 of the Charter, also have a vital role to play. I would like to echo what the Secretary-General said about Article 25 and the need to uphold the decisions of the Security Council in that context. A few people have mentioned reform and veto reform. Let me therefore set out the United Kingdom's position. We are a signatory to the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency code of conduct, which commits us to not vote against credible Security Council action to stop mass atrocities and crimes against humanity. But the fact that we do not all agree on the veto should not prevent us from making progress in pursuing other areas of Security Council reform. I want to say a word about State sovereignty and respect for equality, State sovereignty and the principle that countries are all equal and that stronger countries should help weaker countries. That cannot be used as an excuse for failing to address conflicts or violations of human rights and international humanitarian law. It is violence and conflict, and not our attempts to help Member States prevent them, that threaten State sovereignty. Here I draw my colleagues' attention to Article 2 of the Charter, which makes clear that nothing should upset the fundamental rights that the Charter sets out. I would like to close, if I may, by referring to the current situation in the Middle East, since that has featured in our debate today. My Foreign Secretary recently visited Washington, D.C., and I would like to reprise what he said there. He said that we recognize the danger and threat that Iran poses to the Middle East, and we recognize the right to self-defence. At the same time, we want to see tensions de-escalated. We want to find a diplomatic way through, and that is why the remarks that we have heard recently about a diplomatic solution are so important. It also means that the Government of Iran should be willing to consider and committed to a diplomatic outcome as well. I can pledge that the United Kingdom stands ready to assist any diplomatic efforts.
