Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): At the outset, let me
thank Council members for their words of condolence
and support here and elsewhere following the horrific
attack in London this weekend. The perpetrators sought
to terrorize us, to divide us, but make no mistake: they
will fail. Together we will defeat them, and we will
need Security Council unity and activism against this
terrible scourge.

Turning to this afternoon's meeting, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, and I want
to join others in paying tribute to you, Your Excellency
President Morales, for your leadership in bringing
this crucial issue of transboundary water security to
the Security Council. It is an issue that we used not
to discuss in this Chamber, but it is one that warrants
our fullest attention. The stakes are high: more than
three quarters of States Members of the United Nations
share river basins with another country, and more
than 2 billion people live in shared river basins in the
developing world.

Sadly, we know what can happen when the water
runs dry. In Somalia, drought is driving the acute
food shortage that threatens to tip over once again into
famine. One powerful lesson from the last famine in
Somalia six years ago was that famine is not simply
about food but also about water. In north-eastern
Nigeria, lack of water is exacerbating the man-made
crisis, as we saw for ourselves when we visited in
March. Thousands of displaced people, the majority of
whom are women and children, have become sick from
diseases spread by dirty water and poor hygiene as the
conflict continues.

We have to act, and we have agreed to act.
Through the global goals, we all committed to deliver
improved water security, improved access to drinking
water and sanitation, and stronger transboundary
water management.

And yet the outlook for 2030 is fragile. We are
simply not on track. The United Nations estimates
that by the time we are supposed to have achieved
Sustainable Development Goal 6, demand for water
in many developing countries will outstrip supply by
40 per cent. If such scarcity is combined with weak
governance, population growth, migration and climate
change, we may face a potential upsurge in global
conflicts in future. This, therefore, is a clear call for
preventive diplomacy, as so many of my colleagues
have already said. All ofus in this Chamber have a part
to play.

In South Asia, for example, the United Kingdom has
provided $30 million towards water governance over the
past five years. One billion people across Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, India, Nepal and Pakistan
rely heavily on just three rivers, and, despite facing
similar problems posed by water demand and climate
change, regional collaboration between these countries
is limited. That is why we have supported a regional
approach to these rivers in order to address the shared
challenges of development and climate change. We
are working with the World Bank's South Asia Water
Initiative, bringing together different disciplines and
experiences, technical and political, across the region,
so that together we can identify and resolve challenges
affecting these transboundary waters.

But to tackle this problem on a global scale, we
will need more than bilateral or regional action. We
will need to work together, through this institution and
others. Holding this meeting is an important step, but
this effort needs to be sustained. We cannot solve it
through one meeting a year.

The Group of 20 (G-20) also has a role to play,
including through incentivizing water cooperation.
This is not an issue for just the developing world.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development and the Global Water Partnership
estimate that water insecurity costs the global economy
$500 billion every year. And yet we fall a long way
short of meeting the $198 billion of global investment
that is needed every year for water governance and
infrastructure. So we need to see investment in
institutions and infrastructure to deliver improved water
security within States and between States. Building
effective institutions and delivering better governance
is just as critical as building infrastructure. The G-20
can play a critical role through diplomatic efforts,
development cooperation and harnessing the potential
of the private sector, Governments and communities to
mobilize investment in water security.

Finally, if we are to make progress on this issue
before 2030, we need to see the bigger picture. Across
the world, climate change is undermining water
security. In almost all climate-change scenarios, the
world's driest regions become drier, and across the
globe flooding will become more common. If we are
not taking steps to address climate change, we are
fighting with one hand tied behind our back.

The Paris Agreement provides the right global
framework for protecting the prosperity and security
of future generations while keeping energy affordable
and secure for our citizens and businesses. The United
Kingdom played a major role in securing the Paris
Agreement, and I am proud to restate in this Chamber
today that we are wholly committed to it.

