Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General and
to the briefers for their participation in this meeting.

The issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict unfortunately continues to be an urgent one.
We share the briefers' concerns about the reports
of casualties among civilians and humanitarian and
medical personnel. We are very grateful for the selfless
work of the doctors who risk their own lives to carry
out their professional duties in conflict zones. We
are exceedingly concerned about attacks on medical
facilities and personnel and condemn them firmly.
The circumstances of such events require careful,
independent investigation. Mindful of the special
significance of medical facilities and the danger their
personnel face during conflict, our delegation supported
the adoption in May of resolution 2286 (2016). We
are carefully studying the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in that regard in the expectation of
a detailed discussion of them and we hope to get some
clarification on the questions we have about them.

At this stage, we would like to make a few general
comments. The primary responsibility for the safety
and security of humanitarian personnel and others
who are entitled to special international protection in
accordance with the Geneva Conventions, lies with
every party to an armed conflict. They must make
every possible effort to avoid the death of civilians,
including medical personnel, in order to abide by
international humanitarian law. Clearly, that does not
cover situations in which medical personnel suffer at
the hands of those who are supposed to protect them. To
deal with that, Member States and United Nations and
humanitarian organizations should mobilize additional
efforts aimed at strengthening the mechanisms for
providing security to medical facilities and their
personnel in armed conflict.

Against the backdrop of today's information
wars, in considering this issue every United Nations
body should operate using verified information that
is not open to doubt. It is important to ensure that the
Secretary-General's reports submitted in response to
Security Council resolution 2286 (2016) include only
reliable information.

Lastly, we consider it essential to approach the
problem of ensuring the safety of medical personnel
in the context of the protection of civilians generally,
without creating any sort of hierarchy among the
various categories.

Today a lot has been said, and said very emotionally,
about the tragedy of the citizens of Syria and the
conditions in which medical workers have to operate
there. The suffering of the country's civilian population
must be stopped. There was a real chance of achieving
that in the Russian-United States agreements of
9 September. Our approach to what is going on in Syria
at the moment, as well as to countering the terrorist
groups that are firmly established on its territory, has
been laid out in detail in the Security Council meetings
held on 22 and 25 September (see S/PV.7775 and S/PV.7777, respectively), as well as in other formats.
We will not repeat it all again but will focus on the
following points.

It has already become a sort of tradition that the
majority of strikes on civilian targets in Syria are
indiscriminately - by default, as it were - blamed
on Damascus and Russia. That trend has continued
today. In zones of conflict, including the Middle East,
similarly unacceptable incidents have been a natural
consequence of the policies of destabilization of the
United States, with the support of its allies. Hospitals
have been reduced to rubble as a result of strikes by the
Americans or their allies.

We all recall the tragedy of the bombing of
the Medecins Sans Frontieres hospital in Kunduz,
Afghanistan, in October 2015. The coalition in Yemen
has destroyed civilian infrastructure, including medical
facilities, and the United States has given direct
assistance to that through its air force. Some European
capitals have generously supplied that coalition with
arms. From time to time, the pressure of the facts
produces admissions and apologies. In the case of
the deadly attack American air attack in Kunduz in
particular, there were investigations and disciplinary
proceedings, and improvements were made in the
air force's operational guidelines. But what does that
really mean? None of the military personnel involved
were convicted; they continued to serve. According to
the information in the media, the compensation paid
to the families of the victims was merely symbolic.
Regarding the operating improvements for the air force
that I mentioned, we have to ask how they resulted
in the alleged mistakes made in the United States-led
coalition's bombardment of Syrian army positions in
the city of Deir ez-Zor, the strikes on the city of Manbij
on 19 July, where almost 100 civilians died, according
to reports, and the attack on 28 July on the town of
Al-Ghandoura.

Within the Syrian conflict there has been a
persistent desire to supersede the Government at any
price and to redraw the geopolitical map of the region.
At one point there was a possibility to prevent the
start of this conflict, and there has been more than
one chance to end it and reach a political settlement,
to which there can be no alternative. However, instead
of seeking a collective solution, the representatives
of the States directly responsible for farming the
flames of the war in Syria prefer to rehearse endless
anti-Russian fabrications in the Security Council and in
other forums. What we are hearing in the media now is
nothing but speculation that exploits people's suffering
for propaganda purposes and to divert attention from
their own failed policies.The information is often based
on unreliable data from neighbourhoods under the
control of armed groups that have a direct interest in
discrediting the activities of the Syrian Government
and Russia. The work with so-called witnesses is
frequently done in Syria's neighbouring States and
falsified information is spread.

For our part, we urge the rejection of provocative
rhetoric and that we put all our efforts into bringing an
end to the conflict in Syria as quickly as possible. We
already have a good basis on which to work, including
through the Russian-American collaborative effort.

