At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his informative briefing. As noted in the last video-teleconference on the Middle East peace process, we continue to be deeply concerned about the grave situation with regard to the Palestinian question. Dialogue between the two sides with regard to the peace process has stalled for a long time. There are worrisome reports about plans for annexation and further building of settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. In the last several weeks, there have been reports of a number of incidents between Israelis and Palestinians, including the arrest of hundreds of Palestinians by the Israeli authorities. We call for the immediate cessation of such activities. Those complicated developments took place against the backdrop of an increasing number of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases in the West Bank and Gaza. There have been almost 400 people infected, many of whom live among communities with difficult living conditions. The risk of a major outbreak among the Palestinian people is extremely high. That is compounded by the dire economic situation that the Palestinians have been facing. Most recently, the World Bank forecasted that the Palestinian economy will contract by 2.5 per cent - in the best- case scenario - or 7 per cent if the COVID-19 pandemic continues for four months. That will seriously aggravate the ongoing public debt, unemployment and poverty. Given the current circumstances, we are heartened by the most recent examples of cooperation between Palestine and Israel in the fight against COVID-19. The direct talks we have seen between the two Presidents is a very positive gesture and has provided much-needed impetus for the effective coordination between the two sides. We echo other Council members in welcoming the steps that Israel and Palestine have taken together to help treat cases of coronavirus and prevent its further spread. We cannot emphasize enough the need for continuing such important cooperation. It is therefore worrisome to learn of reports of incidents related to health facilities in East Jerusalem. In the light of this emergency, we call on all parties to set aside their differences and prioritize the search for an effective response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In that connection, it is high time that all parties to the Middle East peace process support and faithfully implement the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, and heed the joint appeal by the five United Nations Special Envoys to the Middle East. The dire humanitarian situation in Gaza and the West Bank, exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, makes it increasingly urgent to exercise restraint and refrain from acts that may escalate tension, including plans of annexation and more settlements. To that end, we reiterate our full and consistent support for the United Nations- led efforts. We greatly appreciate the efforts of the Special Coordinator to help ease tension, draw the attention of the international community to the dire need of the Palestinian people and bring the two sides to the table. We hope that those efforts, with the support and involvement of other parties and the international community, will help resume dialogue and negotiations between Israel and Palestine, in order to bring about a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East on the basis of the internationally agreed parameters, including the relevant United Nations resolutions. We echo the call of the international community to increase valuable support to the Palestinian Authority and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in order to help alleviate the hardships of the Palestinian people. Finally, let me take this opportunity to reiterate our position that a lasting and just peace in the region can be achieved only through a two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and security on the basis of the pre-1967 lines and with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine.
