Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): It is a pleasure for us
to see you presiding over this meeting, Sir. My
delegation wishes once more to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, President of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, to the Security
Council. We welcome his report on the progress
attained by his country. We also wish to offer our
condolences on the passing his brother-in-law. We also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her comprehensive
briefing on the latest developments in Timor-Leste.

South Africa is pleased to extend its
congratulations to Timor-Leste on the ten-year
anniversary of its independence. That is a milestone,
not only for the Government and peoples of Timor-
Leste, but also for all peace-loving people of the world
who continue to champion the right to self-
determination. As an indication of remarkable
progress, Timor-Leste has moved from being the host
of a United Nations peacekeeping mission to a country
that has deployed personnel in United Nations
peacekeeping missions such as the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and United Nations Mission
in the Sudan. That is testament to the strengthened
capacity of the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de Timor-
Leste and to the will of the Timorese authorities to
positively contribute to international peace and
security. We are also encouraged by the interest
expressed by Timor-Leste in joining in and playing an
important neighbourly role in the regional community
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

This year is also one in which we will see a
drawdown of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the accession of complete
authority by the Timorese Government to the full
functioning of its security institutions. During the
reporting period, we have seen general stability in
Timor-Leste through further improvements in the
political and security situations. We welcome the
strong commitment of the leadership and other
stakeholders in Timor-Leste to fostering national
dialogue and peaceful and inclusive participation in
democratic processes, and its ongoing efforts to
promote continued peace, stability and unity.
In the area of governance and institution-
building, the Timorese authorities have adopted

additional legislation to further strengthen the capacity
and effectiveness of State institutions. We are pleased
to note the progress made by the Timorese authorities
in preparing for the upcoming presidential and
legislative elections later this year. The electoral
process will further consolidate the entrenchment of
democracy and stability in the country. We are
particularly encouraged by the ongoing efforts of the
electoral management bodies to increase the
participation of women and youth in the electoral
process. We commend the political leadership for the
commitment it has expressed in holding elections in a
climate of peace and stability. Continued dialogue
among the political leaders in the run-up to the election
will be important to ensuring a peaceful outcome.
Accordingly, the dialogue among national leaders co-
hosted by President Ramos-Horta and the Bishop of
Baucau, which is scheduled to be held prior to the
elections, will bring them closer to achieving that goal.

While recognizing the progress made in many
areas, much more still needs to be done, as indicated in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/43). A strong
and effective Timorese-led security apparatus to
effectively deal with security threats is key. In that
regard, we have witnessed the resumption of full
policing responsibilities by the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) in pursuit of the implementation
of the PNTL-UNMIT police Joint Development Plan.
There has also been a continued focus by the PNTL on
operational capacity, with technical advice from
UNMIT police, in preparation for the coming electoral
processes. There remains a continuing need for support
to the PNTL, further institutional development and
capacity-building. We therefore request UNMIT, in the
remainder of this year, to continue to support the
PNTL.

Truth and reconciliation are important to the
further consolidation of Timor's long-term stability.
Further progress towards the implementation of the
recommendations of the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation and the Commission of Truth
and Friendship would have a positive impact on the
long-term peace and stability of Timor-Leste.

South Africa is pleased with the progress in the
implementation of the Joint Transition Plan as UNMIT
prepares to terminate its mandate. We support the
Secretary-General's contention that the Joint Transition
Plan should be accompanied by regular review to
ensure its responsiveness to developments on the
ground. South Africa maintains that the nature and role
of the United Nations presence in Timor-Leste once
UNMIT's mandate has ended is a matter that should be
left for the Timorese authorities to decide and on which
they should take the lead.

It is a singular honour for South Africa to be
called upon to play a lead role in the situation in
Timor-Leste in the Security Council. We wish to thank
Council members which have worked constructively on
the draft resolution, which, inter alia, extends
UNMIT'S mandate until 31 December 2012 and
endorses the plan for its phase-down, in accordance
with the wishes of the Government of Timor-Leste and
conditions on the ground following the successful
completion of the 2012 electoral process. We look
forward to the unanimous adoption of the draft
resolution on Timor-Leste.

I am very sure that all of us have taken note of
President Ramos-Horta's invitation to the Security
Council to visit his great country in 2012.

