Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First, we
want to thank Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
briefing. The Chinese delegation is very gratified by the
continued stability of the situation of East Timor. We are
very happy to note that the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) is being
smoothly deployed, and we pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de
Mello, and his staff for having done a tremendous amount
of work in extremely difficult conditions on the ground.

It is our consistent View that the United Nations
presence in East Timor is for the purpose of helping the
East Timorese realize independence and self-reliance. The
principle that this depends mainly on the East Timorese
themselves should be maintained, and, to the extent
possible, more local people should be brought into this
process and encouraged to play a positive role. Therefore,
we fully support the work of the Consultative
Commission of East Timor, which, in our View, is a good
way to allow the local people to participate in the
decision-making process. We welcome the positive result
of the donor conference held in Tokyo, which we believe

 

will facilitate the laying of a solid financial foundation for
East Timor's transition to independence. Only when
reconciliation has been realized can peace and independence
be possible in East Timor. We have taken note of the fact
that Mr. Gusmao has indicated his commitment to work for
conciliation among all parties, particularly between the pro-
integration party and the pro-independence party. He has
also indicated that he is willing to fully cooperate with
UNTAET. We acknowledge this with deep appreciation.

We hope that the International Force, East Timor, will
soon be turned into a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, and in this regard, the Secretariat should
accelerate the relevant preparatory work. We also hope that
the composition of the peacekeeping force will be more
balanced.

To conclude, China supports the work of UNTAET
and will continue to provide personnel and financial help
within its capabilities.

