Mr. Al-Mansoor (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his detailed
report and for his active and committed role in connection

 

with the situation in Angola. I would also like to express
our appreciation to the troika countries - the United
States, the Russian Federation and Portugal - for all their
efforts. Our thanks go also to all the States that are trying
to make a contribution to the resolution of the crisis in
Angola, as well as to the personnel of the United Nations
and of international humanitarian organizations working in
Angola. My delegation wishes the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Issa Diallo
every success.

Unfortunately, the report catalogues a number of
negative aspects in the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol, which constitute obstacles to the peace process.
They are all due to the intransigence of UNITA and the
refusal of its leaders to advance the peace process in
Angola and to allow its people at long last to resume their
normal lives. This is being delayed by UNITA's shirking of
its obligations under the peace process, which must be
fulfilled in order to bring peace to that country.

As an expression of Bahrain's keen interest in bringing
lasting peace to Angola, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before the Council. The leaders of
UNITA must honour the obligations they have made under
the peace process. In this context, we reiterate our appeal
to the Government of Angola and to UNITA in particular
to achieve national reconciliation. We call upon UNITA to
hand over the localities under its control and to demobilize
all the forces it continues to maintain, with a view to the
reintegration of the troops into society. Any further delay
in this regard would have negative repercussions on the
security, political and humanitarian situation in Angola.
Finally, there is a very important element that impels
us to launch this appeal to the two parties to achieve peace
and lasting reconciliation: the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, and some of
his colleagues made the ultimate sacrifice while attempting
to restore normal life in Angola. In order to honour their
memories and as a token of appreciation for their efforts,
the two parties to the conflict must work together to fully
implement the commitments they entered into under the
Lusaka Protocol.

