Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Mr. Nabarro and Special Representative
Banbury for their briefings. I also listened attentively
to Mr. Mauget's presentation.

The Ebola outbreak in West Africa has recently
slowed down somewhat, and the number of new cases
in Liberia and Guinea has fallen, showing that the
international efforts to combat the disease have begun
to take effect. The relevant countries and international
and regional organizations such as the United Nations,
World Health Organization (WHO) and African Union

(AU) have worked enormously hard to that end, which
China appreciates.

Meanwhile, the momentum of the outbreak's spread
has not been fundamentally contained. It is still a grave
threat to the lives, personal health and public-health
security of West Africans and others in the wider world.
Rather than relaxing our efforts, we in the international
community should work harder to counter the Ebola
epidemic. China believes, first, that the international
community should continue to take steps to consolidate
the results that have already been achieved at this
stage. We hope that the United Nations and the WHO
will further strengthen their monitoring and prevention
of the disease, collect and analyse information on it
rapidly, comprehensively and accurately and determine
its future development, in order to scientifically guide
and coordinate the international efforts.

Secondly, the relevant parties should live up to their
assistance commitments with concrete contributions.
The effort to combat Ebola is at a key stage now, and
China urges that they honour their aid commitments
speedily, helping the countries affected to halt and
eliminate the epidemic as quickly and effectively as
possible and to increase the confidence ofthose affected
in the possibility of completely beating the disease.

Thirdly, the countries affected must get active
assistance in carrying out post-Ebola reconstruction.
The current epidemic has undermined the political and
security situation, economic and social development
and the well-being of the people in those countries. The
international community should focus on their post-
Ebola needs, get to work on plans as soon as possible,
and fully help the affected countries to strengthen
their public-health and other essential systems so that
they can get back onto a path of peace, stability and
development as soon as possible.

A disaster knows no borders, and neither does
our love and solidarity. The Chinese and African
peoples are brothers and sisters, and when our African
brothers suffer from this disease, the Chinese people
genuinely feel for them. We are duty-bound to help
Africa. Since March, when the epidemic erupted, the
Chinese Government has provided four batches of
emergency assistance, worth a total of RMB750 million
or approximately $120 million, the largest amount of
health-related foreign aid since the founding of the
new China. In order to deliver the related assistance
as quickly as possible, the Chinese Government has
even chartered planes to transport the materials to the
affected areas at the earliest date for distribution and
use. So far the first three groups of assistance measures
have all been implemented, and the fourth group is
being implemented step by step.

With Chinese assistance, the construction of a
treatment centre in Liberia is now being stepped up and
is expected to be completed by the end of this month.
By then the centre will be operational, only one month
after President Xi J inping's announcement of the fourth
group of assistance measures. Last weekend, the first
team of 163 health-care workers tasked with managing
and operating the treatment centre had already arrived
in Liberia. It is particularly worth noting that the
treatment centre built with the Chinese aid will be open
to all, including the local population, which shows that
Chinese assistance is truly community-oriented and
people-centred. China has now also become the first
country to help build a treatment centre in the affected
region and send its health-care workers to manage and
operate it.

In the meantime, a 40-member Chinese team
has also arrived in Sierra Leone with the aim of
continuing with monitoring work in mobile labs. There
are currently about 400 Chinese health-care workers
in the affected States. In the next few months, there
will be altogether 1,000 Chinese health-care workers
and public-health experts making tours of service to
the front lines in affected areas in order to train the
local health-care workers to do lab testing, observe
symptoms and give treatment. China has also provided
equipment, including mobile virus-testing labs and
biological safety labs, as well as the most urgently
needed supplies such as grains, medicines, protective
gear, incinerators, ambulances, trucks and motorcycles.

In view of the latest developments in the epidemic,

China's fourth group of aid measures is already being
geared to post-Ebola needs, with a focus on helping the
affected countries strengthen their public health security
systems and capacity-building. Earlier this month,
China's first team of public-health trainers arrived in
Sierra Leone to begin their work. China is also actively
considering building a pathogen-and-tropical-disease
prevention, treatment and research centre in Africa,
and sending experts to participate in the construction
of an AU disease-control centre. We also plan to train
10,000 health-care workers and community-level key
control personnel. In order to contain the spread of the
outbreak, China has provided disease-control materials
and equipment to the three countries affected, as well
as to their neighbours, including Mali, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Cote d'Ivoire. We have also
contributed $6 million to the United Nations Ebola
Multi-Partner Trust Fund and $2 million each to the
WHO and the AU.

Mr. Quinlan took the Chair.

In addition to the assistance from the Chinese
Government, Chinese enterprises in affected countries,
such as Guinea, have also contributed, in cash and in
kind, to the campaign against Ebola and to honour
their social responsibility. Many of those enterprises
have remained open and continued their production
in support of the local economy, a fact that the host
States have greatly appreciated. China's assistance in
Africa's fight against Ebola has fully demonstrated that
China and Africa, as friends, can truly share in good
and ill together. Along with the rest of the international
community, China will continue to contribute, within
its abilities, to thejoint fight with Africa and its peoples
against the Ebola epidemic.

