Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): Allow me to begin,
Mr. President, by expressing my delegation's sincere
appreciation and congratulations on your deserved
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of April. The leadership you have already
displayed assures us of success in the deliberations of the
Council.

I would also like to extend our appreciation to your
predecessor, Ambassador Anwarul Chowdury of

 

Bangladesh, for the excellent manner in which he
conducted the affairs of the Council last month.

It is only fitting that you should be chairing this
particular Council meeting. The contributions of your
Permanent Representative to the question of Angola have
been remarkable, particularly in his capacity as the
Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 864 (1993). In that capacity on
March 10 he presented the unprecedented report of the
Panel of Experts on violations of Security Council sanctions
against UNITA. I wish to convey my delegation's great
appreciation to Ambassador Fowler and to the Panel of
Experts for outstanding service on behalf of the Security
Council.

The report is an important and valuable instrument that
will help the Security Council and the international
community to act credibly and forcefully against the
UNITA of Jonas Savimbi as well as against his supporters.
On the basis of information and evidence available to it, the
Panel of Experts clearly identifies who is violating
sanctions against UNITA, and how, and who is contributing
to prolonging the suffering of the people of Angola. The
Panel also offers suggestions on measures to be taken in
order to curtail the situation.

The 39 recommendations contained in the report
represent a well-thought-out strategy to make Security
Council sanctions more effective, thus forcing UNITA to
abide by the commitments it undertook when it signed the
Lusaka Protocol in 1994. The recommendations provide
also for measures against those supporting UNITA in
flagrant violation of Security Council sanctions. Because we
believe in the merit of those recommendations, we wish to
take this opportunity to express our support to all
recommendations contained in the report of the Panel of
Experts.

We applaud all members of the Council for their
decision to establish the Panel of Experts with such a
remarkable mandate. Now that the result of the Panel's
work is before them, it is the responsibility of Council
members to see to it that the exercise is worthwhile and to
take the next step.

The report clearly states, inter alia, that in order to
add credibility and seriousness to the sanctions against
UNITA appropriate measures must be taken against those
who are violating them. The report emphasizes the need for
stricter control on the flow of illicit arms and petroleum
products to UNITA-controlled areas. It also recommends
that traders and other individuals or companies found to
be breaking sanctions relating to UNITA-held diamond
should lose their registration, be placed on an industry
blacklist and be barred from any involvement in the
diamond industry. Diamonds should bring prosperity, not
impose continued suffering on the Angolan people.
Sanctions violators are increasing the ability of UNITA to
wage war and are consequently prolonging the suffering
of our brothers and sisters in Angola and the destruction
of that country's infrastructure and resources.

It is reported that as a result of the work of the
Panel of Experts and the release of the report on sanctions
against UN ITA, it has become harder for Savimbi to sell
diamonds and buy weapons. That positive development
shows the real impact of sanctions when they are strictly
applied.

We are encouraged by the information that several
States are establishing, at the national level, commissions
and other mechanisms to investigate allegations of
sanctions violations. We hope that they will work
expeditiously and produce results that will be made
known to the international community. Any delay in that
process could mean that another life is lost in Angola.

A number of paragraphs of the report make
reference to the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and to the important role that SADC
countries should play in implementing measures to
strengthen sanctions against UNITA. Those measures are
related to inspecting and monitoring petroleum products
supplies and the introduction of mobile radar systems
with the objective of detecting illegal flight activity,
among other measures. We in SADC support all measures
aimed at strengthening the sanctions regime against
UNITA and those which will bring peace and stability to
Angola, which is a member of our regional organization.

While SADC countries will study existing capacities
within the region, it is clear that to implement the
measures mentioned in the report they will need
substantial technical and financial support from the
international community so that they are not found
wanting. We would therefore appeal to those in a position
to do so to support SADC countries in carrying out this
task. We welcome pledges of support from members of
the Council, including your own Government's pledge,
Mr. President.

 
Humanitarian assistance is also required for the
Angolan populations that have fallen victim to this
senseless war imposed by Jonas Savimbi.

We believe that the Council's credibility is at stake,
for it has taken a bold decision which should be realized -
a decision that represents a real shift in the way the Council
enforces its decisions and conducts its business. There is a
real opportunity for the Council to make significant
progress and to reassert its authority as a guarantor of
international peace and security. We believe that a
resolution commensurate with the task at hand would do
justice to the excellent work done by Ambassador Fowler
and the Panel of Experts.

We believe that this is the least that the Council can
do for the Angolan people, whose Government has shown
the necessary commitment, flexibility, accommodation and
desire for peace in our sister country. The presence here of
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Relations of
Angola is yet another demonstration of his Government's
commitment to peace in Angola.

