The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

Allow me to first join the previous speakers in
thanking Mr. Gambari for his briefing. We commend
his efforts to engage the leadership of Myanmar in
addressing the complex and multifaceted challenges
faced by the country.

The decisions by the Government of Myanmar to
permit Mr. Gambari's visit earlier this month and to
invite his return in few weeks are encouraging. We also
recognize the significance of the decision by the
Government to allow the visit by the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar, Mr. Pinheiro.

We welcome the appointment of Minister Aung

Kyi as liaison minister, his early contacts with Daw

Aung San Suu Kyi and the decision by the Government

of Myanmar to allow Daw Aung San Suu Kyi to meet

key members of her National League for Democracy

Party. We encourage the Government to further remove

the restrictions on Daw Aung Suu Kyi as part of the

effort to create conditions conducive to dialogue and
reconciliation.

We equally welcome the readiness of Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi to cooperate with the Government of
Myanmar to make this process of dialogue a success,
as stated in her written statement, delivered by
Mr. Gambari on 8 November 2007.

All of those developments represent the good
faith of both parties, which is indispensable for a
meaningful substantive dialogue to take place. It is our
firm view that all parties concerned should make best
use of this momentum to move ahead with the process
to promote national reconciliation in an all-inclusive
manner.

Indonesia appreciates the acknowledgement of
the important role of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) in supporting the good offices
of the Secretary-General. In this regard, we wish to
recall the statement of ASEAN Ministers of
27 September 2007, in which the Ministers, inter alia,
urged the authorities of Myanmar to resume national
reconciliation with all parties, working towards
peaceful transition to democracy, and to release all
political detainees, including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi.
The forthcoming ASEAN Summit in Singapore this
month will witness the signing of an ASEAN Charter,
which embodies the vision of an ASEAN community,
bound together by shared values that include
democracy and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms. We believe that each and every
ASEAN member country has the responsibility to
honour the values shared by the group.

Moving forward, it is essential that the Security
Council continues to speak in one voice to consistently
support the Secretary-General's good offices, including
the mission carried out by Mr. Gambari.

On the part of Myanmar itself, we again urge the
Government to take further tangible steps for a genuine
and inclusive dialogue. This would be a key instrument
for achieving national reconciliation, which would
constitute a foundation for Myanmar to move forward
with its peaceful transition towards democracy.

On our part, it is Indonesia's strong commitment
to continue to encourage Myanmar, bilaterally and
within ASEAN, to address the challenges it faces in
attaining such a noble goal. We urge the Government to
continue to cooperate fully with Special Envoy
Gambari and other United Nations mechanisms.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate our firm
support for the good offices of the Secretary-General,
which emphasize the comprehensive engagement of the
United Nations with Myanmar.

I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Security Council. I shall now call on the
representatives of Myanmar.

