Mr. Miranda (Angola) (spoke in French): We
welcome your presence, Sir, and we commend the
Spanish presidency on organizing this discussion on
the civilian aspects of conflict management and peace-
building. We also thank them for the excellent support
document that we hope will be of benefit to all United
Nations Members, in particular countries emerging
from complex conflicts.

We wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement. We also welcome with
satisfaction the presence of the High Representative for
the European Union's Common Foreign and Security
Policy, Mr. Javier Solana, and the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, Mr. Said
Djinnit, as well as the representatives of the Arab
League, whose statements have made a remarkable
contribution to today's discussion.

By civilian aspects of conflict management and
peace-building, we understand the whole group of
decisions taken at the end of a conflict in order to
consolidate peace and to prevent a further outbreak of
hostilities. Peace-building does not replace
humanitarian and development activities in the
countries emerging from crisis. On the contrary, its
purpose is to complement or redirect such activities so
as to reduce the risk of further outbreak of conflict by
helping to create the most favourable conditions for
reconciliation, reconstruction and economic recovery.

Experience teaches us that post-conflict peace-
building requires much more than purely diplomatic or
military decision-making and that a consistent peace-
building effort is required to eliminate the multiple
causes of a conflict. According to the Secretary-
General's report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development,

"Since 1970, more than 30 wars have been fought
in Africa, the vast majority of them intra-State in
origin. In 1996 alone, 14 of the 53 countries of
Africa were afflicted by armed conflicts,
accounting for more than half of all war-related
deaths worldwide and resulting in more than
8 million refugees, returnees and displaced
persons. The consequences of those conflicts
have seriously undermined Africa's efforts to
ensure long-term stability, prosperity and peace
for its peoples." (S/1998/318, para. 4)

The increase in missions, many of which address
issues of a political nature, the building of national
institutions, election monitoring, the organization of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, issues relating to refugees and displaced
persons, respect for human rights and the rule of law,
and the relaunching of development attest to the
growing significance of the civilian component in
peace-building. Given this cross-sectoral nature, the
international community must necessarily take into
account the link between peace and development. It
thus must be able to rely on the cooperation,
coordination and complementarity of the principal
United Nations organs, including the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council.

Moreover, joint deployment with regional and
subregional organizations, in keeping with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter, has
demonstrated that such partnerships are mutually
advantageous. In this regard, the response of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in C6te d'Ivoire and in Liberia before the
deployment of peacekeeping forces attests to the value
and the role of regional and subregional organizations.

In the case of armed conflict, the Security
Council's role is clear. Nonetheless, in situations in
which public order and the functioning of public
institutions need to be restored at the end of a conflict,
it is incumbent on the civilian component to play a
more important role in peace-building in order to
achieve its objectives. There are certain elements that
are required and certain conditions that need to be met.
In our view, the most important conditions are the
following: first, diplomatic, political and economic
action must be undertaken on several fronts. Secondly,
the peace-building effort must be properly financed.
Thirdly, the activities of multiple actors need to be
coordinated at the highest level, in strategic and
administrative terms, in a framework incorporating all
United Nations partners, including the Bretton Woods
institutions, national authorities, the private sector and
civil society.

There is also the aspect of human rights and the
rule of law, which are also very important and vital to
the peace-building process.

The importance and the role of the private sector
in peace-building is also a great challenge for countries
emerging from conflict. The various resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly on the illicit
exploitation of natural resources, in particular as
regards the Kimberly process, eloquently demonstrate
this.

As we encourage economic development, if we
accept the rule of law, and if we give people the sense
of being members of the community where these
activities are being carried out, we are certain that the
private sector can make a crucial contribution to peace-
building.

In Africa as elsewhere, conflicts change in nature
and therefore require for different forms of action in
order to tackle their effects. Today, crises are much
more complex. The protagonists involved are
numerous, and so are their dimensions.

Keeping in mind the state of affairs in a country
such as our own, we note that there is a growing gap
between requests for assistance, which are increasingly
numerous, and the limited resources available; urgent

solutions are therefore required that are based on
clearly defined priorities.

We are therefore convinced that the international
community will continue to follow up this very serious
issue.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to once
again express great appreciation to the presidency of
the Security Council for having convened this
important debate, and we would reiterate that we will
support the presidential statement that the Council will
shortly be issuing.

