Mr. Jinga (Romania): I will honour your request,
Mr. President, to skip the first paragraph of my
statement, in which I express my gratitude. Still, I
would like to thank the briefers for their comprehensive
and useful inputs to this debate.

Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union.

I will now make a few remarks in my
national capacity.

Since the last time the Council held an open debate
on this topic in 2004 (see S/PV.4903), the international
peace and security context has changed significantly.
Today, the increasingly complex and multifaceted
nature of conflicts requires us to explore equally
complex and innovative ways to conduct reconciliation
processes. Reconciliation must acknowledge the wrongs
of the past, restore victims' human dignity and hold
perpetrators accountable. It must also be conducted
in such a way that it improves future relationships
between parties, creating a just and inclusive society
that will not relapse into conflict.
While reconciliation processes are highly context
\-sensitive, with no one-size-fits-all solution, there
are some universally valid recommendations. Let me
mention a few.

First, I highlight the importance of national
ownership. We strongly believe that communities in
conflict must play the primary role in assessing how
to conduct reconciliation processes. Reconciliation
should be nationally owned, since sustainable peace
cannot be imposed from the outside. But, while primary
responsibility lies at the national level, the international
community and the United Nations can provide
assistance. That may be done in the form of lessons
learned and good practices from similar post-conflict
situations, advocating for international norms and
standards, providing capacity development for building
effective democratic institutions, strengthening the rule
of law and ensuring adequate assistance. The promise
of a decent life offered by sustainable economic
development can be one of the strongest incentives for
pursuing reconciliation.

Secondly, inclusivity is key. Just last month, in
October, the Security Council held its annual debate
on women and peace and security (see S/PV.8649). I
reiterate that women should be placed at the heart of
conflict-resolution and peacebuilding efforts. Equally
important, young people play an essential role in
reconciliation because they can challenge stereotypes
and be agents of change in conflict transformation.
Therefore, focusing on the implementation of the
women and peace and security and the youth, peace and
security agendas is essential.

Thirdly, partnerships play a critical role. The
knowledge and expertise that regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union, the European
Union or the Economic Community of West African
States can offer are of paramount importance. We also
believe that strengthening partnerships inside the United
Nations is necessary. In that regard, during Romania's
chairmanship of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
in 2018, one of our priorities was to increase synergies
between the PBC, the Peacebuilding Fund and the
Security Council. The PBC has a unique position in
sustaining reconciliation efforts, given its convening
role in bringing together Member States, the United
Nations system, international financial institutions,
regional organizations and civil society.

Reconciliation is both a process and a goal, and
while existing institutional and legal frameworks
are absolutely indispensable, reconciliation requires
a whole-of-society approach. The role of informal
reconciliation, carried out at the individual and
community levels, can be as important as formal
processes in rebuilding trust and the fabric of society.
One of the most prominent figures of successful
reconciliation, Nelson Mandela, made that point
extremely clear when he said:

"In the end, reconciliation is a spiritual process,
which requires more than just a legal framework.
It has to happen in the hearts and minds of people."

