Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to sincerely congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We wish you every
success in your work. I would also like to thank the
Russian Federation, Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia and
the members of his team for their excellent presidency
of the Council last month.

A prosperous and integrated Africa without wars is
a noble goal that we hope will turn into reality on the
ground as soon as possible. The Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative is a road map for achieving that goal, in
line with the African Union Agenda 2063. The initiative
was endorsed by Security Council in resolution 2457
(2019), adopted in February. In that regard, I would
like to express the readiness of the State of Kuwait to
assume partnership and cooperation in support of the
efforts of all States of the African continent to overcome
obstacles and challenges.

What is needed is concerted, multilateral
international efforts. We need to cooperate with
regional and subregional organizations to develop
solutions, approaches and strategies that address
economic, security, social and development challenges
with a view to achieving sustainable peace and security
in Africa. In that context, I would like to highlight the
following elements.

First, ignoring the needs and ambitions of young
people, who constitute 20 per cent of the population in
Africa, and repeatedly shutting the door in their faces
while they are continuously marginalized explains
their adoption of radical extremist ideologies; it is what
drives them to join terrorist groups and criminal gangs,
especially since, according to United Nations statistics,
600 million of those young people live in conflict
zones. The way to counter this phenomenon, therefore,
is to give young people our attention. We can do that by
listening to them directly through dialogue and youth
forums, such as the Youth Climate Summit, convened
by the Secretary-General this past week.

Secondly, protracted conflicts and wars in Africa,
some of which have their roots in ethnic, sectarian or
religious tensions, have significantly contributed to
the recruitment of children, who have been compelled
to arm themselves and participate in the fighting, and
whose innocence and dreams have been hijacked.
Light should be shed on that phenomenon so it can
be effectively addressed. Moreover, we need to move
children away from war zones, rehabilitate them,
provide them with the help they need and reintegrate
them into society.

Thirdly, the African Union's declaration of 2019
as The Year of Refugees, Returnees and Internally
Displaced Persons: Towards Durable Solutions to
Forced Displacement in Africa signals that decades-
long wars and insecurity have led to great suffering
on the African continent, which in turn has triggered
the phenomena of increased migration and internal
displacement specifically away from conflict zones,
but to areas that are also insecure and vulnerable.
With more than 24 million displaced people in Africa,
economic, security and environmental burdens are felt
in many areas, giving rise to waves ofillegal migration.
We must resolve the root conflicts and establish
stability, peace and security in order to eliminate these
displacement phenomena, which constitute a regional
and international threat.

Fourthly, terrorism is one of the greatest
challenges for Africa. Reports and statistics show that
substantial numbers of young men and women from
Africa are joining terrorist groups, and that those
number cannot be underestimated. That is why, in
order to eliminate terrorism, we must address its root
causes by raising awareness, promoting the culture of
peace and encouraging tolerance and respect among
African peoples.

Moreover, the effects of poverty and unemployment
cannot be overlooked. They constitute fertile ground
for the spread of terrorism and violent extremism in
Africa. Poverty, marginalization and other factors
push individuals to join - and local communities
to harbour - terrorist groups, either for ideological
reasons or because of the lure of material gains. That is
why we need a specific and comprehensive approach to
preventing and countering terrorism.

In conclusion, it is essential that we include the
youth, peace and security agenda in all conferences and
meetings at all levels. Regional organizations should
give greater attention to this topic, as the League of
Arab States did recently with its Young Model award.
The African Union has also launched a number of
youth initiatives, including, in 2006, the African Youth
Charter, and today we are looking forward to the
implementation of the African Union Youth Envoy 2019-
2020 Action Plan. We must also stress the importance of
giving young people an opportunity to hold leadership
positions and participate in decision-making processes,
in line with resolution 2250 (2015).

