The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Angola for his briefing.

I shall now take the floor, once again in my capacity
as representative of France, to speak about the last leg
of our trip, which was held in Burundi at a critical
moment in the history of that country.

Although our time there was brief, we had very
fruitful exchanges with President Pierre Nkurunziza,
who met with us for over an hour; the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs and of the Interior; representatives
of civil society, including organizations representing
women and youth, and the media; religious authorities;
and a very broad spectrum ofpolitical parties reprsenting
the majority and the opposition alike. We also talked
with the United Nations Electoral Observation Mission
in Burundi (MENUB) and its Head, Mr. Cassam Uteem,
the Resident Coordinator and the country team - in
other words, all United Nations agencies on the ground.

The Security Council noted that Burundi has made
significant progress in overcoming the challenges
inherited from the civil war, but that peace remains
fragile. Much of our dialogue naturally focused on the
issue of the elections to be held in a few weeks. In that
regard, the Security Council came with simple messages.
The first was that the organization of credible, free and
fair elections in 2015 would be crucial to the future of
Burundi, and that it was imperative that the electoral
process be peaceful, inclusive, fair and transparent.

The second message was that full respect had to
be shown for the foundational texts that Burundi has
adopted, which have led to the evident stabilization
of Burundi. These include the Arusha Accords, which
must be honoured in letter and in spirit as the linchpin
of stability in the country and remain its lodestar, and
of course the Constitution, as well as the road map
for elections and the declaration recently signed by
the political parties, pledging to conduct the elections
peacefully.

Our third message was that there was an absolute
need to maintain the cohesion and unity of Burundian
society. Any debate that divides Burundi society is
dangerous, especially at this sensitive moment, and
we have called on all political stakeholders there to
make the country's best interests, peacebuilding, the
search for consensus and peace their highest priorities
and motivation. These were the messages that the
Secretary-General himself recalled yesterday when he
expressed his concern about the attempted assassination
of Mrs. Haberisoni, the wife of opposition leader
Agathon Rwasa. The dangers of escalation are real as
elections approach, and we therefore call again on the
stakeholders not to resort to violence and to engage
fully in a peaceful process.

Our discussions also allowed us to address issues
relating to human rights - in particular to express our
concerns with regard to the reduction of political space,
restrictions on freedom of assembly and expression,
and the constraints imposed on the media - and to the
independence of the judiciary. The concerns expressed
by the political parties and civil society organizations
were relayed to the authorities with whom we met.

In the three countries that the Security Council
visited, we enjoyed the best possible reception and
were able to carry out comprehensive and in-depth
interviews and travels that were extremely enlightening
and useful. On behalf of all my Security Council
colleagues, I thank the authorities of the Central
African Republic, Ethiopia and Burundi; the African
Union; the United Nations field missions - the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and MENUB;
and all services and departments of the Secretariat for
having assured the full success of our trip with their
professionalism and rigour.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The meeting rose at10.30 am.
