Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
extending our warmest congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council. We
are confident that you will bring new dynamism and
vision to the Council in its discharge of its
responsibilities.

Let me also pay tribute to Ambassador Wang
Yingfan for steering the work of the Council with
forbearance, determination and wisdom through an
extraordinarily difficult month of May.

We join colleagues in expressing our high
appreciation to Ms. Carla Del Ponte for her briefing. It
was time for the Council to have such an update, the
last one being in November, and to reflect in a
comprehensive manner on different aspects of the
responsibilities entrusted by the Council to the
International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda.

The Prosecutors' responsibility is an onerous one.
The Tribunals stand against impunity. We pay tribute to
the Prosecutor and to her colleagues for their tireless
efforts in making a historic contribution to humanity.

We are pleased to note that the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda have made
progress, often under very difficult circumstances.
Over the past few years, as the lists of detainees in
each case show, many accused, including high-ranking
officials, have been arrested, prosecuted and punished.
The opening of new trials is evidence of this progress
and dynamism.

Today we will limit our remarks to three issues.

The first is the question of the trial of the
indictees. The international community must address
the issue of apprehending high-ranking politicians and
military officers indicted by the Tribunals. Several
accused senior military and political figures remain at
large. It is an outrage that some indictees have yet to be
arrested, given that five years have elapsed since their
indictment.

The second issue is the cooperation of the
countries and regional arrangements concerned. The
success of the Tribunals in both cases depends largely
on the collaboration of the States concerned and of
those in their respective regions. In the case of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the
cooperation extended to it by regional countries in
Africa is very commendable. Such cooperation helped
our efforts in the universal struggle against impunity,
against genocide, and against crimes against humanity
and war crimes.

In the case of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, we are happy to note the increased
collaboration with the Tribunal. We appreciate the
cooperation extended to the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), the Stabilization Force (SFOR)
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in arresting the accused
and gathering evidence. In this regard, the cooperation
extended to the Tribunal by the Governments of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic
of Croatia, as we heard from the Prosecutor again this
morning, deserves our special appreciation. We
emphasize again the need for facilitation of access to
the Prosecutor.

Thirdly, there is the question of resources. The
significant growth of the number of detainees, trial and
appeals speak to the pressing need to increase the
resources for the two Tribunals. Judge Jorda pleaded
the case in great detail before the recent Peace
Implementation Council. In her briefing, Ms. Del Ponte
this morning underlined this aspect very forcefully. No
one would dispute the fact that the necessary means
should be provided to the Tribunals to meet their
requirements. The Voluntary Trust Fund has been of
immense help in sustaining the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. We
encourage all donors to continue to support the
Tribunals.

We understand that a report has been sent to the
Secretary-General on possible adjustments in
procedure, for economy in terms of both time and
budget. We request the Secretariat to attend to the
matter in an expeditious manner and submit
recommendations for decision.

The work of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia is critically important for healing
the wounds and providing for lasting peace in the
Balkans. The same is true with respect to the
contributions of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda to a lasting peace in Rwanda and the
subregion.

The Prosecutor's briefing is a solemn reminder of
our collective responsibility for the onerous tasks
entrusted to these two Tribunals. We must ensure that
as, in the case of peacekeeping missions, the means are
commensurate with the mandate.

