Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): On the very last day of
the French presidency of the Security Council, I warmly
congratulate France for its important initiatives during
this month, including the convening of today's open
debate on children and armed conflict, an agenda to
which Portugal attaches great importance.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia
Gamba, for their commitment to this agenda, for their
very comprehensive briefings this morning, and for
Ms. Gamba's first report (A/72/276). Portugal reiterates
its continued support for her important mandate, and
we commend her efforts in improving the protection of
the rights of children in armed conflict.

Portugal fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union.

Portugal welcomes and supports the Secretary-
General's new approach and his impartiality as regards
the evidence-based listing of perpetrators responsible
for committing grave violations against children.
The information contained in his most recent report
(S/2017/821) is alarming. While there have been
improvements in some countries, notably involving
the adoption of action plans to end violations against
children, in others, the recruitment and use of children
is re-emerging, and violations of children's rights,
including killings as a result ofmilitary operations - by
both State and non-State actors - have intensified.

It is intolerable that so many children in situations
of conflict are denied humanitarian access and
deprived of the most essential human rights, such as
food, water and health care, as is the growing disregard
for international law, including human rights and
humanitarian law by armed groups and Government
forces. All of this has an extremely harmful impact on
children's rights and on countries' prospects for lasting
peace, stability and development.

We recognize the significant progress achieved
and the existence of a strong normative framework
and of a mechanism to monitor, report and respond
to grave violations of children's rights. However, the
challenges ahead remain huge and must be firmly
addressed. The Council has an important responsibility
in that regard when addressing the changing nature of
conflicts, protracted conflicts, the prevalence ofviolent
extremism and the proliferation of non-State armed
groups, including terrorist groups. Children in armed
conflict require special protection that must be granted
and never forgotten or disregarded. Peacekeeping
operations' mandates must consistently address child
protection and must be given the necessary financial
means and human resources to be effective in that
regard. In addition, children deserve a central focus in
every post-conflict peacebuilding plan. In this regard,
Portugal supports the inclusion of child-protection
provisions in the mandates of peace operations and
mandatory predeployment training on child protection
for all United Nations troop and police contingents. We
also support the effective screening of peacekeepers to
ensure that individuals who have committed violations
against children do not serve with the United Nations.

Furthermore, prevention, integration, rehabilitation
and cooperation, at both the domestic and international
levels, are critical elements for the success of this agenda.
Children who have been victims of conflict need help
to physically and psychologically recover from the
traumatic damages they have suffered and to be socially
reintegrated. Such help should never be disregarded.
Efforts should actively include demobilization and the
safe return of displaced and refugee children.

It is for the international community to ensure
that child-rehabilitation programmes and educational
training are part of the planning for efforts to address
post-conflict situations and that adequate resources are
devoted to that particular component. By now, we all
understand how urgent it is to address the challenge
of reintegrating children deprived of their liberty for
their alleged association with extremist groups. From
the start, those children must be recognized as primary
victims of forcible recruitment who have been exposed
to extreme brutality.

Attacks on and the use of schools and hospitals for
military purposes must not continue with impunity.
Portugal reiterates its active engagement in providing
access to education for children, including higher
education, in emergency situations and calls on all
Governments to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration.
Access to education is both a mechanism to prevent
the recruitment and targeting of children, including
in the context of violent extremism and terrorism,
and an effective means for addressing the root causes
of conflict. Sustainable Development Goals 4 and 16
provide good frameworks for action in that context.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its Optional Protocol on the Involvement of
Children in Armed Conflict, along with the Paris
Principles - which more than 105 States, including
Portugal, have endorsed - continue to provide an
adequate basis for action. This year marks the tenth
anniversary of the Paris Commitments and the Paris
Principles, which provide guidelines for protecting
children from recruitment and use by armed forces or
armed groups. Portugal invites all Member States that
have not yet done so to consider endorsing and fully
implementing the Paris Principles.

In conclusion, protecting children from the ravages
of war is a moral imperative and a relevant part of
international peace and security. The international
community is equipped to improve the situation of
children in armed conflicts and to address the root
causes of conflict. Unequivocal political commitments
and good will are required to make a dramatic difference
for the sake of innocent children who have been trapped
by grown-ups' wars.

