At the outset, I would like to congratulate Germany on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of July. I value its efforts to steer the Council's work in the light of the regional and international challenges on its agenda. I also wish to convey my appreciation for the briefing given by Mr. Nickolay Mladenovy, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process (annex 1). Egypt associates itself with the statements on this issue submitted on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (annex 20) and of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (annex 47). Although the international community, as represented by the United Nations, has taken up the question of Palestine since the General Assembly adopted resolution 181 CID), in 1947, providing for the establishment of a Palestinian State, the Palestinian people, deprived of its right to self-determination, continues to languish under Israeli occupation. Over several decades, the Palestinian question has gone through several phases, the most recent of which has been the endorsement by Arab States and the Palestinian leadership of peace as a strategic choice in the hope of stabilizing the conflict-riddled Middle East. In that context, the Palestine Liberation Organization, as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, undertook to negotiate with the Israeli side. Negotiations managed to spread the hope among the Palestinian and Israeli peoples, as well as others in the region, that a real peace could be achieved, ending one of the region's oldest crises, one that remains the defining issue in the Arab world. Nevertheless, after all these years, progress on the Palestinian question has stagnated, and the situation in the occupied territories has deteriorated. Israeli actions on the ground continue to accelerate and intensify, with the aim of imposing a fait accompli and undermining the two-State solution so as to render impossible the establishment of a Palestinian State. Israel's settlement activities have continued. The occupying Power has persisted in confiscating land, expelling Palestinian citizens, destroying their homes and announcing plans to build additional settlement units. At the same time, Israeli settlers have violated the rights of the Palestinian people in the West Bank. Holy sites, particularly Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, have not been spared violent acts, despite the city's centrality to the followers of the world's three monotheistic religions. Israel has not only adopted such practices, but it has also declared its intention to annex more Palestinian territory, as the agreement to form the current Israeli Government provides for the annexation of parts of the West Bank, in contravention of international law, United Nations resolutions, the Fourth Geneva Convention and all terms of reference of the peace process. This annexation is something that would effectively eliminate the two-State solution and undermine the prospect of resuming negotiations. Any unilateral steps taken by Israel to annex Palestinian territories would amount to the imposition of a fait accompli and new facts on the ground that cannot be overcome or ignored. Such actions would cause the situation in the occupied territories to deteriorate further, adversely affecting the security and stability of the entire region. They would also give militant and extremist voices a platform to spread their ideas, which are inimical to peace and coexistence among peoples. Egypt has always asserted its long-standing position concerning the Palestinian people and its legitimate right to establish an independent State within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. In the light of current developments, Egypt believes that the only way to uphold the rights of the Palestinian people is to put an end to unilateral actions, in particular plans to annex Palestinian territories, halt Israeli practices in the West Bank and lift the blockade on the Gaza Strip. Those steps would create a climate conducive to the resumption of negotiations on the basis of a two-State solution, the Arab Peace Initiative, international law and internationally recognized resolutions. The other crises in the Middle East are not faring much better than the question of Palestine. Our region is increasingly affected by a dogmatic terrorist project that uses religion as a smokescreen to seize and monopolize power, destroying the principles of the nation-State and citizenship, without regard to the cost to the peoples of the region. It is regrettable that the United Nations and its organs continue to turn a blind eye to the crude and destructive actions of the Governments of a limited number of States in the region in support of these warped designs, while those States continue to spread terrorism, chaos and sectarian divisions, flouting the most important principles of international law. Those malicious schemes are doomed to fail. In the end, the solutions that will prevail are those that serve the interests of the peoples of the region and meet their aspirations for security and development through sovereign democratic States that respect the principles of citizenship and do not use religion as a smokescreen for political ambitions or expansionist fantasies. Egypt endorses the call for a global ceasefire that would enable the peoples of the region to address pandemic-related developments and lay the groundwork for a comprehensive political process based on the terms of reference set out in the relevant Security Council resolutions on resolving protracted regional conflicts. The United Nations must ensure that efforts aimed at peacefully resolving the crises in Syria and Yemen are guided by the peoples of those countries, free from foreign interference or dictates. Such efforts must also fully preserve the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of those countries and the unity of their peoples. In that context, Egypt expresses deep concern at the alarming findings set out in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2020/531), published in June. Those findings relate to the origin of smuggled weapons seized en route to Yemen, as well as to the missiles and uncrewed aerial vehicles used in attacks on vital facilities in Saudi Arabia last year, attacks that Egypt condemned in the strongest terms. In a statement delivered by Minister for Foreign Affairs Sameh Hassan Shokry Selim at the Security Council meeting on Libya held on 8 July 2020, Egypt reiterated the call by President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi for an immediate and unconditional ceasefire (see S/2020/686, annex 18). Egypt supports the political settlement of the Libyan crisis enshrined in the Cairo declaration of 6 June 2020, which is entirely consistent with the outcomes of the Berlin Conference and Security Council resolutions on Libya. The aims set forth in those declarations are to stabilize the country by restructuring the Presidential Council of Libya, form an independent Libyan Government that enjoys consensus among all Libyan parties concerned and the confidence of the Libyan House of Representatives, dissolve armed militias, combat terrorism and ensure that Libyan wealth is distributed equitably. Egypt once again condemns the destructive foreign interventions in Libya by a specific regional party that is working to recruit terrorist fighters from Syria and which supports armed militias and militant groups in the country. Owing to those interventions, there is a widening gap between, on the one hand, the legitimate aspirations of the Libyan people to live in peace, security and dignity in a unified, independent State and, on the other hand, the very real project of chaos and extremism that this regional actor seeks to sow in the country. The international community has tarried too long. The time has come to heed the voice of reason and wisdom, realize the hopes and aspirations of the peoples of the region to live in security and peace and safeguard the region's resources and lives instead of squandering them on conflicts that bleed them dry. Egypt will continue to work for peace and security in the Middle East in order to forge a better tomorrow for the peoples of the region.
