Mr. Ghafoorzai (Afghanistan): I should like to
begin by expressing this brief concluding statement, on
behalf of the Afghan people and Government,
appreciation to all those who have taken part in the open
debate on the situation in my country, Afghanistan.
Today's debate has magnified the deep concern of the
international community in general and the Security
Council in particular about the prevailing problems in our
country. The debate has also exemplified a genuine desire
to search for ways and means of achieving an end to the
"nonsense" conflict in Afghanistan. This desire is in
accord with the deep enthusiasm of the Afghan people to
see an end to the fighting. Our people has indeed suffered
enormously and wishes to cherish the fruits of peace.

However, looking deeply into the root causes of the
conflict may bring one to the conclusion that sometimes
we actually face no other alternative than to fight for
peace. Of course, putting an end to the foreign
interference would leave no reason for the conflict to
continue. It is true that, with the discontinuation of
interference, the sides involved in the conflict would be

 

one step closer to reaching an accord that would once again
enable them to stand side by side and jointly strive to
rebuild their war-ravaged country.

This leads me to recall a consensus, exemplified in the
course of today's open debate, that seems to exist on the
discontinuation of foreign interference, a consensus which
is a matter of satisfaction to my delegation.

Ideas have also been floated on ways and means that
an international effort could pursue to put an end to the
conflict. Some may deserve consideration, while others
need to be further clarified so that the people of
Afghanistan can rest assured that, in any international
initiative for their good, consideration of the will of the
Afghan people is paramount. It should be underscored that
only a process in which the people are involved would
guarantee a lasting, durable and comprehensive peaceful
political solution.
Let me state for the sake of the record that the Afghan
Government is ready to listen to and discuss any practical
proposal that may be forwarded by the Special Mission.
Ambassador Mestiri, in View of the valuable experience he
has gained during the past two years, deserves to be
supported in his endeavours to carry out the mandate
entrusted to him by the General Assembly.

The Mission's headquarters was recently moved inside
Afghanistan to the eastern city of J alalabad. This is a
positive step; however, the office's moving to the capital,
Kabul, would contribute to improving the situation there by
discouraging the random rocket attacks on that city. For the
Council's further information, there are many embassies
open in Kabul, and Ambassadors of friendly countries head
their diplomatic missions there.

We have heard the appeals of speakers, on behalf of
their Governments, to the conflicting sides. We assure the
Council that these appeals will reach the parties. However,
as far as the Government is concerned, we are only trying
to defend the innocent inhabitants of Kabul and State
sovereignty, to be transferred to a legitimate and credible,
nationally-oriented body capable of improving the situation,
a mechanism to be created - as was rightly stated by the
representative of Japan - as a result of a genuine inter-
Afghan dialogue which would represent the aspirations of
the Afghan nation, including the warring sides.

I am deeply grateful to those who spoke today and
expressed the utmost sympathy and solidarity with the
Afghan people in their hour of trial. I just hope that our
common efforts will soon generate a genuine Afghan
political will in an environment free of foreign meddling,
so that all sides may move on and enter into the second
stage of their struggle: the struggle for Afghanistan's
reconstruction.

I would like very briefly to refer to the statement
made by the representative of Pakistan. As we have
explained in the course of the debate in the General
Assembly and in the course of today's debate, our
disapproval of the Pakistani attitude is echoed by a wide
range of frustration within Pakistan at the unhealthy
policy pursued towards Afghanistan by some quarters,
especially Pakistani military intelligence. Those objections
have been well expressed by high-ranking Pakistani
officials, members of Parliament, senators, politicians,
writers and others who truly understand the value of
Afghanistan's friendship.

His Excellency the representative of Pakistan wished
to hear the "true voice" of the Afghans before the
Council. This only represents an unwillingness on the part
of the Pakistani Government to establish friendly relations
with Afghanistan and to serve as a positive element for
the restoration of peace and stability in its neighbouring
country, Afghanistan. What we heard today did not after
all seem to be in harmony with what we heard as recently
as this morning from Islamabad. Perhaps this only
justifies our finding that the Pakistani Government lacks
a State policy with regard to Afghanistan and that there
are many sides in the Pakistani Administration with
different voices, according to their group interests and
likings.

His Excellency the representative of Pakistan said
that Pakistan was not interfering in the current conflict in
Afghanistan. Owing to the magnitude of Pakistani
influence on a number of Afghan factions, especially
Taliban, we believe that Pakistan's interference, if it were
on the side of peace and the facilitation of national
reconciliation, would be welcome by Afghanistan.

Once again references were made to who is
controlling what part of the country. As a victim of
foreign interference, I will not try to explain the situation
inside Pakistan, particularly in Karachi - seven
independent agencies in northern Pakistan, in Malakand,
and so forth - fearing that this would be construed as
interference in the internal affairs of Pakistan. As far as
the representative of
 

Pakistan's references to legitimacy are concemed. these are
only justified if the Pakistani delegation is representing the
views of the Afghan opposition. They can continue to do
so, but not from the rostrum of the United Nations.

