Mr. Nesho (Albania): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for your excellent work in leading the
Security Council and for the opportunity today to speak
on a very important issue: peace, security and
development in the Balkans.

We would like to warmly welcome the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Balkans, Mr.
Carl Bildt, and the High Representative for the
European Union Common Foreign and Security Policy,
Mr. Javier Solana. They delivered important
statements, full of ideas for the present situation and
the future of the Balkans. Furthermore, I would like to
express my Government's gratitude to Mr. Solana for
his great contribution during the conflict in Kosovo.

From the outset, I should like strongly to support
and thank the United States of America and its
representative, Ambassador Holbrooke, for their
principled and far-sighted position. We believe that the
United States statement contributed towards preserving
the importance ofthe Security Council by not turning it
into a forum for endless rhetoric in which the
perpetrators of war and massacres can give lectures on
morality.

The issues raised this morning by Carl Bildt are
part of a profound analysis that explains the conflict
situation in the Balkans, a situation that is first and
foremost a consequence of a traditional Balkan policy
depending on outmoded e'tatiste concepts, with a
mentality and philosophy influenced by the lengthy
Byzantine and Ottoman dominations, and encouraged
by undefined and irresolute action on the part of the
international community in the early 19905 to find a
long-term solution in favour of international peace and
security. It can be said that, in some instances, the
ambivalence, lack of commitment and inaction of the
international community and Europe have been
influenced by the European tradition of the balance of
power and old preferences that often result in half-
hearted and temporary solutions to Balkan problems.

It was the Dayton Peace Agreement, and later the
intervention of the international community, the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the United
States and Western European countries that prevented
the spillover of the conflict throughout the Balkans and
led to liberation, Victory and hope for a lasting
solution.

The continuation of the international
community's commitment in the Balkans - not only
for security reasons, but also for the region's economic
and social development, as defined in the Stability Pact
for South-Eastern Europe - is the key to the success
and future progress of the Balkan region. We are
grateful for the assistance given by the European Union
to the Balkans and for its leading role in the Stability
Pact. The Stability Pact will create the conditions
needed by the people of the Balkan region to overcome
hatred, and becoming involved in the building of their
common future will help them to understand that their
interests lie in unity and not in division.

Success in achieving the goals of the Stability
Pact will depend on many factors: the flow of
investment and development projects, the commitment
of the Balkan States and their cooperation in joint
projects. The greater the help of the international
community, the faster the positive changes will appear.
The faster the aid of the international community, the
fewer problems will be present in the Balkans.

Unfortunately, today, an obstacle to achieving the
objectives of the Stability Pact is the criminal regime
of Milosevic, who not only is the generator of tension
and instability in the region, but also prevents
uniformity of development in the region. Albania is of
the View that the present isolation and the sanctions
placed against the Belgrade regime should continue
and be strengthened by all ways and means, a process
that will surely bring the desired solution.

Albania, as a Balkan country, sees its future
within the Balkan integrated community, with the goal
of integration into the structures ofthe European Union
and NATO. Working for the future, it is far from
holding positions that generate instability or create
conflicts. It is working to fulfil a great idea. It will
contribute and commit itself to successfully
implementing Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)
and the mission of the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo towards the creation of a
multi-ethnic society and the democratic institutions
necessary to govern the country.

We believe that the forthcoming municipal
elections in Kosovo represent a further step towards
achieving stability in the region. These elections will,
for sure, increase the responsibility of the Kosovar
Albanian community towards the objectives put
forward by the international community. We think that
the best solution for the region is that Kosovo, as an
independent entity, be integrated directly into the
European Union, thus eradicating the source of conflict
and ignoring the nationalistic positions ofthe interested
parties. This is the most just and best solution imposed
by today's realities, and will at the same time ensure
better respect for the great contribution of the
international community towards peace, security and
justice in the Balkan region. Any other solution would
be artificial and temporary.

In closing, let me say that the international
community will find a partner in Albania to work with
for the achievement of peace and security in the Balkan
region. We believe that Albania should be seen by the
international community as an important and needed
player in the process ofthe integration ofthe Balkans.

