The Secretary-General: Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, and the members of the Security
Council for your decision to convene today's meeting.
As the Council is well aware, peacekeeping today
bears little resemblance to its original character. Many of
today's peacekeeping operations seek not only to bring
stability to areas of conflict, but also to address the root
causes of conflict. This means tackling a wide variety of
needs, ranging from the political to the social and the
economic. In many conflict situations, the processes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) are
at the heart of these efforts.

That said, let me emphasize at the outset that no
efforts of ours can be a substitute for the political will of
the parties to commit themselves to peace. Still, the
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation
has frequently made a crucial contribution, not least by
helping create an environment where this process can
proceed.

We are here today because we are united in our will
to strengthen the United Nations ability to play an
effective role in helping societies address the complex
issues of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
I hope that today's discussion can lead to a renewed
determination to provide those peacekeeping operations
that are supporting these tasks with the mandates and
resources they need. I will briefly address some of the
larger issues concerning this process, but I urge the
Council to review carefully my report, which covers the
challenges in this area more broadly.

If peacekeeping operations are to support DDR
processes efficiently, it is essential that the provisions for
DDR be integrated into any peace agreement that is
reached. My report before the Council suggests that,
where feasible, arrangements for the disposal of arms and
ammunition should be decided as part of peace
negotiations, so that questions of how to dispose of the
collected arms and ammunition do not subsequently
become a stumbling block.

In addition, it is clear that an operation aimed at
addressing the issue of demobilization may require a
considerable deterrent capacity, which should be provided
early in its deployment.

It is also often essential that arms issues be
considered in a regional context. Prerequisites for a

 

successful regional approach include bilateral decisions to
share intelligence and information, cooperation by relevant
regional organizations and continued support from the
Security Council.
Responding to arms trafficking may also require a
focus on financial flows, including information on where
faction leaders are obtaining funds, where they are holding
them and how they are spending them.

While primary responsibility for reintegration falls
outside peacekeeping, I believe that peacekeeping
operations can nonetheless play a key role in this important
element of post-conflict reconstruction. In particular,
peacekeeping operations can help ensure that all factions
View the political process as one in which they can
reasonably hope to compete, and that it provides a fair and
legitimate alternative to violence.

In order to succeed in confronting this key challenge,
however, we need to extend the range of tools available to
peacekeeping operations. We need, in particular, to continue
and strengthen our special focus on the needs of child
soldiers. That means following up our most recent
discussions to include in two United Nations operations, in
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a
child protection adviser who can identify child-related
concerns in the planning, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration phases.

We also need to see a more flexible approach by the
Security Council to the use of assessed funding for critical
elements of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
so that the process can go ahead, even while funding
through voluntary sources is being mobilized. These
elements include the destruction of weapons, the provision
of seed money for quick-impact projects and measures for
child soldiers, including girl soldiers.

Finally, we need to improve our ability to locate
experienced disarmament experts and trainers for service
within peacekeeping operations in the field. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has worked over
the past year to develop training materials in this area for
the use of Member States, and will continue these efforts.

Today's peacekeeping operations engage a wide
spectrum of partners within the United Nations system,
including the World Bank, in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration activities. More and more, however, they
also need to look beyond the United Nations system.
Regional organizations and international and local non-
governmental organizations can contribute to disarmament
and demobilization, and, as we have seen recently in
Kosovo, may assist in rebuilding the social and political
infrastructure that permits reintegration.

Allow me to conclude by urging the Council to view
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes
as only one part of the multifaceted approach necessary
if we are to succeed in peacekeeping in the twenty-first
century.

We must also renew our efforts in the political
sphere, where we can do more to channel differences
peacefully through the rule of law; in the military and
security sphere, where we can do more to help armed
factions transform themselves into political civilian
organizations; in the humanitarian sphere, where we can
do more to alleviate the suffering of civilians as the first
victims of war and the last beneficiaries of peace; and in
the socio-economic sphere, where we can do more to link
post-conflict reconstruction with assistance for lasting
development.

Only within such a broad framework can the
international community make a meaningful contribution
to the success of this crucial element of post-conflict
peace-building.

