Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in the meeting
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, Karel
De Gucht, and of the representatives of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. We are grateful to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Alan Doss, for his substantive briefing on the activities
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and on
the situation in that country.

The Russian Federation supports the policy of
diplomatic efforts on the part of the international
community to stabilize the situation in the east of the
country. It is extremely important to prevent further
escalation of tensions and their spread to the subregion.
We are convinced that military means for resolving the
Congo problem do not exist. The sole path, with no
alternative, is that of dialogue and the return of the
parties to full implementation of the peace agreements
achieved in Nairobi and Goma. We call on the armed
units of the Congres national to abide by the ceasefire,
cease hostilities, retreat to pre-28 August positions and
return to the implementation of the Goma agreement.

The collective efforts of the countries of the
Great Lakes region to resolve this crisis situation are of
particular importance. It is important to re-establish a
climate of trust and confidence between the Congo and
Rwanda, including by using the facilitator mechanism
established by Mr. Obasanjo and Mr. Mkapa. The
efforts of the Special Envoys are already yielding
considerable positive results.

Within the country, the Government, in our view,
should step up multilateral efforts to resolve the crisis,
including through intensified activity to resolve the
problem of the presence of troops of the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda on the territory
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The best
way to resolve the crisis would be through the
implementation of the disengagement plan proposed by
MONUC and through a regional summit.

The conflict is multifaceted, and it is clear that
discrete measures will not yield the desired outcome.
In order to restore real stability, there is need for a
wide-ranging, comprehensive approach, including a
broad set of legal, political and international tools.
These include, above all, bilateral and multilateral
negotiations; mediation; peacekeeping, with MONUC
making full use of its mandate, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations; bringing to justice those
guilty of crimes against humanity and war crimes in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo;
increased military and economic assistance to the
country; and tightened control over compliance with
the sanctions regime imposed by the Security Council.
All of those elements are required.

A key objective is for the Government to
intensify its efforts to build a national army that can
ensure security in provinces far from the centre, as well
its efforts on security sector reform.

Broadly speaking, we agree with the conclusions
set out in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/728) and the recommendations regarding
immediate measures that would promote the restoration
of peace in the eastern part of the country.

As to the mandate of MONUC, we believe that
the Mission already has an adequate set of
competencies. Under resolution 1843 (2008), the
military component of the Mission is being
substantially strengthened. In our view, the proposal to
further strengthen the mandate requires extremely
careful, thorough and painstaking consideration that
takes account of the views of the troop-contributing
countries. The Security Council must be extremely
balanced and cautious in considering the matter of
giving United Nations peacekeepers the ability to make
independent use of coercive force against troops of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other countries.

In conclusion, my delegation expresses its
readiness to participate in constructive work on a draft
resolution extending the Mission mandate for a further
year

