The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan, document
8/2000/387.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan
of 5 May 2000 (S/2000/387).

"The Security Council welcomes the success
achieved in the peace process in Tajikistan with the
completion of implementation of main provisions of
the General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace
and National Accord in Tajikistan signed in Moscow
on 27 June 1997 under the auspices of the United
Nations (S/1997/510). It expresses its appreciation for
sequential and persistent efforts of the President of the
Republic of Tajikistan and the leadership of the
Commission on National Reconciliation in this regard.
The Council acknowledges the significant achievement
of the Tajik parties which have managed to overcome
many obstacles and to put their country on the path to
peace, national reconciliation and democracy. It joins
the Secretary-General in hoping that these
achievements will be consolidated in the further
strengthening of the institutions in the country with a
View to the democratic, economic and social
development of Tajik society.

"The Security Council notes with satisfaction that
the United Nations has played a successful and
important role in the peace process. It highly
appreciates the efforts of the United Nations Mission

of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT), supported by
the Contact Group of Guarantor States and
International Organizations (the Contact Group), the
Mission of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Collective
Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (the CIS Peacekeeping Forces),
in assisting the parties in the implementation of the
General Agreement.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to the Russian Federation, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and other interested Member States
for their sustained political support for the peace
efforts of the United Nations in Tajikistan, for
assisting the parties to maintain political dialogue
and to overcome the crises in the peace process. It
encourages the members of the former Contact
Group to continue to support Tajikistan in its further
efforts to consolidate peace, stability and democracy
in the country.

"The Security Council notes with satisfaction
that UNMOT maintained excellent relations with the
CIS Peacekeeping Forces and the Russian border
forces, which contributed to the success of the
Mission and helped to support the political process
on the ground.

"The Security Council reiterates its support for
the intention of the Secretary-General to withdraw
UNMOT when its mandate expires on 15 May 2000.
It pays tribute to all those who served in UNMOT
for the sake of peace in Tajikistan, and especially to
those members of UNMOT who gave their lives in
the cause of peace.

"The Security Council emphasizes that the
continued support of the international community in
the post-conflict phase will be crucial in allowing
Tajikistan to sustain and build on the achievements
of the peace process, and in helping it to lay a
durable foundation for a better life for its people.

"In this regard, the Security Council expresses
its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
intention to inform the Council about modalities of
the establishment and functioning of a post-conflict
peace-building office of the United Nations in
Tajikistan in order to consolidate peace and promote
democracy. It encourages close cooperation between
this office and the Mission of the OSCE and other
international agencies in Tajikistan. The Council also The Security Council has thus concluded the present

encourages Member States and others concerned to stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
make voluntary contributions to support projects

aimed at social and economic rehabilitation of this The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

country."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ZOOO/ 17.
