Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
In Abuja on 5 May, the Sudanese Government and the
Sudanese Liberation Movement signed the Darfur
peace agreement, marking a turning point in the
Sudanese peace process.

China welcomes the convening by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union of a ministerial
meeting on 15 May, at which follow-up action was
discussed and a communique issued.

In our view, the following issues are of the
greatest urgency.

First, the parties that have not yet signed the
peace agreement must be urged to do so in swift
response to the request of the African Union (AU).
Secondly, all parties in the Sudan must be asked to
honour their commitments and to implement the
agreement in a comprehensive, timely and faithful
manner. All sides need to promote conditions
conducive to the implementation of the agreement.

China welcomes the fact that resolution 1679
(2006) reflects the aforementioned issues, particularly
its wording on strengthening the capacities of the
African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS), consistent
with the AU's decision and request. We have therefore
voted in favour of the resolution.

We note, however, that China still has
reservations concerning the resolution's invocation of
Chapter VII of the Charter. The heading of Chapter VII
reads "Action with respect to the threats to the peace,
breaches of the peace, and acts of aggression". The
contents of resolution 1679 (2006) are clearly
inconsistent with that wording. On the basis of our
political support for the AU and in order to establish
conditions for the speediest possible implementation of
the resolution, we have not pressed our objections, but
that should not be construed as constituting a precedent
for the Security Council's future discussion and
adoption of new resolutions on the Sudan. At the
appropriate time, there should be a specific agreement
based on specific circumstances.

With respect to the United Nations peacekeeping
operation that is to succeed AMIS, our country's
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Li Zhaoxing, laid out
China's position at last week's Security Council
meeting of foreign ministers. We believe that, if the
United Nations is to deploy a peacekeeping operation
in Darfur, the agreement and cooperation of the
Sudanese Government must be obtained. That is a
basic principle and precondition for the deployment of
all United Nations peacekeeping operations.

