Mr. Bishnoi (India): We thank you the President
for organizing this debate, and we join other speakers in
welcoming the presence among us, earlier today, of His
Royal Highness the Crown Prince of Jordan. Countering
violent extremism is one of the most important
challenges before the international community note.
We also take the opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General and the others who have provided briefings to
the Council today.

The concept paper (S/2015/231, annex) seems to
argue that youth are central to the problem of violent
extremism and that it is somehow through social and
economic development that the challenge needs to be
addressed. I would like to say, with all due respect, that
our understanding is somewhat different. We therefore
welcome this opportunity to share our perspective.

First, in our view, we need to acknowledge that it is
the absence of State authority, or weak State authority,
that provides the breeding ground for violent extremist
organizations to operate. The fact that there are
conditions of poverty and unemployment is secondary.
In fact, those conditions also result from the absence of
strong State authority.

Secondly, religious fanaticism is responsible for
Violent extremism. The purveyors of hate and those
who characterize others as infidels are the culprits;
youth are only cannon fodder. While there is indeed
merit in empowering and educating youth, the more
obvious need is to restrain those who engage in the
politics of hate. That is the responsibility of the State
and not one that can be exercised selectively. Terrorism
is evil. There can be no good terrorist or bad terrorist.
In the same way that extremism and Violent extremism
are always evil, there should be zero tolerance.

It is the responsibility of States to ensure that their
education systems do not promote hatred and bigotry. It
is important that traditional learning systems promote
harmony and the brotherhood of all humankind. In
India, we seek to ensure that our textbooks reflect our
rich heritage of diversity. Tradition and culture should
be preserved in a spirit of responsibility and tolerance.
It is also the responsibility of States to ensure that the
media, including social media, are not used to incite
and propagate hatred. As was said earlier, States that
do not take such responsibilities seriously do so at their
own peril. In today's interconnected world, they do so
at the peril of others as well.

Lastly, a truly democratic, inclusive and
participatory form of Government will go a long way
towards preventing conditions that lead to violent
extremism. It is important that no section of society
feel excluded or marginalized. That is certainly be the
surest way of preventing radicalization.

India is one nation, with many faiths and diverse
beliefs. It is a nation whose unity is strengthened by its
pluralism. It is our firm belief that ultimately the values
represented by open and tolerant societies will be the
best foil to the forces of violent extremism.

