Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation would like to thank
Ambassadors Cesar Mayoral, Ellen Margrethe Loj and
loan Motoc for their briefings on the work of the
Committees. We would welcome the continuing
opportunity for the Council to hold open meetings to
discuss such an important question.

Syria condemns international terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. Syria itself has been a victim
of terrible terrorist acts and was among the first to
draw attention to the danger and to call for a national
and global strategy to combat terrorism.

Syria is committed to cooperating with the
various Security Council committees fighting
terrorism. We proved this when we were members of
the Council, where we participated effectively in the
work of the counter-terrorism committees.

Syria also makes sincere efforts to develop its
own legislation and to take effective measures to carry
out its commitments in that respect. We are proud to
submit our reports early. As part of its work, the Syrian
parliament has also placed top priority on the
implementation of our anti-terrorism commitments.
Laws have been enacted and complete instructions on
the laws have been issued. For example, about two
months ago, a law was enacted to combat money-
laundering. In addition, the executive authorities are
making all necessary and sincere efforts in that respect.

During its latest visit to Syria, the 1267
Committee saw for itself the great efforts my country is
making in this respect. The United Nations is a unique
forum for our collective work, which allows full
coordination and cooperation among all countries in
fighting terrorism and working against the spread of
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).

In this respect, the Arab region suffers from
terrorism in general and State terrorism in particular,
namely the terrorism practised by Israel through its
continued occupation of Arab land and its continuous
killing of Palestinian citizens, the destruction of their
property and the building of the separation wall on
their land. My country was among the first to sign the
Convention against Nuclear Terrorism and worked
towards the acceptance of that Convention. We will
participate effectively in the forthcoming discussions
to conclude a comprehensive treaty on global terrorism
by finding solutions that meet the needs for combating
that scourge.

We have submitted all the required reports within
the framework of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004)
and 1267 (1999). The Syrian authorities are following
up work with other regional and international
organizations in this area.

In the coming days, we will submit our third
report pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We believe
that the 1540 Committee should continue its work to
fight WMDs, especially in the Middle East, and to
prevent such weapons from falling into the hands of
terrorists.
All Arab countries have acceded to the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty. Israel is the only country in
the Middle East which has not done so. This is a threat
to regional and international peace and security,
because Israel has hundreds of nuclear weapons and
other WMDs. The protection of Israel by certain
parties, and especially the fact that certain parties have
covered up Israel's terrorist acts, should not be
accepted because of serious and dangerous
consequences.

Allow me to conclude by saying that the work of
these three Committees is very important for the
international community and we are hopeful that they
will enrich our multilateral international cooperation in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

