Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): It
gives me particular pleasure to welcome Karel de
Gucht, who, sad to say, I first came across more years
ago than either of us would wish to remember, in
another place - probably 20 years ago. I have seen all
the contributions he has made in different incarnations
since. I welcome him in this newer incarnation and
thank him for his briefing.

The Security Council has increasingly recognized
the role and importance of regional organizations. We
have done that in the resolutions we have adopted, and
I believe that what we heard this morning demonstrates
the commonalities that exist between the aims of the
United Nations on the one hand and those of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) on the other. If the Security Council has
primary responsibility, which it does, for international
peace and security, we actually have a shared
interest - both of us and other regional organizations -
in how, in practice, we tackle not just individual, actual
conflicts, but in how we prepare and cope with generic
issues associated with threats to international peace
and security.

The Minister set out for us the three pillars of the
OSCE. That rings so true with what is basic for the
Security Council in approaching post-conflict
situations. We need to tackle security-related, political,
institutional and economic issues. He played back to us
what Kofi Annan said in his report for the summit: that
one cannot have security without development. We
would say also, of course, that one cannot have
development without security - the two concepts
interlinked with that of the third pillar: human rights.
It is a truism for all of us that the rule of law and
democratization are basic to that process and that they
are much more than just the holding of elections.
Elections are a symptom of the rule of law; up to a
point, they may be the outcome of it. But elections in
and of themselves are not enough without the creation
of the conditions, the institutions and everything else
that goes with the rule of law and the establishment of
democratic societies.

That is why the contribution made by the OSCE
in Kosovo was so important. It remains one of the key
pillars of the efforts of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) there.
We - the United Nations, the European Union and the
OSCE - have a shared interest in an outcome in
Kosovo that addresses the whole question of the
aspirations of the people and the need, at the same
time, for regional stability, in a way that contributes to
a peaceful outcome and does not actually cause
disturbance or potential instability.

The Minister also brought up the question of the
new challenges, which are not just for the Security
Council and the United Nations - the whole United
Nations family; terrorism, organized crime and so on
are key issues. The fairly self-evident lesson is that for
the United Nations and the OSCE, the need for
enhanced cooperation and for working together in a
practical manner is actually very important, not just to
put in place the theory and the idea that, of course,
there are links between us at a broad level, but in order
to actually produce practical contributions whenever
there is a need to do so.

He has set out a whole range of areas and
situations. I can only agree with him and stress that one
of the lessons of the last two years has been to
understand fully to what extent regional cooperation,
albeit under Chapter VIII or whatever other
arrangement, with the United Nations and its family is
basic to tackle these key issues wherever necessary. He
has shown us today how that applies to the European
continent. I think that the United Kingdom can only
agree with him.

