Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, allow me to
thank Luxembourg for organizing this open debate on
a very important subject. I also thank Ms. Zerrougui,
Mr. Ladsous and Mr. Lake for their interesting and
thought-provoking statements. By the same token, I
welcome to the Chamber and thank for his remarks
Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh. He probably knows better
than any one ofus here what we are really talking about
today.

I should like to congratulate the presidency on
the adoption of a timely resolution on this matter,
which Estonia also sponsored. Resolution 2143 (2114)
represents a step forward in our common endeavour.

Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. Let me stress some topics that are
especially important for my country.

Fifteen years have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1261 (1999), and significant progress has
been made since then. Nevertheless, we in the United
Nations are used to reading, listening and talking
about the atrocities throughout the world that concern
children. Among others, most of us have read the
recently issued report of the Secretary-General on the
situation of children in Syria (S/2014/3l). We have read
that more than 10,000 children have died as a direct
result of the conflict there. We have also read that
thousands more have been injured and mutilated. We
know that more than 1 million children are now living
as refugees, and millions more are displaced within
their own country. Some children have been separated
from their families. Others have seen their parents,
brothers or sisters being killed or injured. It sounds as
if something regular is going on in the world on a daily
basis. It can happen that we do not even think any more
about the real persons behind those huge numbers or
about the thousands and millions of real children and
their suffering. What can we do to make a difference
for those children? I should like to stress three points:
education, accountability and capacity-building.

Education is the best and most effective prevention
tool we have. Habits, norms and mindsets can only be
changed through education. Only through education
can we ensure a better future for these children. Let me
stress, therefore, that schools should be for children and
should never, under any conditions, be used for military
purposes. Also, every child continuing his or her daily
schooling should be kept away from the heinous hands
of warlords willing to conscript them. Education
also means empowerment, and if one has decent job
opportunities one is less exposed to armed conflict.

Secondly, with regard to accountability, although
ending impunity for grave violations against children
in situations of armed conflict is crucial to halt and
prevent these crimes, perpetrators are rarely held to
account. National courts have the primary responsibility
in that regard. Sometimes they are not able to do that.
The international community, therefore, should assist
in strengthening national judicial systems to ensure
accountability, including through the development of
legislation criminalizing violations against children.

However, where national courts still lack the
capacity or the political will to investigate and prosecute
grave crimes against children in armed conflict, the
International Criminal Court (ICC) has a crucial role to
play. The Council itself has on numerous occasions, as
in the resolution adopted today, acknowledged that the
fight against impunity for atrocious crimes, including
against children, has been strengthened through the
work of the ICC. For the ICC to fulfil its mandate,
effective cooperation and assistance by all States, the
Council, and international and regional organizations
is essential.

To achieve its commitment to deal effectively
with perpetrators, the Council could increase pressure
on them by including violations against children in
the mandates of all Sanctions Committees and by
improving the exchange of information among the
Council, Sanctions Committees and the ICC to include
individuals on sanctions lists sought by the Court. While
it is important to work with Government authorities to
end violations against children in armed conflict, it is
also crucial to engage and conclude action plans with
non-State armed groups.

Thirdly, with regard to capacity-building and
concrete actions by the United Nations, providing
specific operational predeployment and in-mission
training for peacekeepers so as to enable them to make
the right decisions while operating in difficult situations
is one of the most important issues. We believe that
predeployment training should be a rule rather than an
exception, and we commend the recent developments
in that regard. We would like to stress the crucial role
of child protection advisers, who should be deployed in
peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding missions and
special political missions. They must be deployed in a
consistent manner, and the child protection capacities
of the different missions must be reinforced.

Finally, let me express Estonia's full support for the
"Children, not soldiers" campaign, launched yesterday.
Its aim is to end and prevent the recruitment and use of
children by Government armed forces by 2016. Indeed,
the goal sounds ambitious. In the United Nations we
rarely see goals that have to be reached in only two
years, but Estonia believes in such ambitious goals.
Children throughout the world deserve the time to be
children: they should not be parents, they should not be
used as cheap labour and they should not be soldiers.
Their blood should not be shed for the political,
ideological or economic goals of grown-ups. We will be
looking forward to the next Secretary-General's report
in June, and truly hope that progress will already be
reflected by then. No ambition should be too ambitious
on this topic.

