Ms. Willson (United States of America): The
United States remains strongly committed to
supporting the United Nations International Criminal
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda
and appreciates the work of their Presidents,
Prosecutors and Registrars to bring to justice those
most responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law.

We join others in congratulating Judge Pocar on
his election, and we welcome him to the Council. The
United States thanks the Presidents and Prosecutors for
having addressed the Council this morning.

With regard to the Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, the United States remains committed to
providing significant financial and diplomatic support.
We call on all States to fulfil their legal obligations to
cooperate fully with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Such
cooperation includes not only access to archives and
witnesses, but also apprehending all fugitive indictees
within their territories and transferring them to The
Hague without further delay. In that regard, we
welcome the arrest and transfer of Croatian ICTY
indictee Ante Gotovina to the Tribunal, and
congratulate the Croatian and Spanish authorities for
their efforts leading to his arrest.

As Secretary of State Rice stated,

"Croatia has now taken a major step forward
towards addressing the injustices of its recent
past. With the success of its considerable efforts
to locate and bring Gotovina to justice, Croatia
significantly strengthens its candidacy for its
eventual full Euro-Atlantic integration."

The United States also calls on the Government
of Serbia and Montenegro and the Bosnian Serb
authorities to fulfil their obligations to the ICTY, in
particular through the apprehension and transfer to the
Tribunal of Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, for
whom the Tribunal's doors will always remain open.

The United States and others in the international
community have made clear that upholding
international obligations to the ICTY is a prerequisite
for further integration into the Euro-Atlantic
community. As long as Karadzic and Mladic remained
at large, Serbia and Montenegro and Bosnia and
Herzegovina will not be able to fully engage with
Euro-Atlantic institutions.

We are pleased that the leaders of the Bosnian
Serb community presented the Secretary with a
statement calling for the arrest or surrender of Karadzic
and Mladic and pledging that full ICTY compliance
would be their top priority. That is a step forward, but
it must lead to serious action. We are disappointed that,
despite many statements of intent from the Government
of Serbia and Montenegro, progress has not been made
on the apprehension of Mladic. We call on Serbian
Prime Minister Kostunica as head of Government, and
on recently appointed Defence Minister Stankovic, to
intensify their efforts to apprehend and deliver
Karadzic, Mladic and all other fugitive indictees to The
Hague. Efforts will be judged by results, not just by
words.

With the recent apprehension of Ante Gotovina,
the international community must now exercise
additional scrutiny of Serbia and Montenegro and the
Bosnian Serb authorities to ensure their full
cooperation with the Tribunal. We must also all work
together to ensure the success of the ICTY'S Security-
Council-endorsed completion strategy, which seeks to
conclude trials by 2008 and all work by 2010.

The international community can help the
completion strategy succeed by providing strong
support for the Tribunal's efforts to help create the
capacity for credible domestic trials of low- and mid-
level war crimes cases. We continue to support such
efforts and note the significant work being done in
Sarajevo, Belgrade and Zagreb in that regard and urge
other States to contribute to these domestic war crimes
chambers, through either direct financial assistance or
in kind contributions.

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the United States commends the
increased pace of trials under the leadership of
President Erik Mose. We must all continue to work
together to ensure success of the Tribunal's completion
strategy, which seeks to conclude trials by 2008 and all
work by 2010, as was previously endorsed by the
Security Council.

For that to occur, the international community
must provide strong support for the ICTR's efforts to
help create the capacity for credible domestic trials of
low- and mid-level war crimes cases. We urge all
States, especially the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Republic of the Congo and Kenya, to fulfil
their international obligations to apprehend and
transfer to the ICTR Felicien Kabuga and other persons
indicted for war crimes by the Tribunal who are within
their territory. Those fugitive indictees continue to
foment conflict in the Great Lakes region and must be
actively pursued and apprehended, as called for by the
Security Council in numerous resolutions, acting under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
including 1534 (2004) and 1503 (2003).

