Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to thank all
the briefers for their comprehensive reports. We very
much appreciate the work they are doing. We also want
to commend the Secretary-General's commitment to
continuing to seek a political solution in order to achieve
peace in Yemen. Ms. DiCarlo's recent visit to Riyadh
to meet with the Government of Yemen to convey the
Secretary-General's assurance that the United Nations
remains committed to the Stockholm Agreement, and
particularly the Al-Hudaydah agreement, is a testament
to that commitment. We would also like to express
our wholehearted support for the work undertaken
by Mr. Griffiths and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard.
I would like to underline what Mr. Griffiths said
about a political solution being the only possible one
for this conflict. We must keep the dialogue going
with all parties while at the same time pushing for
the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement.
In response to the briefing, Indonesia would like to
underscore three points.

First, we are very concerned about the tensions
in the region, and we especially condemn the attacks
on Abha airport in Saudi Arabia on 12 and 16 June.
They are a threat to security and stability in the region
and jeopardize the fragile ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah.
Moreover, any provocative actions may escalate further
violence in other parts of Yemen. The humanitarian
cost is already far too high, and the Yemeni people
have suffered far too much. We agree with the
Secretary-General's assessment that an open conflict
in Al-Hudaydah will result in a humanitarian disaster
for the entire people of Yemen, as well as the region.
We must all join the consensus on preventing an open
conflict in Al-Hudaydah, as it is a vital lifeline for
humanitarian corridors.
Secondly, Indonesia remains concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. As the German
Ambassador mentioned, every report we hear from
Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley paints a picture of
sadness and grimness. I think that this has gone on
for far too long. We also noted that the World Food
Programme has considered suspending aid in Houthi-
controlled areas of Yemen due to the obstacles that have
been introduced and that have meant that humanitarian
workers have not been given the access and freedom
to decide who receives their vital assistance. It is
very saddening that humanitarian assistance is being
used and manipulated by the party controlling the
area. Indonesia calls for unhindered access for World
Food Programme personnel to deliver assistance
to the most needy. It is important that the parties
responsible cooperate fully with the United Nations
and other humanitarian agencies. We cannot accept
any obstruction of the efforts to bring food to boys and
girls dying of hunger. As Mr. Beasley mentioned in his
statement, no one should be in a position to decide who
gets to eat or not. This is a tragic situation.

Thirdly, we would like to reiterate our support
for the Special Envoy and the full implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement, as well as for all
efforts to continue seeking a political solution to the
conflict in Yemen. We also urge all stakeholders to
remain committed to the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah,
as well as to the finalization of arrangements for the
prisoner-exchange agreement and the memorandum
of understanding on Taiz. I would like to stress once
again that there is no way to end and resolve the crisis
in Yemen other than through a political solution. War
is never a desired option for anyone in the world, and
the people of Yemen have been hoping for what must
seem an elusive dream of peace for almost five years
now, which is already far too long. As the Secretary-
General said in his review (S/2019/485) of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement
(UNMHA), the Mission is a key priority

"for the people of Yemen themselves, who see
UNMHA as a ray of hope in the process of reaching
a wider peace in the country".

We are hopeful that we can establish a wider United
Nations mission beyond Al-Hudaydah to bring more
hope to more Yemeni people once a political solution
has been reached. Peace is attainable if there is political
will from us all.

