Mr. Corman (Turkey): Mr. President, first let me
thank you for organizing today's open debate, which is
indeed a very timely one. I would also like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for August.

I wish to express our thanks and appreciation to
the Ugandan mission for its efficient work during its
presidency in July. I also wish to thank Under-
Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra, as well as
General Martin Luther Agwai, for their useful and
thought-provoking briefings. General Agwai's first-
hand experience on the ground was particularly
enlightening and helpful.

I would also like to take this opportunity to salute
all the United Nations force commanders who were
with us this morning, and through them convey our

09-4428}

heartfelt gratitude to all the men and women who serve
peace under their blue berets in some of the most
dangerous parts of the world. Our hearts and prayers
are always with them, but I know they want more than
that, and rightly so. They need a more efficient
peacekeeping system that provides them with the
necessary mandate, guidance and resources and that
duly honours the heroism of the United Nations
peacekeepers who risk their lives in the line of duty
day in and night out.

That is indeed why we are here. For the eight
months since the launch of the joint France-United
Kingdom initiative, we have extensively discussed
several aspects of peacekeeping reform in various
forums. We believe it is now time to take stock of what
has been said and done so far with a View to charting a
practical way forward.

To date, what has come out of our discussions in
no ambiguous terms is a broad consensus on the need
to reform the way we run our peacekeeping operations
in the United Nations. There is explicit agreement that
the entire United Nations peacekeeping system is
plagued by serious problems and stretched to the point
where the risk of failure has become intolerable.

It is also unmistakably clear that peacekeeping
operations are seen as the showcase of United Nations
efforts to advance the ideals and principles enshrined
in its Charter. Thus, what is at stake is the credibility of
the United Nations itself, with enormous implications
for whether we will or will not be able to deliver on the
promises of the Organization in the future.

What has been even more striking throughout this
review process is that there is also broad agreement on
what needs to be done. The previous open debate (see S/PV.6153) organized in June under our own
presidency of the Council, for instance, brought out
those points of convergence in a most lucid manner.

In principle, everyone concurred that we need
earlier and more meaningful consultations with troop-
and police-contributing countries; that we should
engage and encourage regional organizations, notably
the African Union, to assume a greater role in
peacekeeping and help them strengthen their
capacities; that we have to come up with clear and
achievable mandates, matched by the necessary
resources and driven by existing capabilities; that we
ought to improve the level of information and analysis
available to us about the operational environment, in
particular military advice; that we must make better
use of benchmarks to monitor progress and to make the
necessary adjustments along the way; that we should
always have a political strategy that will guide all the
efforts of the international community, including
peacekeeping operations; that we must have a holistic
and robust approach to peace, integrating peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding into one single
strategy, including the protection of civilians; and that
we need to invest more in preventive measures,
including mediation, so as to settle conflicts through
peaceful means.

Yet, what was and is still missing are the practical
steps that will help translate this collective
understanding and commitment into a renewed and
more effective partnership, drawing together the
strengths of all stakeholders.

This is why we greatly welcome the non-paper
prepared by the Secretariat, which proposes a new
partnership agenda with a View to charting a new
horizon for United Nations peacekeeping. Frankly
speaking, we are still examining the paper and its
recommendations, but what we like about it is its
practical and action-oriented nature. Thus, we are
confident that it will provide us with the necessary
momentum and framework to build upon our next
steps.

To that end, however, we Member States need
immediately to start taking up each and every
recommendation of the non-paper and see how we can
put them into practice or why we cannot. In other
words, the Secretariat gave us a rich menu of options
and practical suggestions. It is now up to us to take
them to the operational level.
This exercise should be an all-inclusive one.
Every major stakeholder, including the Security
Council and its Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Fifth Committee of the General
Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission and of
course the Secretariat itself, all have a role to play, or
better, a responsibility to deliver.

As to the time frame of this endeavour, on the
other hand, we believe that we can and should aim at a
deadline of early next year to put in place at least the
initial and most essential elements of this new
undertaking. Indeed, 2010 will mark the tenth
anniversary of the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) and the

culmination of the "Peace Operations 2010" reform
process. There is now a chance for us to make the year
2010 a milestone for United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We should not lose this window of
opportunity.

Turkey is ready and willing to take an active part
in this important enterprise. As a traditional troop- and
police-contributing country to the United Nations and
other international peace operations, we know by heart
the difficulties encountered in the United Nations
peacekeeping system, and will do our best to help
bring about a new and results-oriented consensus on
United Nations peacekeeping.

Finally, we thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for preparing a draft presidential statement
for this meeting, which we fully support.

