Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): It is with great pleasure
that my delegation joins previous speakers in congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month of May. We are confident that you
will provide the Council with effective leadership during
this month. My delegation would also like to assure you of
its wholehearted cooperation in the discharge of your
important responsibilities.

My delegation would also like to express its sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Somavia, the Permanent
Representative of Chile, for his excellent stewardship
during the month of April, when he presided over the
Council's activities.

Today the Council's discussion is focused on the
future of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III), the largest United Nations peace-keeping
operation, as its mandate terminates today. We are therefore
most appreciative to the co-sponsors for having produced a
draft resolution now before the Council for its
consideration. My delegation also welcomes the
comprehensive report (S/ 1996/328) of the Secretary-General
of 30 April 1996 on the situation in Angola. We wish also
to express our gratitude to Mr. Beye for his commendable
efforts in the pursuit of peace in that country.

Having carefully examined the report on the situation
in Angola, my delegation cannot but express its regret at
the disappointingly slow pace at which the peace process is
progressing, despite the efforts of the international
community in laying the groundwork for a political
settlement. It is indeed a source of great concern to my
delegation that the quartering and disarming of UNITA
troops in a fully verifiable manner has not yet been
completed as scheduled. We fully share the view reflected
in operative paragraph 5 of the draft resolution, that this
aspect is crucial as well as fundamental to the success of
the peace process. We equally believe that the complete
return of the rapid reaction police to barracks under the
monitoring of UNAVEM. III, as called for in operative
paragraph 14, is essential for advancing the peace process.

Much still needs to be done. The tasks which need to
be resolved by the parties and UNAVEM. III are indeed
many and wide-ranging, from the turning over of arms,
ammunition and military equipment to UNAVEM. III to the
disarmament of the civilian population; from the
unconditional release of all prisoners to the destruction of
landmines; from the demobilization of troops and their
social reintegration to the integration of UNIT A troops
into the Angolan Armed Forces (FAA) and the formation
of unified armed forces.

Considering the magnitude of these undertakings, my
delegation is gratified to note that the Joint
Commission - the principal body charged with
monitoring the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol -
has agreed to a calendar of actions detailing the various
tasks to be implemented by the parties and UNAVEM. III
during the month of May. It is essential to emphasize, in
this context, the need for the parties to take the necessary
measures to ensure the safety of United Nations and
international personnel, as provided for in paragraph 21
of the draft resolution. It is our earnest hope that this new
timetable will be faithfully adhered to.

Any further delay in its implementation, in our
opinion, would not only be detrimental to, but even bring
about, the collapse of the peace process as a whole, thus
hindering the formation of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation, envisaged in paragraph 11 of the
draft resolution. It is therefore imperative for the parties
to show real political will by continuing negotiations on
all outstanding issues.

My delegation believes that the implementation of
the Lusaka Protocol should be facilitated by the
conducive atmosphere which can only be achieved
through the parties' firm commitment to peace. In this
regard, the parties concerned should do their utmost to
cease hostile propaganda, destroy their stockpiles of land
mines and demobilize and reintegrate ex-combatants into
civilian life.

We are keenly aware that these various aspects are
closely interlinked. For a durable peace to take hold in
Angola it is essential that the root causes of insecurity be
addressed adequately. My delegation firmly believes that
it is of the utmost importance to resolve the military
aspect of the conflict, but equally important is the creation
of job opportunities, the provision of sufficient food and
shelter and the revitalization of the national economy of
Angola.

In that regard, we fully endorse operative paragraph
25 of the draft resolution, urging the international
community to provide the necessary assistance in order to
rehabilitate and reconstruct the Angolan economy. We
believe that an improved economic environment would

 

provide the necessary conditions conducive to the
development of war-torn Angola. Consequently, this would
allow for the peace process to move forwards towards
national reconciliation. In that context, we welcome the
convening of the informal meeting of donors by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), which provided
the opportunity to conduct an exchange of views regarding
the need for the Government to adopt an adequate
macroeconomic framework. As such, a wide ranging and
well coordinated response by the international community
must be promoted.

Having said that, my delegation considers that the
draft resolution clearly spells out in detail all measures
which are expected to be implemented by the parties based
on the Lusaka Protocol and the agreed new timetable.
Though the Indonesian delegation and others fully
understand the growing frustration of the international
community, it would be appropriate given the alternative,
to persevere in the pursuit of peace by extending the
mandate of UNAVEM. III for another two months, until 11
July 1996. A perpetual prolongation of the conflict would,
in our opinion, be a disservice to the people of Angola,
who have been deprived of peace for far to long. It is now
incumbent upon the parties to fulfil their obligations.
In View of those considerations, my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution.

