Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to express my gratitude for the opportunity
afforded to my delegation to participate in this session
of the Security Council and to commend Croatia and
the President of the Croatian Republic for organizing
this open debate on threats to international peace and
security caused by terrorist acts. In this regard I would
like to fully align myself with the declaration of the
representative of France speaking on behalf of the
European Union.

The world continues to be shocked by the terrible
events that took place recently in Mumbai -
indiscriminate terrorist acts against the civil
population, which have led to universal condemnation.
Likewise, a few days ago, Spain once again became a
victim of the scourge of terrorism, as have so many
countries in the more or less recent past. The
international community cannot remain impassive in
the face of this terrorist violence that affects us all,
kills innocent people, attempts to undermine the
enjoyment of human rights and liberties and has
destabilizing effects that threaten peaceful coexistence
of nations.

It is therefore necessary to bring about firm and
sustained multilateral action, in which the United
Nations would play a central role as a guarantor of
international law and would coordinate the actions of
States and regional and universal organizations in their
fight against terrorism.

The United Nations system has played an
important role in the fight against terrorism. That is
why it has important legal instruments, such as the 16
international conventions and protocols that exist on
this issue, in addition to the numerous resolutions and
decisions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council and other measures adopted by
specialized organs and committees, including
subsidiary bodies to this Council. The international
community took an important step forward in
September 2006, when the General Assembly adopted
by consensus, the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and its Plan of Action, which sought
to draw on a package of legal and political instruments
to develop a collective and exhaustive plan to counter
terrorism. The effective implementation of the Strategy
must be a priority for all and the final success will
depend, essentially, on the political resolve of the
Member States and on the coordination efforts
deployed by this Organization.

I would like to reiterate the firm commitment of
Spain in the fight against all forms of terrorism,
regardless of its motivation or manifestation, and it is
the wish of my Government that this work be a
permanent priority in the United Nations agenda, since
effective multilateral action is essential in View of the
nature of the threat.

Spain has suffered greatly at the hand of terrorist
violence and is therefore working domestically and
internationally to prevent and combat it. Given our
cumulative lengthy experience in this area, we are
convinced that this difficult task can only be
successful, if the fight against terrorism is waged in
strict compliance with international law, with the
highest priority given to law and human rights and with
resolute international cooperation. Spain played an
important role in the drafting and adoption of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and
it is one of the major contributors to the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force of the Secretary-
General in the fight against terrorism, which is working
for the coordinated implementation of the four key
components of the Strategy throughout the United
Nations system.

Spain has therefore participated in a number of
initiatives to address the conditions that are conducive
to the spread of terrorism in areas such as the peaceful
settlement of conflicts, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations, development assistance and
providing relief for the victims of terrorism.

Moreover, Spain has actively promoted the
Alliance of Civilizations, an initiative launched by the
Secretary-General that seeks to promote mutual
understanding and cooperation between States and
peoples of all cultures and religions on the basis of the
principles and values enshrined in the United Nations

Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, in order to address every form of extremism
and fanaticism that could contribute to violence.

Spain is also justifiably proud to have been the
first State to have ratified the 16 international
instruments developed within the United Nations
system with regard to the fight against terrorism. We
have also financed technical assistance initiatives for
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, as well as activities launched by other
specialized entities within the United Nations system.

Terrorism poses a serious threat to international
peace and security. Its effects on innocent people in
every region of the world are devastating, and it seeks
to undermine the supreme values enshrined within the
United Nations Charter. The time has come for all
Member States, under the leadership of this
Organization, to show firm political resolve to address
this barbarism and to use all measures available to the
United Nations under the Charter.

We must take steps forward and seek to align our
positions in order to be able to adopt a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism in the near
future. That convention is currently at an advanced
stage of negotiation in the General Assembly. We all
stand to benefit from it, as we are all victims of this
scourge and have all paid a high price for it. We will be
able to develop an effective response only if we act
collectively. The decision lies in our hands.

