Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland would like to thank the French presidency
of the Security Council for having organized this open
debate. The diversity of the social, ethnic and religious
fabric of the Middle East must be defended against all
forms of identity-based aggression.

Switzerland would like to raise five points.

First, my country condemns in the strongest
possible terms the human rights abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law committed by
Government armed forces and non-State armed groups
in the Middle East and elsewhere. It is extremely
concerned about the credible allegations made by the
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights that the self-proclaimed Islamic State and other
extremist groups may have committed war crimes,
crimes against humanity and the crime of genocide.
The murder of children, women and men and the
immense suffering inflicted on the civilian population
are unacceptable.

Secondly, Switzerland calls on all parties to armed
conflictstomeettheirobligationsunderinternationallaw
and to respect humanitarian principles. Humanitarian
assistance must benefit the persons affected, without
any discrimination. The measures taken as part of
the struggle against terrorism should not criminalize
humanitarian aid or any contacts established with
non-State armed groups for humanitarian purposes.

Thirdly, Switzerland condemns all human rights
violations, whoever the perpetrators may be, and calls
on all actors to stop the violence. We would point out
that respect for and the protection of human rights is
the primary responsibility of States. Counter-terrorism
efforts cannot justify any weakening of the measures
aimed at ensuring the protection of and respect for
human rights and the rule of law.

In all conflicts and unstable situations, members
of vulnerable groups, including religious and ethnic
minorities, run a greater risk of suffering human rights
violations.

Fourthly, Switzerland stresses the importance
of accountability, nationally and internationally, for
all Violations and abuses committed against civilians
and for attacks against cultural property and places
of worship. We emphasize the need to prosecute
such crimes at the national level and encourage all
States to ratify the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. In accordance with the principle of
complementarity, we invite the Security Council to
consider referring the situation in Iraq to the Court. We
reiterate our call for the situation in Syria also to be
referred. We deem regrettable the rejection of the draft
resolution submitted to the Security Council in that
respect and will pursue our efforts in this area.

The prevention of violent extremism is one of
Switzerland's priorities in its efforts to promote peace
and combat terrorism. In addition to participating in
global security efforts in this field, we are committed
to promoting alternatives for young people who might
be tempted to join extremist groups, in particular by
strengthening efforts to build the capacities of at-risk
societies. For that reason, Switzerland supports the work
of the Global Community Engagement and Resilience
Fund, which seeks to implement a long-term strategy
to create jobs and therefore future prospects, so as to
make all forms of extremism appear less attractive.
Such preventive engagement is also clearly encouraged
by resolution 2178 (2014).

The Security Council has a key role to play
in combating extremism and protecting civilian
populations and minorities in times of conflict.
Switzerland therefore welcomes the efforts and unity of
the Council in facing the escalation of extremism.

