Mr. Danon (Israel): Before I begin, I would like to
congratulate the Russian Federation on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. I would also like to
thank the Polish Ambassador for her presidency.

On 15 May the Security Council began its meeting
with a moment of silence for the 61 Palestinians killed
in Gaza the day before (see S/PV.8256). As members
stood and paid their respects in mourning, Hamas
revealed that nearly 90 per cent of those who had
died had been identified as Hamas terrorists. Hamas
bragged about it. In an interview, Dr. Salah Bardawil,
a Hamas leader, confirmed it. He said, "I am giving
you an official figure. Fifty of the martyrs in the recent
battle were from Hamas".

On that day, Security Council members stood in
solidarity with the terrorists of Hamas. One would
think that the absurdity would end there, but it did not.
Moments later, at the same meeting, the Ambassador
of Bolivia listed some of the names of the people who

had died in Gaza, even as Hamas took pride in the fact
that the vast majority of them were its own. In the eyes
of the Ambassador of Bolivia, Anas Hamdan Salim
Qadee, a 21-year-old confirmed member of Hamas's
military wing, did not count as a terrorist. He must have
forgotten that this wing is the same one that is listed
as a terrorist organization by Australia, New Zealand,
Canada, the European Union, Japan, the United
Kingdom, Egypt and the United States.

On 18 May the Human Rights Council adopted
resolution S-28/1 on the recent events in Gaza. The
resolution did not even mention Hamas. Despite
Hamas's deadly activities and attacks, its attempts
to breach the security fence and infiltrate Israel, its
incitement of the people of Gaza, its use of innocent
Palestinian women and children as human shields,
the Human Rights Council chose to turn a blind eye.
Today, too, the Security Council attempted to adopt a
similar draft resolution (S/2018/516). We acknowledge
the United States and all who did not support the draft
for their moral clarity. The Security Council also had
the opportunity to adopt a draft resolution proposed by
the United States (S/2018/520), which rightly named
Hamas and the other terrorist groups as the root cause
of the conflict. It recognized that peace and stability
will never come to our region until the international
community is brave enough to call out the terrorists
by name. We thank the Americans for taking the right
stand. Ambassador Haley made it clear today that the
rules of the game are changing here in the Council and
that this double standard against Israel will not stand.

Despite the rockets fired by Hamas and Islamic
Jihad at our civilians, despite the missile that landed in
the yard of a kindergarten, despite the endless mortar
shells striking our southern communities, the draft
resolution submitted by Kuwait tried to give Hamas
a free pass. This was a text born in sin. It tried to
continue an alarming trend of absolving Hamas of all
responsibility for the violence and death it has caused. It
mentioned Israel five times. I do not know who drafted
it; many worked actively on it. Five times it mentioned
Israel, yet its drafters could not bring themselves to
mention Hamas even once. Do they not know how
to spell it? This empowers Hamas by granting it the
Security Council's stamp of approval. Hamas has ruled
Gaza with malice and brutality for 12 years. It has paid
its civilians to storm the fence with the explicit goal of
increasing the death toll. It has deprived the people of
Gaza of their basic human rights. It uses Israel to create
a scapegoat for its own failures. Hamas has launched
more than 10,000 rockets into Israeli communities and
constructed nearly 40 terror tunnels in order to kidnap
and kill Israelis.
It is true that the residents of Gaza need
protection; they need protection from Hamas, the same
organization that the Council cannot name. I must ask
Council members, who are educated people and should
understand facts when they see them, if they have not
read the news. Have they not heard of the missiles that
Hamas fired at Israeli schools or the explosives they
placed at the fence? I ask them - I ask the Ambassador
of France and the Ambassador of Sweden, who promoted
this draft resolution - why did they omit Hamas from
the draft resolution? What was the problem with adding
it to the text? They had hours of negotiations. I am
waiting for an answer. The residents of southern Israel
are waiting for an answer.

Did they forget that the European Union has
designated Hamas as a terrorist organization since
2003? Does that mean nothing to them? Maybe they
can show us what happened at the back door when
they drafted the text. I can go over the paragraph in
which they speak about rockets flying from Gaza
into Israel. They could have added "from Hamas".
Maybe they want to explain to us why, when Paris was
attacked by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), the international community stood with Paris,
but when Israel is attacked by Hamas, they blame us,
the victim. There is no difference between the evil of
Hamas and the barbarity of ISIS, Al-Qaida or Boko
Haram. Those organizations are no different in their
mission to terrorize innocent people. They are all the
same. The only draft resolution that the Council should
adopt is one that condemns Hamas and designates it a
terrorist organization.

When the Palestinians are concerned, the
international community never misses an opportunity
to blame Israel, but when it is about Palestinians
living in danger in other countries, the international
community is silent. Looking back at history, in 1991
200,000 Palestinians were expelled from Kuwait after
the Gulf War. Many were abused or killed during
that expulsion. Kuwaiti officials, and even members
of Kuwait's royal family, called for the cleansing of
Palestinian neighbourhoods. Today, thousands of
Palestinians living in Lebanon are treated like third-
class citizens. In Syria, the Yarmouk refugee camp has
faced a siege, starvation and Government shelling for
the past seven years. What was the world's reaction
to Kuwait's abuse of Palestinians in the 19905?
Silence. What about its reaction to Lebanon's years
of maltreatment of Palestinians? Silence. And to the
situation of the Palestinians in Yarmouk camp in
Syria? Silence once again. It seems that there are some
in the United Nations who speak for the Palestinians
only when Israel is involved. If the world truly wanted
to help Palestinians, it would adopt a resolution on
their situation in Kuwait, Lebanon or Syria. If it truly
wanted to help Palestinians, it would adopt a resolution
condemning Hamas, here, today.

Let me make myself clear. Israel will always
protect its civilians. We will not allow our citizens to
die for the world's distorted sense of fairness. When it
comes to the Palestinian civilians who are put in harm's
way by the terrorists in Gaza, it is Israel that acts with
greater care and respect for human life than almost any
other country, especially those that claim to stand in
solidarity with the Palestinians.

Thankfully, the biased and hypocritical draft
resolution submitted today was not adopted. But the
Security Council's moment of silence, the Human
Rights Council's resolution S-28/1, adopted on 18 May,
and the draft resolution that was introduced today only
empower Hamas. They convey the notion that some in
the international community actually support Hamas,
and confirm to Hamas that its violence and terrorism
will surely go unnoticed. They grant Hamas full
immunity. The only way to protect the Palestinians
in Gaza is by holding Hamas responsible. Those who
supported today's draft resolution chose not to protect
the Palestinians. Those who did not support it voted for
the protection of Israelis and Palestinians.

