The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

Can I first of all thank all the speakers so far who
have engaged in such a disciplined way, and also a
constructive and honest way, with the difficult issues
that we are confronting. I will abbreviate the speech
that is being circulated, in the interests of time.

I think it is worth remembering that the founding
objective of the United Nations was to secure peace
after the ravages of Second World War. On one
indicator, since the end of the cold war there has been a
welcome decline in the number of armed conflicts, a
decline of about 40 per cent. But there is another
statistic, which I do not think has been cited today, that
is nonetheless significant and speaks directly to the
point that Ambassador Khalilzad has just made. He
referred to a golden hour. The statistic that I have is
that 30 per cent of conflicts break out again within five
years of a peace settlement. I think that speaks to the
challenge that he laid out for us.

It is obviously a challenge for the parties to a
peace settlement, but it is also a challenge to the
international community for the way it delivers
support. I would like to highlight what the Foreign
Minister of Sierra Leone said about local ownership
and local responsibility. Her story, I think, is obviously
one in which the international community has played a
role by helping to end the fighting. But the real success
is the work that has been led by the Government and
people of Sierra Leone. That is the lesson we need to
take forward as we address the three questions that
were posed in the concept paper that we circulated
(S/2005/291).

I would like to reflect briefly on the difference
between success and failure in the number of examples
that have been given today in each of the three areas.

The first concerns effective leadership. A
fragmented international response is unable to be the
right sort of responsible partner for any country trying
to seek stability after conflict. That is a major issue in
the case of Afghanistan, where the recent appointment
of Mr. Kai Eide is very important for that country. But
the United Kingdom also believes it is important to
bring together the civil and military functions that too
often have been separate. It is not just a matter of
coordinating institutions; it is also a matter of
integrating functions, and that is what we will be doing
through our combined civil/military mission in
Helmand province.

The second priority that we highlighted in our
paper concerned civilian expertise, and some very good
points have been made about that today. At the
moment, over 130 British civilian experts are working
in international missions, but our Prime Minister has
committed us to developing a pool of about 1,000 such
experts, from customs officials to judges and police
officers, able to work on a standby basis and therefore
to deploy at speed in areas where needed. I am very
conscious of what the South African Defence Minister
said about the need for the international community to
be able to respond in real time, not in bureaucratic
time. I think the development of a standby capacity is
important in that respect.
The third challenge in the paper concerns
funding. Here I do want to highlight the option of a
United Nations recovery fund, to which donors commit
funds in advance so that resources are there to kick-
start recovery efforts, rather than having to spend time
raising the money once the crisis has emerged. We
have national arrangements for funding stabilization
and recovery, but at the moment there is not a central
international source of funding, and I think we could
benefit from having one.

I want to conclude by returning to the theme that
we started our discussion with today. We began with a
minute's silence for the victims in China and Myanmar.

The issues of leadership, expertise and funding that we
highlight in our paper on post-conflict stabilization are
also important in responding to humanitarian disasters.
In the United Kingdom we have taken enormous heart
from the fact that in the midst of terrible tragedy in
China we have seen Japanese rescue teams working
alongside Chinese colleagues to help save lives. I
believe is an important example.

Sadly, we have not yet the same level of
international cooperation with the Burmese authorities.
Our interest in the situation in Burma is humanitarian.
From a briefing this morning, I understand that the
people of Burma desperately need boats, helicopters
and logistics experts, as well as medical supplies and
food, to ensure the massive step-up in the delivery
effort that is needed. The challenge is to put in place an
emergency response of the scale that we saw for the
Asian tsunami and the Pakistan earthquake. I am sure
we all hope that the Secretary-General will be able to
bring about that level of effort through his good offices
and his meetings in Rangoon this week.

Let me end where I began by saying that
resolving conflict is at the heart of the Security
Council's agenda. One of the lessons of the past 20
years is that there is a need for civilian expertise to be
deployed rapidly to support Governments. We need
their people, their funding and their leadership. Like
many others who have spoken today, we too look to the
Secretary-General to offer, on the basis of this
discussion, advice that helps to develop an
international capacity sufficient to the task.

That concludes my national statement, which I
hope respected the time limit that I set for others. I
now resume my functions as President of the Council.

It is my great honour to welcome Mr. Nikola
Spirie, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and to invite him to take the floor.

