Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea): Let me begin by
thanking you, Sir, for your leadership during the month
of April and for revisiting this important issue. I would
also like to express my gratitude to the Secretary-
General for his insightful report, which highlights
many issues of critical importance for the protection of
civilians in conflict situations. I found the report to be
very timely, as civilians are increasingly becoming the
targets in armed conflicts. I am of the view that the
Secretary-General's paper has laid out a clear and
practical course of action and can therefore serve as an
excellent basis for further discussion.

Since the Republic of Korea introduced the issue
of the protection of humanitarian assistance to refugees
and others in conflict situations during its Security
Council presidency in 1997, my delegation has been
following the Council's subsequent measures with
great interest. Last year, we were pleased to see the
Security Council's adoption of three resolutions
pertaining to this issue, including resolutions 1314
(2000) and 1325 (2000), which included specific
provisions for the protection of women and children.

These measures clearly represent a growing
recognition that widespread violations of the rights of
civilians deserve the attention of the Security Council
and that human security is intricately linked to
international peace and security. However, as the
Secretary-General has noted, the challenge remains to
translate good intentions and recommendations into
concrete action. It is our hope that this debate will
generate further discussion on specific modes of action
for protecting civilians and provide the impetus to
carry out the recommendations outlined in the
Secretary-General's report.

My delegation shares the Secretary-General's
vision of a culture of protection in which Member
States and armed groups adhere to the recognized rules
of international humanitarian and human rights law and
commit themselves unequivocally to the alleviation of
armed conflicts. Implicit in this perspective is the idea
that short-term prescriptive measures are not sufficient
to ensure the protection of civilians in conflict
situations. We must also develop long-term preventive
strategies to foster international peace and security.

Allow me to comment on a few of the issues to
which my delegation attaches particular importance.

First, the Secretary-General has rightly noted that
international standards of protection can be upheld
only if they are given the force of the law. For this
reason, the Republic of Korea strongly advocates
prosecuting violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law and opposes granting amnesty to
those who commit crimes against humanity. My
delegation has been actively involved in United
Nations efforts towards this end and supports the
further development of legal instruments for the
protection of civilians in conflict areas. In this regard,
the International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda represent a step in the right
direction.

Secondly, we believe that the idea of smart
sanctions merits further elaboration. We recognize the
challenges inherent in the development of targeted
sanctions and emphasize that they must be tailored to
particular regimes and have clear goals. Most
importantly, any discussion of sanctions must include a
thorough review of their humanitarian implications. In
this regard, we strongly support the recommendation
made by the Secretary-General in last year's report to
establish a permanent technical review mechanism to
ascertain the potential impact of sanctions on civilians.

Thirdly, I wish to emphasize that separating
civilians from armed elements is crucial, not just for
the safety of the individuals in the affected areas, but
for the security and stability of the region as a whole.
The mass movement of people from conflict areas to
neighbouring States can destabilize entire regions and
internationalize a conflict that was once local in nature.
While bearing in mind that the primary responsibility
for protection lies with the affected States, I would like
to reaffirm the responsibility of Member States to
protect and assist refugees and internally displaced
persons when their home countries are unable or
unwilling to do so.

Fourthly, we welcome the development of
effective partnerships between the Security Council
and non-governmental organizations, civil society and
regional organizations. Regional organizations are
often well informed about the local context of
conflicts, and can therefore play a vital role in the
protection of local civilian populations.

We are therefore pleased to note that the fourth
high-level meeting between the United Nations and
regional organizations, held in February, laid the
groundwork for adopting a framework for enhanced
cooperation in peace-building.

Finally, my delegation also advocates greater
coordination and consultation among the Security
Council, the General Assembly and other United
Nations organs. In particular, we welcome the role that
the Economic and Social Council can play in civilian
protection, and we look forward to the meeting
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council on the 27th of this month.

There is a growing awareness that peacekeeping
alone cannot solve all of the problems associated with
conflict situations and that social and economic
development may help nations avert conflict. Entities
such as the Economic and Social Council address the
root causes of conflict, which are often poverty-related,
through the promotion of economic growth, poverty
eradication, sustainable development, good governance
and democracy. It is my hope that closer coordination
among the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council and other United Nations organs, such as the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, will enable us to better address the
multifaceted challenges of civilian protection in armed
conflict.

Let me conclude by reiterating my delegation's
hope that the Security Council will continue to expand
its involvement in the protection of civilians in conflict
situations. In particular, we hope that special attention
will be given to the protection of women, children and
other vulnerable groups in armed conflict. We also
advocate the adoption of specific measures for the
protection of United Nations and humanitarian
personnel. Our efforts to protect civilians in conflict
areas will be futile unless United Nations and
humanitarian personnel are granted safe access to these
areas.
The Republic of Korea will continue to be
actively involved in this process, and I hope that many
of the measures we have discussed today will be
promptly and successfully implemented.

