Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would like first to thank
you, Mr. President, for arranging this public meeting
on Kosovo today. I welcome Deputy Prime Minister
Covie to the Chamber and thank him for the statement
he just made. I wish also to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Annabi for his very comprehensive and helpful
briefing.

Ireland fully agrees with the statement that will
be delivered by Spain on behalf ofthe European Union,
so I shall make just a few comments of particular
importance to my delegation.

My delegation congratulates the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Michael Steiner, on the ambitious and positive start he
has made to his work, building on the achievements of
his predecessors. Mr. Steiner has in recent weeks
outlined a comprehensive vision for Kosovo's future
development, founded on economic progress, the rule
of law and a fair and just society for all people in
Kosovo. We urge all of Kosovo's elected leaders to
work together, including with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), to achieve the
objectives outlined by the Special Representative.
Cooperation aimed at achieving those objectives can
only enhance Kosovo's European perspectives.

Ireland welcomes the election by the Kosovo
Assembly, last month, of Ibrahim Rugova as President
and Bajram Rexhepi as Prime Minister of Kosovo, as
well as the formation of a Government. Those
elections, which ended a critical period of deadlock in
Kosovo, are a vital step towards the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). The election
of the President and Prime Minister gives real meaning
to the views of the Kosovar people as expressed in the
elections of last November. We remain concerned,
however, at the continued difficulties regarding the
participation of the Kosovo Serb Return Coalition in
the new Government, and we call on the Kosovo Serb
leaders to resolve this new impasse rapidly. We greatly
appreciate the facilitation efforts - which I believe
Mr. Annabi characterized as creative - of Mr. Steiner
in this regard, and we give the Special Representative
our full support.

However, ultimately the political leaders in
Kosovo must take responsibility for the development of
a genuine political dialogue both within and between
Kosovo's communities. We are encouraged that there
has been some progress at the municipal level, and we
look forward to a more inclusive and constructive
approach at the highest level as the 21 September
municipal elections approach.

The development of a meaningful dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade will be essential to the
achievement of the objectives outlined by the Special
Representative. The Common Document signed by
Belgrade and UNMIK last November provides the
framework for such discussions, but it is essential now
that Kosovo's elected leaders participate in the High-
Ranking Working Group and enhance that dialogue.

Ireland welcomes the creation of a joint expert
committee by UNMIK and the authorities ofthe former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to address practical
problems on the ground relating to the implementation
of the 2001 border agreement between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. We hope that the committee
can resolve practical issues in a pragmatic way to
reduce tensions in the border zone.

The slow rate of Kosovo Serb returns remains
Oworrying; it is outpaced by the continued rate of
departures. Ireland again encourages the early
development of a framework of economic and other
measures in order to increase the numbers of those
resettling, and remaining, in Kosovo. We appreciated
the comments that Mr. Annabi made earlier in that
regard. The resettlement process is a key element ofthe
reconciliation process in the province.

Ireland welcomes the transfer, as outlined by Mr.
Annabi, of Kosovo Albanian prisoners by the
authorities in Belgrade to UNMIK. The detention of
those prisoners for almost three years beyond the end
of the conflict was unjustifiable, and we hope that the
transfer will now assist efforts to develop a real
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. The
realization of that commitment by the Belgrade
authorities removes an unnecessary irritant and is a
major step in the process of reconciliation between the
Albanian and Serbian communities in Kosovo.

Ireland also believes that the fight against
organized crime must be an absolute priority for the
authorities in Kosovo. Without steps to combat crime
and the violence that often accompanies it, democracy
cannot take effective hold in Kosovo. The
establishment of the conditions for real economic
growth will also be essential in combating organized
crime in the long term. Economic success can follow
only in a society based on the rule of law.
Ireland strongly believes that the successful
development of Kosovo will help to ensure peace and
stability in South-East Europe. Kosovo's vocation lies
in Europe. Ireland believes its path - at a speed which
only Kosovo itself can determine - must surely lie in
the process of European integration. This, in turn,
depends on building a truly democratic and multi-
ethnic society. We, along with our partners in the
European Union, will continue to support greater
integration and regional cooperation through the
Stability Pact and the stabilization and association
process.

