Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2010/85), which provides a
very objective and precise overview of the situation in
Timor-Leste. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, for her briefing and for her efforts as head of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) to establish security and stability in that
country and to help its people attain their legitimate
national aspirations. We also welcome to the Security
Council His Excellency Mr. Jose' Luis Guterres, Deputy
Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of Timor-
Leste.

Lebanon appreciates the unanimity between
UNMIT and the various political and civil society
sectors in Timor-Leste, and welcomes the conclusions
of the technical assessment team on the security
situation, the rule of law, human rights, justice, the
implementation of democracy in the country, and the
economic and social situation. We also welcome the
improving political and security situation in Timor-
Leste, despite its continuing fragility, as reflected in
the report. We support the municipal elections to be
held this year in an atmosphere of political consensus,
security and stability. These elections are an important
indicator of Timor-Leste's progress in its
transformation into a democratic country based on the
rule of law.

In my country's opinion, accountability and
combating impunity are fundamental. In this regard,
we cannot help but stress the confirmation in the
Secretary-General's report of the need to complete
investigations and the collection of evidence aimed at
prosecuting the perpetrators of serious past crimes. We
view with serious concern the increasing poverty in
many sectors of the population in Timor-Leste,
particularly the sharp rise in youth unemployment. We
believe it is a social time bomb that could lead to
serious security consequences, particularly as many
youth in armed gangs were responsible for the violent
events of the 2006 crisis. Hence, the importance for the
Government to work towards economic and social

10-2486]
development in the country, especially through new
opportunities for employment and a more just
distribution of national wealth.

Finally, we would stress that the international
community must continue to help Timor-Leste to build
and strengthen its institutions, particularly judicial and
security institutions. We support the recommendation
of the Secretary-General in the report on the extension
of UNMIT's mandate for a further 12 months, as it
stands, so that it may complete its mandated mission.

