Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to introduce the
latest 30-day report of the Secretary-General, covering
the month of April, on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1769 (2007). I will begin my
briefing with an update on the fighting that took place
over the past weekend in Omdurman between rebel
fighters and Government of Sudan forces, which has
been a source of great concern for all of us. I will then
give an overview of the security and humanitarian
situation in Darfur, and will provide Council members
with additional detail on the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and related priorities as outlined in the
2
30-day report. I will also provide a brief update on the
Special Envoys' efforts on the political track.

With regard to the security situation, as the
Council will be aware, fighting broke out over the
weekend in Omdurman, which is located on the west
bank of the Nile river and is one of the three principal
urban areas of the Khartoum region. On Friday, 9 May,
the Government of Sudan informed the diplomatic
community in Khartoum that it had received reports of
some 200 to 300 vehicles of the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) advancing from Northern Darfur
towards Omdurman and the city of El Obeid in
Northern Kordofan. The Government stated that the
Sudanese Armed Forces had engaged these JEM
elements, through aerial attacks, near El Obeid, and
warned the diplomatic community to be alert.

On the afternoon of Saturday, 10 May, the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) reported that
fighting had broken out in Omdurman between the
Government forces and the JEM. fighters. Media and
local sources report that JEM. elements took over a
police station in Omdurman by force, killing around
six local police there. Reports on the size of the JEM
incursion ranged from a column of 80 to 300 vehicles.
The Government of Sudan alleged that the JEM. forces
involved were supported and armed by Chadian
Government elements. The Government retaliated,
killing JEM. fighters and destroying their vehicles.
Reportedly, sporadic fighting continued until nightfall.
According to a Government source, some 20 to 30 JEM
vehicles were destroyed and some 200 JEM. personnel
arrested. Remaining JEM. personnel then reportedly
scattered to villages to the north and west of the
capital. The overall number of casualties incurred
during the fighting remains unclear at present, although
a number of bodies have been shown on Government
media broadcasts.

The Government imposed a curfew on Saturday,
10 May, beginning at 5 p.m. local time in Omdurman
and Khartoum. The curfew was lifted in Khartoum on
11 May at 12.30 p.m. local time but remains in place in
Omdurman, where Government forces have reportedly
conducted house-to-house searches for JEM. fighters
and their weapons.

(spoke in English)

The Government of Sudan accused Chad of
supporting the attack. President Omer Al-Bashir
appeared on State television late on Saturday night and
08-33839
announced the severance of diplomatic ties with Chad.
According to media reports, State security forces
ransacked the Chadian embassy in Khartoum on
Sunday morning and confiscated documents. On
11 May, the Government of Chad issued a statement
expressing its surprise that Sudan had severed
diplomatic relations between the two countries. The
Government of Chad further denied any involvement in
the incident.

In El Fasher, the situation remains calm, and
UNAMID is continuing limited patrols with force
protection, although the temporary closure of airports
interrupted the movements of rations and personnel.
We are very concerned that the movement of
significant numbers of JEM. fighters from Darfur all
the way to Khartoum went undetected and took both
UNAMID and the Government by surprise. The
incident underscores the serious shortfalls in the
Mission's resources, especially in its aerial
reconnaissance capabilities. We will, in the meantime,
work with UNAMID to find ways of improving its
monitoring capabilities using currently available
resources. Equally worryingly, UNAMID Sector West
has received unconfirmed report that the Sudan
Liberation Army-Unity (SLA-Unity) is gathering
forces with over 40 vehicles near Khor Abeche to
attack El Fasher. In addition, there have been reports of
JEM. and Chadian armed elements crossing the border
and assembling in Western Darfur.

We continue to monitor the situation closely.
UNMIS and UNAMID are in contact with the
Sudanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of
Defence and other Government authorities to seek the
full reopening of airports and explore alternative
options to move the Missions' assets and personnel if
the situation further deteriorates. In N'Djamena, the
situation remains calm so far, but United Nations staff
in Chad has been advised to stay alert. We will, of
course, update the Council on any significant
developments.

This is a deeply disturbing development that has
implications for the already complex security situation
on the ground in Darfur, but also for the operations of
UNAMID as well as for the efforts to revitalize the
Darfur political negotiations, for the Chad-Sudan
relationship and, indeed, for Sudanese national politics.

We are primarily concerned about the threat that
that escalation poses to UNAMID supply lines from
08-33839

Port Sudan to Darfur through El Obeid. Possible
retaliatory operations by the Government could also
lead to further escalation that may impede UNAMID
deployment and operations. The attack may also result
in setbacks in the ongoing efforts by the Special
Envoys to bring the parties together in Geneva to
discuss security issues. Furthermore, there is a
possibility for an intensification of what sometimes
looks like a proxy war between Chad and the Sudan,
which would jeopardize the implementation of the
Dakar Accord. On 12 May, the Secretary-General
issued a statement through his Spokesperson
condemning the use of armed force by JEM. to achieve
political ends and calling for an immediate cessation of
hostilities.

The JEM. attack on Omdurman comes during an
alarming increase in violence in Darfur itself. During
the past six weeks alone, there has been violence
between the rebel movements and the Sudanese armed
forces, as well as between factions of the movements.
That has occurred in both South and North Darfur.
Those engagements have included aerial
bombardments on rebel positions, including on villages
occupied by civilians.

Taken with the increasingly volatile situation on
the Chad-Sudan border and the increased banditry
targeting United Nations assets, the security situation
in Darfur is deteriorating at an alarming rate. The
30-day report includes a detailed description of the
specific security incidents that took place during the
reporting period.

I should now like to turn to the humanitarian
situation, because the ongoing violence has also had a
direct impact on humanitarian operations. Thirty-eight
commercial trucks hired by the World Food
Programme to transport supplies into Darfur were
hijacked during the period under review. That has
forced the agency to halve rations beginning in the
month of May, which will have serious implications for
the health and well-being of over 3 million
beneficiaries of food aid in Darfur. That also comes at
a time when malnutrition indicators remain at
extremely worrying levels in many areas of the region.

As a result of violent clashes in all three states so
far this year, more than 150,000 civilians have been
forced to flee their homes, at a rate of more than 1,200
per day. Increased tribal fighting in South Darfur
forced more than 50,000 people to flee the area in the
3
month of April alone. While some moved to already
overstretched camps such as A1 Salam, near Nyala, and
El Neem, in El Daein, others have reportedly fled to
very remote areas that are often inaccessible to
humanitarian organizations.

As I have just said, the situation of Darfur's
conflict-affected population is growing more
precarious by the day as a result of the security
situation. With rations reduced by half, with only
minimal amounts of food and other relief materials
pre-positioned in advance of the rainy season and
access decreasing, it is now more important than ever
that the parties show full respect for international
humanitarian law and ensure full access to populations
requiring humanitarian assistance.

Deploying UNAMID has been and will continue
to be an extremely complex and difficult undertaking.
The circumstances that I have just described pose
additional complications. As members can see from the
report before the Council, UNAMID is increasing its
activities with each passing month, but it still needs to
be strengthened considerably before it will be able to
implement its mandate.

The process of bringing the Mission to that level
of capability has been too slow thus far. Finalizing
arrangements with troop and police contributors has
been a painstaking and time-consuming process. Troop
contributors have justifiably taken time to fully prepare
for deployment into a complex and insecure
environment. Moving goods from Port Sudan is taking
far longer than anticipated and has recently become
perilous, with much of the equipment being hijacked
on the open road. Within the Mission itself we have
seen plans delayed by operational difficulties
associated with the great distances to be travelled, the
harsh environment and the ongoing and detailed
discussions with authorities that are required to take
forward most major actions. We must remain conscious
of the need to balance the deployment of personnel
with a supply chain that is robust enough to support
them in Darfur.

Those factors have slowed deployment
considerably and have required a thorough review and
enhancement of our plan to deploy UNAMID, so that
the Mission can have maximum effect on the ground as
soon as possible. To that end, Assistant Secretary-
General Jane Holl Lute and a supporting technical team
travelled to E1 Fasher from 11 to 17 April to develop an
enhanced plan with the UNAMID leadership aimed at
maximizing the deployment of military and police
personnel by the end of 2008. If that plan is fully
implemented, UNAMID could be at 80 per cent of its
authorized strength by the end of this year.

That total is based on an ambitious calculation
concerning which units will be prepared to deploy
within the coming months and how quickly
preparations can be completed for their reception in
Darfur. The result would be that by the end of 2008
15,300 out of 19,555 troops, 3,018 out of 3,772
individual police officers and 12 out of 19 formed
police units will be deployed to Darfur. To reach those
targets, we will have to deploy a considerable number
and wide range of units.

First, key enabling units, including engineering,
transportation, multi-role logistics and medical units,
should deploy before the rainy season.

Secondly, the current 10 infantry battalions

already deployed - four from Nigeria, four from
Rwanda, one from Senegal and one from South
Africa- must undertake rotations at the United

Nations standard of strength and equipment. Currently,
those battalions are smaller than the United Nations
standard of 800 soldiers.

Thirdly, six new battalions - two from Ethiopia,
two from Egypt, one from Senegal and one from
Thailand - as well as two new companies from Nepal
will have to deploy this year. We are planning for the
deployment of the Thai and Nepalese units
immediately following the arrival of the first Egyptian
and Ethiopian battalions in Darfur, based on the
understanding reached between the Secretary-General
and President Al-Bashir on the margins of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference Summit in
Dakar. In fact, the Secretary-General recently wrote to
President Al-Bashir to confirm that understanding.

Finally, 11 additional formed police units should
deploy in 2008.

One of the central requirements for the success of
the enhanced deployment plan is a significant
strengthening of the Mission's engineering capability.
It is engineers that can expedite the building of austere
camps and establish the minimal infrastructure
required for units to deploy. There are currently
engineering works ongoing within the Mission,
including by commercial contractors. The Council will
08-33839
recall that three military engineering companies -
from China, Egypt and Pakistan - are included in the
Mission's force composition. The advance party of the
Chinese company has established itself in South
Darfur. While there have been difficulties in delivering
their equipment, we have had very good and
encouraging news from China that the deployment is
going to proceed shortly and that possible
reinforcements can come from other parts of the
Sudan. Advance elements from the Egyptian company
are in Darfur. We expect them to initiate activities by
early next month. We are also finalizing with Pakistan
a late shift in the unit location, after which the
deployment will take place.

Those three companies will have a critical role to
play in the establishment and functioning of the
Mission, but meeting our targets now requires a
considerable augmentation of engineering capabilities.
On the military side we have already taken a number of
concrete steps to that end. We are working through the
possibility of temporarily deploying to Darfur elements
of the Chinese, Egyptian and Pakistani engineering
elements within UNMIS, with full consideration being
given to the implications for UNMIS. We are
requesting that incoming battalions from Ethiopia,
Egypt, Senegal and Thailand include a light
engineering capability. And we are asking targeted
troop-contributing countries to consider contributing an
additional dedicated engineering unit to the Mission.

As the Council will note, we are pursuing
multiple avenues to strengthen the Mission's
engineering capability, because that is a fundamental
requirement for us to achieve our objectives. But
strengthened engineering capability is not the only
requirement for enhanced deployment. There must also
be a similar improvement in the movement of goods
from Port Sudan to Darfur. Customs clearance is
currently taking one month, which is too long.
Insecurity and banditry on the roads from E1 Obeid and
throughout Darfur are causing local contractors to
refuse to transport Mission assets along these routes.
The road movement of equipment from Port Sudan to
Darfur, a distance of 1,400 miles, takes on average
seven weeks. This is also too long if we are to meet the
deployment targets for 2008.

Government assistance in providing security
along the Mission pipeline from Port Sudan to Darfur
is, therefore, critical. We are encouraged by the
discussions that the Government has already had with

UNAMID on this issue, and we look forward to
increased cooperation in this area. At the same time,
the Department of Field Support is actively exploring
alternatives, such as the movement of goods by air
from El Obeid to Darfur. The Department is also
looking into the opening of other land routes. The air
bridge option would require the Government of Sudan
to open airports to United Nations activity 24 hours a
day, seven days a week, as well as to increase United
Nations ramp space at airports.

Another key aspect for implementation of the
plan will be the provision by the Government of the
land required to build new sites for camps in a number
of locations, on the one hand, and to expand existing
camps to receive rotating battalions, on the other.
Those camps will also require secure access to water,
which will have to be guaranteed by the Government.

We are depending heavily on our troop
contributors to help us deliver the enhanced plan. We
are asking for an increase in size in the battalions
already in situ. In some cases we have approached
troop contributors to alter the composition of military
units so as to introduce engineering capability. In other
cases we are asking them to transfer assets between
missions. We are also asking them to deploy to
locations where conditions will be austere and where
military units will have to exist under the most basic
conditions. We will be working most urgently with
those who have not yet finalized preparations for
deployment, since it now takes an average of five
months from finalization of arrangements to the arrival
in Darfur of a fully equipped unit.

To achieve that last and critical objective - unit
readiness - we will also be relying on donors who are
working with specific troop-contributing countries to
ensure that they have what is required to deploy to and
to function in the challenging environment of Darfur. A
number of donor countries, including a group that
meets regularly as the Friends of UNAMID, have been
making good progress in training and equipping
UNAMID troop-contributing countries. The continued
efforts of the Friends of UNAMID are greatly
appreciated and will be indispensable in meeting our
deployment targets. That work will have to be
complemented by equally serious efforts to ensure that
deploying units are self-sustaining so that they can
focus their energies on implementing the mandate.
We will also require sustained cooperation from
the Government. Joint Special Representative
Rodolphe Adada has reported that there are regular and
productive consultations taking place between the
Mission and the Government. We will rely heavily on
those consultations being effective in our efforts to
secure the land and access to water and to improve the
speed at which goods move across the country. Those
are all fundamental requirements of the enhanced
deployment plan.

With regard to formed police units, there is
continued uncertainty regarding the readiness status of
most of the 11 units that are scheduled to deploy in
2008. In addition to the formed police unit from
Bangladesh, which is operational in Nyala,
preparations for the deployment of only two other
formed police units, from Nepal and Indonesia, are
complete. The ability of all other formed police units to
deploy in 2008 has yet to be confirmed by the police-
contributing countries, which include Egypt, Senegal,
Nigeria and Pakistan. Pledged formed police units from
Burkina Faso, Cameroon and Mali require assistance
with equipment and training. We look to donors to
assist those units in completing deployment
preparations within the next two to three months, or
else they will not be in a position to deploy in 2008.
Finally, we hope Nigeria and Indonesia will respond
favourably to our requests for one additional formed
police unit each.

Last, but certainly not least, I must mention the
missing capabilities - those for which we have not yet
received a pledge from a troop-contributing country.
Almost nine months after the adoption of resolution
1769 (2007), we continue to face shortfalls in critical
areas of the force. We still lack three medium utility
helicopter units, one aerial reconnaissance unit, one
medium transport unit, one heavy transport unit and
one multi-role logistics unit. While predeployment
preparations are under way for the light tactical
helicopter unit offered by Ethiopia, four additional
light helicopters are still being sought in order to meet
the operational requirements of the Mission. At the
same time, there is still a requirement to identify, in
collaboration with the African Union, police-
contributing countries that have the capability to
deploy the remaining seven formed police units.

I would like to once again emphasize that the
successful implementation of the enhanced deployment
plan is critically dependant on the assistance of the
stakeholders whom I have just mentioned. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations will continue
to work with those actors to ensure that we are moving
forward together in a coordinated and expeditious
manner to achieve our deployment goals.

I would like to conclude my remarks by turning
briefly to the political process and work being led by
Special Envoys Eliasson and Salim. In this context, it
is important first to say a few words about the recently
concluded population census in Sudan.

After a number of delays, Sudan's fifth
population census was carried out from 22 April to
6 May 2008. While it was successful in many areas of
Sudan, the enumeration process in Darfur experienced
a number of obstacles. As a result of the prevailing
security situation in Darfur, and due to warnings
received from the rebel movements in areas that they
control, enumerators were unable to reach many
locations, including in the region of the border with
Chad. The non-signatories to the Darfur Peace
Agreement, internally displaced persons (IDPs) and the
Mini Minawi faction of the Sudan Liberation Army all
voiced their opposition to the census, which further
hampered efforts to count the population in those areas.

Preliminary estimates by international observers
indicate that out of a total of 81 IDP camps throughout
Darfur, 25 per cent fully participated in the census,
10 per cent participated partially and over 50 per cent
did not participate at all. That will complicate efforts to
adjust power- and wealth-sharing arrangements as
stipulated by the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and
will also make it difficult to determine political
constituencies prior to Sudan's general election in
2009.

With respect to the political process in Darfur, the
Special Envoys have continued to focus their
consultations with the parties on convening a dialogue
on security-related issues. The Envoys' objective is for
those consultations to be initiated by the end of May,
and they are intensively engaging both the Government
and the five movement groupings - JEM, SLM-Addul
Wahid faction, SLM-Abdul Shafie, SLM-Unity and the
United Resistance Front. In the coming period, the
mediation will also continue its work to encourage
cohesiveness and the development of common
positions within and among the parties, as well to
include civil society groups in the political process.
The United Nations and the African Union are
also continuing their intensive search for a chief
mediator, who would be based full-time in Sudan to
strengthen the African Union-United Nations
mediation. We are working to identifying the
appropriate individual as soon as possible.

The Security Council visited Sudan one year ago
this summer and will do so again in a matter of weeks.
In the time that has elapsed since the Council's last
visit, the situation in Darfur has grown infinitely more
complex and prospects for peace seem more remote.
The parties are not demonstrating the political will to
abandon the military option, engage in negotiations or
fully cooperate with UNAMID and the humanitarian
community. The situation calls for a redoubling of
efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating table and,
in the meantime, to deploy a peacekeeping operation
capable of making a positive contribution. We will
continue to work with our partners to achieve the
ambitious objectives we have set in both those areas.

