Mr. Hayes (Ireland): It is a great pleasure for my
delegation to see you, Sir, presiding over the Security
Council. Our confident expectations that your
performance of the duties of this high office will be
marked by wisdom and effectiveness have already been
fully justified, and we wish you continued success for the
rest of your month in office. We particularly appreciate
your efforts to continue the improvements in the
transparency of the work of the Security Council. We
would also like to thank the representative of Rwanda for

 

the effective conduct of the Security Council's business last
month.

Permit me also to express to Japan our heartfelt
sympathy over the disastrous earthquake which has struck
that country and which has caused so many casualties and
brought so much suffering on its people. It is our wish that
the efforts of the Government to alleviate the plight of
those suffering will meet with significant and early success.

I welcome this opportunity to give a response to the
Secretary-General's important and, in View of the United
Nations fiftieth anniversary this year, timely report, which
has been published as a supplement to "An Agenda for
Peace". At the outset, I wish to thank him for having taken
the initiative in giving us his analysis of the many changes
that have occurred since June 1992 and for the valuable
recommendations which he makes. The Secretary-General' s
analysis and proposals are all the more valuable since they
are clearly based on the experience acquired during the past
few years, and in particular the lessons to be derived from
operations such as those in Somalia, Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia. As measures designed to strengthen the
role of the United Nations in the area of preventive
diplomacy, peacemaking and peace-keeping, the
Secretary-General's proposals merit careful study and, in
general, evoke the support of my Government.

The comments I wish to make should be seen in the
context of the statement made by the Ambassador of France
on behalf of the European Union, which we, of course,
fully endorse. In View of the importance of the issues at the
heart of this debate and the public interest and concern they
arouse, my Government wishes to make some
supplementary observations.

Our first comment, a general one, is that the ground
covered in this report, as indeed in "An Agenda for Peace",
impinges on the peace role of the United Nations system as
a whole, including, in particular, not only the Security
Council but also the General Assembly and the Secretary-
General himself.

The manner in which United Nations operations in the
field have qualitatively changed in recent years and, in
particular, have had to take on a multifaceted approach in
order to deal with the many complex problems arising from
preventive diplomacy, peace-keeping and peace-building
mandates, appropriately forms one of the major themes of
the Secretary-General's report. My Government has
welcomed the development of this multifaceted approach to
the conduct of the United Nations responsibilities in this
general area. We would like to see this approach further
developed in the future through, in particular, ensuring
that a human rights dimension is clearly provided for in
humanitarian and peace-keeping operations and is
included in further mandates, as appropriate.

The Secretary-General in his report quite rightly
highlights the increasing number of conflicts around the
world today that are within States rather than between
States. These conflicts are often of the most barbaric and
cruel kind, with large numbers of innocent civilians as
their principal victims. The role that can be played by the
United Nations to end these conflicts is both complex and
delicate, and cannot easily be performed without the help
of regional organizations. We fully support the importance
the Secretary-General attributes to the role that regional
organizations can play in preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking and peace-keeping. In this regard, we fully
subscribe to the principles which he has proposed should
underlie the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations in this area.

The way in which preventive diplomacy can be used
to pre-empt conflicts and defuse them at an early stage is
well known and has been successful on many occasions.
However, as the Secretary-General has himself pointed
out, too often the offer of assistance from the United
Nations is rejected or comes too late. There is also the
problem of ensuring that all information on or evidence
of growing instability or a potential crisis is expeditiously
brought to the attention of the competent organs, and that
appropriate action is quickly taken. For example, ample
information on the deterioration of the situation in
Rwanda was available within the United Nations system
in advance of the crisis, but did not lead to timely
preventive action. We need to examine such problems
carefully and as a matter of urgency in order to improve
the manner in which the preventive diplomacy efforts of
the United Nations are undertaken.

In this regard also, I should like to recall a proposal
put forward by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ireland, Mr. Dick Spring, in his
address to the forty-ninth regular session of the General
Assembly. In that address, he called for the establishment
of a mediation body to which the Security Council or the
General Assembly could refer difficult issues. Such a
body would, of course, act in close consultation with the
Secretary-General and would be made up of personnel
skilled in mediation. In our View, such a body could
quickly acquire an expertise and authority that would
enhance the peacemaking capacity of the United Nations.

 

My Government has noted with great interest the
Secretary-General's comments regarding the difficulties
involved in the establishment and financing of small field
missions for preventive diplomacy and peacemaking. We
believe firmly that the financing of such important missions
needs to be put on as assured a basis as possible and
therefore would urge that favourable consideration be given
by the appropriate bodies of the General Assembly to the
specific proposals which the Secretary-General has made in
this regard.

In this respect, we submit that a positive and creative
approach to a more proactive role for the United Nations in
preventing and defusing conflicts is called for. Success in
such a role not only would prevent much human suffering,
but would have the additional advantages of strengthening
the United Nations capacity for maintaining peace and of
reducing the need for costly peace-keeping missions. Again,
a case in point is Rwanda, where early preventive
diplomacy could have avoided much bloodshed and also
averted a belated and more costly international operation.

The principal - indeed, one might say
quintessential - instrument employed by the United
Nations in maintaining international peace and security
throughout the first half century of its history has been
peace-keeping. My Government fully subscribes to the view
articulated by the Secretary-General in his report that recent
experience has confirmed that respect for certain basic
principles of peace-keeping, such as impartiality, consent of
the parties and non-use of force except in self-defence, are
absolutely essential if peace-keeping mandates are to be
implemented effectively. We equally endorse his View that
classic peace-keeping must be clearly seen as distinct from
peace enforcement at all times, and the latter should never
be seen as logically deriving from the former.

The importance in United Nations peace-keeping of
ensuring strict adherence to the principle of unity of
command is a concept which my Government has always
recognized and supported, and we therefore endorse the
Secretary-General' s comments on this important matter. We
have also noted his comments generally on the subject of
command and control and, in particular, his concerns
regarding micro-management of peace-keeping operations
by the Security Council. We understand his concerns on
this point. My Government has consistently held the view
that effective communication of information between troop-
contributing countries, the Security Council and the
Secretary-General is absolutely essential in order to ensure
adequate public confidence in, and understanding of, the
United Nations and its role in the areas of peacemaking and
peace-keeping. We have therefore warmly welcomed the
recent efforts made to improve consultation procedures in
this regard, and we feel sure that these and any further
efforts to develop them can also contribute to
improvement of the overall command and control
structures.

As regards the issue of availability of troops and
equipment, my Government has taken note with interest
of the Secretary-General's proposal regarding
establishment of a rapid reaction force, and it believes
that, as outlined in the statement of the European Union,
this proposal merits further examination in all its aspects
and in conjunction with the ongoing efforts to develop the
system of stand-by arrangements.

In his report the Secretary-General has quite rightly
pointed out that the measures available for use in pursuit
of post-conflict peace-building can equally be applied in
support of preventive-diplomacy activities. He has drawn
attention, however, to the difficulties which may exist in
triggering international recognition for the application of
such measures in a situation of potential conflict where
there is as yet no United Nations peacemaking or
peace-keeping mandate. In this regard, we support his
comments on the effective early-warning role which
agencies and programmes of the United Nations system
can play in alerting the Secretary-General to potential
disputes. I also wish to reiterate my Government's belief
that the Economic and Social Council can, and should be
encouraged to, play an important role in ensuring that
information on economic and social conditions likely to
result in a threat to international peace and security is
quickly brought to the attention of the Organization and,
in particular, the Security Council. In a wider context, we
fully share the views put forward by other speakers in this
debate on the importance and relevance of the "Agenda
for Development" in addressing the economic and social
circumstances which so often trigger and, indeed, fuel
conflicts.

My Government has noted with satisfaction the
pertinent comments of the Secretary-General on the
question of what he has termed "micro-disarmament".
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons, in its
own way, needs to be as much a cause of concern for the
international community as the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. There can be no doubt about the
need to stem and control the flow of small arms. It was
for this reason that my Foreign Minister once again
proposed on behalf of my Government in September last
that the United Nations should elaborate a code of

 

conduct for conventional arms transfers. This proposal for
a code, which would set out common principles to be
observed in this area, was subsequently developed as a
European Union initiative during the recent session of the
General Assembly. It is still our belief that such a code of
conduct remains necessary and would help to bring about
the progress in conventional-arms control which the
Secretary-General has called for in his report.

The Secretary-General's report recalls that the Charter
authorizes the Security Council to impose sanctions for the
purpose not of punishing a State but of securing
modification of State behaviour which is threatening
international peace and security. Drawing on the experience
of cases where sanctions have been imposed, the
Secretary-General accurately describes them as a blunt
instrument. He adverts to aspects of their application which
should be considered before their imposition, such as clear
establishment both of the aims they are intended to achieve
and of objective criteria for their termination. He also
identifies several undesirable side effects that may result
from their application, including severe impact on third
States and exacerbation of humanitarian problems.

He suggests two headings under which action to
alleviate such effects might be taken: first, facilitating the
work of humanitarian agencies in situations where sanctions
are imposed and, secondly, responding to the expectations
raised by Article 50 of the Charter in regard to third States
which are particularly adversely affected economically by
sanctions.

These are extremely important considerations, not least
in the context of the status of and support for Security
Council decisions to impose sanctions. We believe that the
Secretary-General's proposal, in paragraphs 75 and 76, to
set up a Secretariat mechanism and give it investigatory
tasks regarding the effect of sanctions is useful, and that its
potential should be carefully examined by Member States.

It is, or should be, well understood by now that the
whole capacity of the United Nations to engage in
peacemaking and peace-keeping activities is hostage to the
willingness of Member States to observe their obligations
to pay their assessed contributions in full and on time. My
Government fully endorses the pertinent comments of the
Secretary-General on this matter, in particular his comments
in paragraph 97 of his report. We look forward to solid
progress being achieved in 1995 to improve the overall
financial situation of the Organization so as to enable all
United Nations activities, including those in the area of
peacemaking and peace-keeping, to be conducted on a
more secure financial basis.

In conclusion, my Government shares the View of
the Secretary-General that, in taking stock of all that the
United Nations has achieved in the area of peacemaking
and peace-keeping during the first half-century of its
existence, there is no reason for undue pessimism. As he
aptly points out, much has been achieved, taking into
account the fact that it is only in the past few years that
the United Nations has really been in a position to act in
the manner which was originally intended. Problems still
remain to be resolved but they can be overcome provided
the United Nations and its Member States demonstrate a
willingness both to learn from recent experiences and to
build on the Organization's successes. Progress will also
require new attitudes and new thinking, and in this regard
we echo the Secretary-General's views on the timeliness
of a demonstration on the part of all Member States of a
deeper commitment to the goals of international
cooperation and true multilateralism.

