Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I am very grateful
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom for his briefing and for all his hard work in
Afghanistan leading the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I join others in
welcoming Ambassador Saikal to the Council in his
new role and look forward to working together.

I want to begin by welcoming today's unanimous
adoption of resolution 2255 (2015). By renewing the
Taliban sanctions regime for another 18 months, we have
shown that we mean it when we say that there will be no
weakening of our resolve and no let-up in our efforts to
disrupt the finances and activities of the Taliban. Sadly,
the continued need for this sanctions regime shows that
Council support for Afghanistan remains vital and that
our job is not yet done. UNAMA is a vital part of that
support, and I applaud the Mission's determination to
continue fulfilling its mandate, often under difficult
circumstances.

The reasons for our continued role are clear.
Together, we want to build a secure and stable
Afghanistan - an Afghanistan that no longer exports
insecurity; an Afghanistan where people can thrive,
prosper and live in peace. Those are aims that all should
share in Afghanistan, its neighbours in the region
and the international community. I believe that there
are two elements at the heart of securing that future:
security and the economy.

Regarding the first point, this year's fighting
season has shown that making security a reality for all
is exceptionally tough. The Afghan National Security
Forces and all of us face an unrelenting foe in the
Taliban. I want to pay tribute to all the international
service men and women who have lost their lives, and
in particular I offer my condolences to the families
of the six international soldiers killed near Bagram
today. I also join others in praising the bravery and
resilience of the Afghan security forces. There have
been many sacrifices and many challenges this year,
particularly in Helmand province, but the Afghan
security forces are showing that they can overcome
the challenges by holding and retaking district centres
from Taliban control. The Taliban's continued attacks
against civilians, including women and children near
Kandahar, as well as at the Spanish Embassy compound
in Kabul, undermine any pretence that it is fighting for
religious ideals.

In response to such threats, the Afghan security
forces will need sustained help. That is why the United
Kingdom supports the Afghan National Army Officer
Academy and gives $110 million in annual funding
for security. It is why we have extended our military
presence, as announced in October. I hope that Member
States will all continue their vital assistance. But to
guarantee long-term security in Afghanistan, a peace
process is the only solution, so I warmly welcome the
progress made at the Heart of Asia meeting and the
associated meetings in Islamabad. I pay tribute to the
commitment and determination shown by President
Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah in pursuing
improved relations with the region and in starting
peace talks. Let us all urge Pakistan and Afghanistan
to meet their commitments to pursue peace with those
wiling to negotiate and to take concerted action against
those unwilling to do so. The United Kingdom strongly
supports the call of the Heart of Asia conference for
peace talks to begin urgently.

In addition to the Taliban threat, we share concern
at the emergence of small groups of former Afghan and
Pakistani Taliban claiming allegiance to Daesh. As we
showed in this Chamber last week, the Council is united
in its opposition to Daesh and its affiliates. Let us give
our full support to the National Unity Government of
Afghanistan in combatting such groups.

Turning to my secondpoint, economic growth is vital
if Afghans are to remain committed to Afghanistan's
future. Afghanistan's potential is significant. The
inauguration of the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-
Pakistanflndia gas pipeline this month shows that this
potential can be realized. I congratulate Turkmenistan,
Pakistan and India, as well as Afghanistan, on their
support for that project. The pipeline, like KASA 1000
and other regional projects, can have huge benefits for
all the countries of the region.

Afghanistan's potential is also seen in its
people - people like Najina, an 18-year old young
woman studying at the Afghanistan National Institute
of Music in Kabul. Najina once said that she had no
hope of being recognized for any talent, yet today she
has a chance to realize her ambition to become the
best pianist in the country. Students like Najina are not
just continuing Afghanistan's rich musical heritage;
they are also showing that Afghanistan can retain its
brightest, its best and its most talented. But ultimately,
the people of Afghanistan are the country's greatest
asset. Economic growth will be secured thanks to their
talents, skills and hard work.

Let me close by restating the United Kingdom's
enduring commitment to the Government of
Afghanistan, both financially and politically. I am
proud to reiterate our strong support for the work of the
National Unity Government, and I urge all Afghans and
the international community to continue their backing
for President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer
Abdullah. Together, we can help them address the
major economic, security and governance challenges
that Afghanistan faces.

