Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in French):
First of all, allow me to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for his briefing. I alsojoin colleagues in warmly
welcoming the new Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali, His Excellency
Mr. Coulibaly. The leadership of Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix and of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Annadif are truly worthy of
admiration, as are the dedication and perseverance of
the Mission personnel, in the complex environment
of Mali. I also pay tribute to all those who have paid
the ultimate price in their efforts to establish peace in
Mali, including the brave soldiers from the Kingdom of
the Netherlands.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands has been involved
in Mali for a long time. We are, and will remain,
committed to Mali. As needed, we will contribute
development assistance, diplomacy and our contribution
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

According to a Malian proverb, all those who paddle
in the same boat have the same goal. More than ever
before, for the international community, it is essential
that all stakeholders be motivated by a common goal:
peace in Mali. The year 2018 will be pivotal for Mali.
Elections will be an important test in renewing the
legitimacy of Mali's leaders. I would like to make three
points: on the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali, on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-S Sahel) and on good governance.

First, concerning the peace process, swift progress
in the inclusive implementation of the Peace Agreement
is urgently needed. The timeline adopted last week was
welcome progress, and we must adhere to it during
the next two months. The Netherlands welcomes the
support and mediation provided by the international
community, the European Union and, especially,
MINUSMA, thanks to which we have been able to move
forward. Such international support remains crucial.
Furthermore, the appointment of the independent
observer and the Security Council's sanctions regime
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) are vital components
for achieving tangible results in 2018. We must not
hesitate to use the tools provided by the sanctions
regime when they are needed to promote progress.

Secondly, concerning the G-5 Joint Force and the
capacity of MINUSMA, in a short time, the central part
ofMali has become ahotbed ofterrorism, intercommunal
violence, illegal migration and organized crime, which
seriously threaten the stability of Mali, the broader
Sahel region and even Europe. The link between
terrorism and transnational organized crime is toxic in
its effect. It is for that reason that resolution 2364 (2017)
quite rightly calls upon Member States to combat illicit
activities, such as drug trafficking, trafficking in
migrants and trafficking in persons. Such challenges
deserve the Council's full attention. The Netherlands
therefore welcomes the establishment of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. However,
it is important to ensure the rapid and sustainable
implementation of a sound regulatory framework in
order to prevent the occurrence of all human rights
violations. If we fail to guarantee respect for human
rights and human dignity, including with regard to
detention and judicial proceedings, we will raise a new
generation of terrorists, instead of eliminating them.

The crisis in central Mali exerts greater pressure on
the capabilities of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
To date, it remains the peacekeeping mission with the
highest number of victims among Blue Helmets, which
only serves to underscore the crucial importance of
high-quality equipment and well-trained troops.

Based on our experience in Mali, the Netherlands
has learned the importance of a well-trained troop
contingent, quality equipment and operations that are
conducted with reliable information. We would like
to underscore in particular the importance of using
innovative force-generation methods, such as rotation
plans. We call upon the Secretariat to continue efforts to
ensure the availability and sustainability of equipment,
which is vital for the Mission's effectiveness. We call
upon Member States to provide capacity to MINUSMA.
During our presidency of the Security Council in two
months" time, the modernization of peacekeeping
operations will be the subject of our open debate on
28 March.

Thirdly, the coming year will be crucial as it pertains
to good governance. In that regard, Bamako will play
the most important role in providing sound leadership
that will allow for inclusive and transparent dialogue
ahead of elections. It is also important that women and
young people be fully involved in the implementation
of the Agreement. We commend the support provided
by MINUSMA for the holding of legitimate elections.
In order to enhance accountability and reconciliation,
it is essential that the Malian Government commit to
addressing human rights abuses and that it be supported
in that endeavour. The Malian parties must commit to
implementing urgent reforms, such as decentralization
and security sector reform, that address the root causes
of the crisis. We must prove to the Malian people that
there are peace dividends to be reaped.

In conclusion, Mali and its people are faced with
myriad challenges. MINUSMA must therefore work
simultaneously at various levels. The Kingdom of the

Netherlands is fully committed to Mali, peace, justice
and development. Nonetheless, it is only with the full
commitment of parties in Mali and of the international
community that we will be able to build sustainable
peace in Mali. The Kingdom of the Netherlands will
remain the Council's partner in that endeavour.
