Mr. Palous (Czech Republic): First, let me
express our sympathy with the people of Mexico for
the outbreak of the flu epidemic.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The candidate countries Croatia and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
countries of the Stabilisation and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, as well as Armenia,
Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine align
themselves with this statement.

At the outset, let me thank the presidency,
Mexico, for organizing an open debate and reaffirm the
European Union's strong support to the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict. I would also like to
express our support for the work of Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, whose outreach activities and field
visits contribute significantly to improving the
situation of children in armed conflict. On behalf of the
European Union, I would like to thank UNICEF and
other United Nations agencies and implementation
partners for their vital field work and the input they
have made to the Secretary-General's current report on
children and armed conflict (S/2009/158).

The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the situation of children affected by armed
conflicts around the world and endorses the current
report of the Secretary-General as well as the
recommendations contained therein. More efforts
should be made to eliminate harmful practices
affecting girls and boys in armed conflict. Moreover,
the European Union highlights the need to continue to
address the short- and long-term impacts of armed
conflict on children in an effective, sustainable and
comprehensive manner.

This year we commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, and the European Union wishes to use this
occasion to call on all countries to universally
implement that Convention and its Optional Protocol.
The European Union also calls on all countries to
adhere to and implement the Paris Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups, adopted in February 2007.

The European Union emphasizes the need for the
close coordination of policies regarding the protection
of civilians across the scope of United Nations
activities in key areas such as human rights, gender
equality, rule of law, development policies,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform.

The European Union welcomes the
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict established
by Security Council resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612
(2005), especially the progress on the design and
implementation of action plans as indicated in the
Secretary-General's report. In that respect, the
European Union reiterates the importance of providing
specific child protection advisers in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and political missions. In order to see
even more progress in the future, access to all parties
involved, including non-State parties, must be ensured.

The European Union calls on Governments and
all parties concerned to abolish and prevent the
practice of recruitment and use of children in armed
forces or armed groups in clear violation of
international legal obligations and other relevant
principles. Moreover, the European Union reaffirms its
full support of the work of the International Criminal
Court in the fight against impunity for the recruitment
and use of child soldiers and as a dissuasive instrument
for potential perpetrators. The European Union
emphasizes the need to ensure a more intensive
cooperation between the Working Group and the
relevant sanctions committees.

Furthermore, we support the call to the Security
Council to take appropriate account of all categories of
grave violations. The European Union encourages the
Council to take concrete measures vis-a-vis those
parties listed in the annexes of the Secretary-General's
report, including the use of sanctions for repeat
offenders who have shown themselves unwilling to
engage in meaningful dialogue to put an end to
violations.
Accordingly, the European Union remains deeply
concerned with the increase of rape and other forms of
sexual violence against children, both boys and girls, in
armed conflict. Action needs to be taken without delay
against those egregious violations. Security Council
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) are relevant
in that regard and must be implemented. The European
Union urges the Security Council to expand the criteria
for violations that trigger the listing of a party in
annexes attached to the report of the Secretary-
General, and to include parties to armed conflict that
commit rape and other grave sexual violence against
children, as well as the intentional killing and maiming
of children.

The European Union is firmly committed to
addressing the impact of armed conflict on children in
an effective, sustainable and comprehensive manner.
The European Union continues to implement updated
guidelines on children and armed conflict through the
monitoring and reporting mechanisms in 19 priority
countries, and cooperates with the United Nations,
national and regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations and civil society on the basis of
resolution 1612 (2005). A vast range of child protection
projects are financed by the European Union through
various instruments. Those include 15 million euros for
the 2008 thematic programme, Investing in People, to
support children affected by armed conflict and
trafficking; 5 million euros for the European
Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights -
towards children's rights; in addition to substantial
broad humanitarian support.

Further, the European Union advocates a
systematic mainstreaming of human rights, gender
issues and child protection into the European Security
and Defence Policy operations on the basis of the
Checklist for the Integration of the Protection of
Children affected by Armed Conflict, and promotes a
comprehensive approach to the issue through
09-31649
humanitarian, development, security and human rights
instruments. Those commitments are further articulated
in the European Commission communication entitled,
"A Special Place for Children in European Union
External Action".

The European Union strongly encourages the
Council to improve and enhance, without further delay,
its response to violations committed against children in
situations of armed conflict, in particular sexual
violence, building upon the experience and lessons
learned in the implementation of resolution 1612
(2005), and taking into consideration the
recommendations proposed by the Secretary-General in
his current report. The European Union looks forward
to the adoption of an action-oriented presidential
statement by the Security Council as a first step in that
respect.

Let me assure the Council of the European
Union's continued commitment to this important issue.

