Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): As this is my first statement at a formal meeting
of the Security Council this January, I should like to
congratulate you on your assumption of your duties as
President of the Council for this month.

I express also my gratitude to all my colleagues for
their kind words addressed to the Russian delegation
concerning our tenure of the presidency of the Security
Council last month.

The Russian delegation is grateful to the Secretary-
General for his detailed report on Liberia. We welcome the
presence among us of the Foreign Minister of Liberia and
welcome also the important speech he delivered.

Unfortunately, the information coming out of Liberia,
including the information we have heard today, tells of
serious hold-ups in the peace process, and this is cause for
serious concern. There has been no real progress in the
processes of separation of forces, disarmament and
demobilization of combatants. Not only that - as the
Secretary-General points out in his report - there are some
armed groupings trying to re-establish control over the self-
same points from which their forces had previously been
withdrawn.

We firmly condemn the armed attacks that have
resulted in so many casualties among the peace-keeping
personnel of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). We
express our deep condolences to their families.

Events in the Tubmanburg area have acutely
worsened the situation in Liberia and halted the further
deployment of ECOMOG divisions and United Nations
military observers, thus jeopardizing the peace process as
a whole. We cannot accept the Liberian factions' attempts
to justify their attacks on the peace-keepers and the
absence of progress towards a political settlement by
alleging that the world community has not provided them
with sufficient funds to secure the peace process. The
international community is actively working for peace in
Liberia, as can be seen in the joint actions of ECOWAS,
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the United
Nations, as well as in the efforts of many individual
States, the most recent example of which was the visit to
the region by the Permanent Representative of the United
States, Ambassador Albright.

However, it is clear that lasting peace, stability and
national reconciliation cannot be imported from the
exterior. The key to success in the peace process in
Liberia is in the hands of the Liberians themselves. We
would venture to hope that their current leaders have
sufficient political will and wisdom to be able, through
joint efforts, to get their country out of this vicious circle
of Violence and bloodshed.

The task of the international community, as we see
it, is to give them all possible assistance in this regard.
The Russian Federation calls upon all Liberian parties to
cooperate fully with ECOMOG and the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) in the
performance of their duties and to fulfil the obligations
they voluntarily accepted under the Abuja Agreement.

The Russian delegation supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation that UNOMIL's mandate be
extended for four months. We expect that by the end of
March the Secretary-General will have presented for the
Security Council's consideration an interim report on
developments in the process, including an analysis of
matters connected with preparations for the elections in
Liberia, scheduled for August of this year.

The Liberian parties should understand clearly that
the patience of the international community is not
boundless and that the Security Council cannot go on
 

endlessly extending the mandate and authority of UN OMIL.
Further active support by the international community for
the peace process in Liberia will depend to a decisive
degree on whether the Liberian parties are actually able to
demonstrate the political will to normalize the situation in
the country and to fulfil faithfully the provisions of the
Abuja Agreement.

It is important to all of us that a political settlement in
Liberia should soon be crowned with complete success. We
believe that the experience gained in that country of
practical interaction between the United Nations, the OAU
and ECOWAS can be usefully applied to other peace-
keeping operations and can constitute an important
contribution to the development of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional organizations.

