Mr. anald (Norway): As we speak, millions of
civilians are trapped in armed conflicts in several
regions of the world. Although the number of conflicts
has decreased during the last 10 years, today's conflicts
tend to be protracted. They are often fought by groups
using small arms, without clear command structures. In
many cases the armed groups are unwilling to respect
the rights of civilian populations to maintain neutrality,
and this has devastating effects.

In protracted armed conflicts, civilians are
subject to widespread violence, insecurity and
displacement, with no protection against even the
gravest breaches of international humanitarian law. As
societal structures and common norms of behaviour
gradually break down, the vulnerability of the
population increases sharply. Women and children are
at particular risk.

We have seen this happen again and again - in
northern Uganda, in Darfur and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, just to mention some of the
situations of greatest concern. In northern Uganda, the
humanitarian situation is precarious. Approximately
1.3 million internally displaced persons depend on
humanitarian assistance that cannot be delivered with
regularity due to the unstable security situation and the
acute level of violence. The conflict between the
Government forces and the Lord's Resistance Army is
also having serious consequences for the whole region
and is affecting the security of civilians in the
neighbouring countries of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Sudan.

Sexual violence against women is a particularly
serious problem in Darfur and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and it is more widespread than ever.
Sexual crimes are not only being committed by the
irregular armed groups, but also by those who have
primary responsibility to protect: the armed forces and
law enforcement agencies. Attacks on humanitarian
organizations in the southern Sudan and in Darfur
during recent months add to the fear that armed groups
are targeting humanitarian personnel as part of their
strategy. That situation makes protection of and access
to civilians extremely difficult.

In his report to the Security Council, the
Secretary-General points out that humanitarian
assistance does not reach an estimated one third of the
25 million internally displaced persons. That is a
growing problem. Nepal is one of the countries where
such difficulties give reason for grave concern.

Norway fully shares the conviction expressed by
the Secretary-General in his report that strict
compliance with international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law, as well as international criminal
law, by all parties concerned provides the best basis for
ensuring the safety of the civilian population, whatever
threats they are facing. A culture of impunity for mass
atrocities can critically undermine long-term security.
If peace and reconciliation are to be real and
sustainable, they must be built on the rule of law.
Impunity for breaches of international humanitarian
and human rights law is totally unacceptable.

Norway strongly welcomed the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1),
which explicitly sets out our common responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. Once again, we
underline the great importance of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in that respect, serving as a final
safety net provided by the international community for
cases where there is no effective national mechanism to
counter impunity.
A new Security Council resolution on protection
of civilians must bring us closer to an effective
international protection regime. It is our firm belief
that the resolution must include a clear and
unambiguous reference to the responsibility to protect.
Furthermore, the particular role of the ICC in ending
impunity and securing justice should be underlined in
the resolution.

There is no doubt that the true challenge for the
Security Council is effective implementation on the
ground. A new and strengthened resolution will
potentially bring us forward - but we have to continue
focusing on implementation of already agreed texts
that are far from fully implemented, such as Council
resolutions 1325 (2000), on women, and 1612 (2005),
on children in armed conflict.

Norway welcomes the data collection announced
by the Secretary-General in his most recent report to
the Council. Our responses to armed conflicts and our
peacebuilding efforts must be based on sound
knowledge of the situation and the needs of the
victims. We would particularly like to draw the
Council's attention to the need for empirical
information on the situation of women and children in
armed conflict, and on the recruitment and employment
of child soldiers by warring factions, including States
and non-State actors.

