Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): care d'Ivoire commends Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his exceptional briefing on the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that
connection, I would like to comment on two key issues
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo: the current
electoral process and the security situation.

With regard to the electoral process, my delegation
welcomes the publishing on 5 November, by the
Independent National Electoral Commission, of the
electoral calendar, thus setting the holding of general
presidential, legislative and provincial elections for
23 December 2018 in order to help the country emerge
from this ongoing and protracted sociopolitical crisis.
To that end, Cote d'Ivoire believes that it is now up to all
stakeholders in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and in particular the Commission, to do their utmost
to ensure adherence to the set date of 23 December
2018 for the holding of general elections, in accordance
with the commitments they freely entered into under
the Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement
of 31 December 2016. All Congolese parties must, in
a spirit of peace and mutual trust, work towards the
establishment of conditions conducive to the holding
of peaceful, credible and democratic elections by
23 December 2018. In that regard, my delegation remains
concerned about recent demonstrations that resulted in
loss of life, maj or material damage and numerous arrests
of demonstrators. Cote d'Ivoire calls on the Congolese
Government to take all the appropriate measures to
calm the situation and defuse the sociopolitical climate.
We also call on all political actors to exercise restraint
and avoid violent demonstrations.

My delegation welcomes the unity among Council
members on this political track and the tireless efforts
of the Organization to enhance synergy in the efforts
of the United Nations and international and regional
organizations - in particular the African Union, the
European Union, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, the International Organization of
La Francophonie and the Southern African Development
Community - with a view to a speedy resolution of
the crisis.

With regard to the security situation, Cote d'Ivoire
expresses its concern about the growing insecurity in
the context of widespread human rights violations,
fuelled mainly by the proliferation of armed groups in
the east of the country, especially in North Kivu and
South Kivu, as well as in the west, specifically in the
Kasai region. Attacks by such groups led to the deaths
of 15 Tanzanian peacekeepers on 7 December 2017.
C6te d'Ivoire once again expresses its condolences to
the Republic of Tanzania for the deaths of those soldiers
and pays tribute to their memory. My country condemns
this deadly attack and, as Chair of the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations, looks forward to the
results of the investigation aimed at determining the
exact circumstances of this tragedy and to taking
appropriate measures so that such tragedies are not
repeated in future.

It goes without saying that the existence of such
armed groups poses a serious threat to stability
throughout the region and to the overall process for
ending the crisis. Taking appropriate measures to
deter those groups must therefore be a priority of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
in addition to its efforts to support the political process.
In my delegation's view, those are the considerations
to be taken into account when it comes to renewing
MONUSCO's mandate, which is scheduled for March.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
warmly congratulate Mr. Maman Sidikou, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and outgoing Head
of MONUSCO, for the quality of the work he has
carried out in an extremely difficult environment, as
well as to congratulate Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, on her
appointment to replace Mr. Sidikou. We wish her every
success in her new duties.

