Ms. Naeem (Maldives): Let me begin by thanking
Japan's presidency of the Security Council for
convening this quarterly open debate on the situation
in the Middle East.

The Middle East remains one of the world's most
volatile regions and continues to pose a daunting
challenge for international peace and security. While
continued efforts are under way in the fight against
terrorism, violent extremism continues to spread
throughout the region, as demonstrated by the recent
attacks in Istanbul, Baghdad, Medina and beyond,
which are particularly heinous for having been carried
out during the Holy month of Ramadan. The Maldives
strongly condemns those attacks, and extends its
condolences and sympathies to the victims and the
people who were affected by those acts of terrorism.

We also note with grave concern the continued
repression of the rights of Palestinians in the occupied
Palestinian territory, and the escalation of Violence
against Palestinians, including assaults, vandalism
and the destruction of property. Despite the Israeli
Government expressing support for an amicable two-
State solution, it continues to violate its commitments
under the Oslo Accords, and continue to designate the
West Bank as an integral part of the State of Israel in
its laws, official statements and the media. Numerous
Israeli politicians have even expressed support for
the complete formal annexation of the West Bank.
Therefore, it is evident that in practice Israel does not
recognize the right of a sovereign Palestinian State
to exist.

Furthermore, Israel continues to implement
settlement expansion policies in violation of
international law. We are witnessing a complete
and total de-legitimization of the grievances and
aspirations of the Palestinian people, as their rights
are being progressively denied through the expansion
of such illegal settlements. The denial of the right to
development of Palestine is a clear contradiction of the
aspirations set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1),
which the entire world agreed to last year. The failure
to remedy that situation creates a dangerous precedent
for the future. Therefore, the Maldives calls upon the
Security Council to devise a practical, immediate
and sustainable solution to that conflict and to take
immediate action. The solution is not to have circular
debates in the Council about how the current measures
are not working, but rather to find a new approach that
would produce practical results.

The Maldives, together with the majority of the
international community, reaffirms its commitment to
establishing an independent Palestinian State, based on
the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
and taking its rightful place as a full Member of the
United Nations.

In addition to the grave violations against
Palestinians, the Maldives also condemns the Israeli
violations of the territorial and sovereign rights of
Lebanon and the occupied Syrian Golan. We call
upon Israel to abide by the relevant Security Council
resolutions and immediately cease those actions, which
are further compromising peace and security in the
Middle East and violating international law.

The present instability in the Middle East is to a
large degree rooted in long-standing political, social,
ethnic and religious disputes that have no easy solution.
Changing geopolitical conditions have brought various
people into conflict, and they will ultimately have
to learn, or re-learn, how to tolerate differences and
live peacefully alongside one another, in accordance
with the principles of international law, which is the
cornerstone of world peace. Therefore, we cannot allow
any State to continue to blatantly disregard those viable
solutions for sustainable peace and to perpetuate the
situation of conflict in the Middle East.

