Mr. Delattre (France) (Spoke in French): I thank
the Special Coordinator for his briefing.

The status of Jerusalem has been the subject
of specific Security Council resolutions and in that
regard concerns the entire international community, as
the President of the French Republic, Mr. Emmanuel
Macron, reminded us yesterday. That is why, with
several of its partners, France took the initiative to
request this meeting of the Security Council.

As President Macron noted, we regret the decisions
announced by the President of the United States on
Wednesday, unilaterally recognizing Jerusalem as
the capital of Israel and preparing for the transfer of
the American Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. I
wish to stress three elements guiding France's position,
concerning the law, the two-State solution and the risk
of escalation, respectively.

First, as to the law, the decisions to which I
have just referred do not alter the parametres of the
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as set out
by international law. The status of Jerusalem will have
to be determined by the parties in the framework of a
peace agreement. In the absence of agreement, and in
accordance with the consensus that has prevailed for 70
years within the international community, France does
not recognize any sovereignty over Jerusalem. Thus,
following the June 1967 conflict, we did not recognize
the annexation of East Jerusalem, which is, under
international law, part of the occupied territories; nor
in 1980 did we recognize the unilateral acts taken by
Israel concerning Jerusalem.

The Council adopted resolutions 476 (1980)
and 478 (1980), before and after the enactment of
the Israeli Basic Law: Jerusalem, Capital of Israel.
These resolutions include two principles. First, any
measure aimed at altering the status of Jerusalem, as
well as the geographical, demographic and historical
characteristics of the city, is considered null and void
and must be abandoned. Secondly, all United Nations
Member States that have established diplomatic
missions in Jerusalem must remove them from the city.
This is what happened as a result of resolution 478
(1980), without exception. Finally, barely a year ago,
the adoption by the Council of resolution 2334 (2016)
recalled that no modification of the 1967 borders other
than those agreed by the parties would be recognized by
the international community, including in Jerusalem.

It is now up to the United States to clarify the
compatibility of President Trump's announcement on
6 December with this common legal base on which
all peace efforts are built. And it is more than ever
up to us to reaffirm our collective commitment to
international law, including the resolutions of the
Council, on the essential question of the status of
Jerusalem, which is decisive for any prospect of peace.
For without agreement on Jerusalem, there will be no
peace agreement.

That is the second element guiding our action.
The historical and religious significance of Jerusalem
in the eyes of all parties makes it one of the keys to
resolving not only the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, but
also to regional and international stability. Given its
gravity, its centrality in the Middle East, its symbolic
dimensions and its place in the collective imagination,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict - and at its core the
unique question of Jerusalem - is a deeply mobilizing
issue, the scope of which extends far beyond the borders
of Israel and the Palestinian territories. That is why it is

essential to take great care to provide no pretexts to the
radical movements in the region and, on the contrary, to
encourage all peacemakers.

In that spirit, and because it is steeped in spiritual
and symbolic significance, if we are not careful
the question of Jerusalem could transform from a
political conflict, which by its nature is susceptible
to compromise, into a religious conflict that would
be intrinsically impossible to resolve. In that context,
France and its European Union partners believe that
Jerusalem is destined to become the capital of two
States, Israel and Palestine, pursuant to parameters that
must be defined by Palestinians and Israelis through
negotiations, together with Jordan, given its special role
in that regard. Let us be clear: there is no alternative to
the two-State solution, and there will be no two-State
solution without an agreement between the parties on
Jerusalem. In that regard, we noted the willingness
displayed by the President of the United States to
support the two-State solution. We hold out the hope
that it will pave the way for the United States to return
to the fold of international consensus.

Thirdly, in the immediate term we are of course
very concerned about the risk of escalation on the
ground following three days of clashes, particularly in
Gaza and parts of East Jerusalem. We call on everyone
to exercise restraint and make every effort to restore
calm. Beyond that, negative repercussions throughout
the region must be avoided. We therefore call upon
all regional stakeholders to avoid fuelling tension and
contribute to restoring calm.

France is both a friend to the Palestinians and
the Israelis, which is why we are seeking an honest
approach to the situation by calling upon those parties
to simply return to the negotiating table. Indeed, there
is no shortcut in the difficult path towards peace - that
path is one of negotiation and respect for the other. As
the issue of Jerusalem is one of the keys to peace in the
Middle East, it is more important than ever to recall our
collective commitment to safeguarding international
consensus on the specific status of the city. The
following things are at stake: respect for international
law and the legitimate rights of each of the parties, the
legitimacy of the Security Council and preserving the
two-State solution. In all of those endeavours, members
of the Council can count on the continuous and resolute
commitment of France.

