Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I have the honour
to brief the members of the Security Council in
my capacity as the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013), concerning the Central African Republic. In
my statement, I intend to highlight the main findings
of the final report of the Panel of Experts and briefly
touch upon the discussion of the report and its
recommendations during the Committee's meeting on
20 November. I also intend to highlight the work of
the Committee and the Panel of Experts since my last
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7331), on 9 December
2014.

On 20 November, the Committee met with the
Panel of Experts to consider its final report and
recommendations. According to the report, armed
groups remain in control of, or still exert influence
over, almost all inhabited areas of the Central African
Republic. Armed groups are also continually rearming,
and present a key risk to the holding of elections in the
country. Attacks against peacekeepers have also been
ongoing. The report also highlighted that the Lord's
Resistance Army continues to be a major threat in the
Central African Republic and is using the country to
gather resources. The report furthermore underlines
that the local population in the Central African Republic
has turned out in unprecedented numbers to register
for the elections, thereby demonstrating the strong
will of the country's people for the polls to be held. In
connection with the recommendations contained in the
Panel's report, letters have been sent out to the relevant
States and organizations.

With regard to the work of the Committee and
the Panel of Experts since my last briefing to the
Council, I wish to recall that, on 9 February 2015,
the United Nations Mine Action Service provided the
Committee with an overview of its work in the Central
African Republic. During the Committee's informal
consultations of 31 March, the Coordinator of the Panel
of Experts presented the Panel's programme of work.

On 22 April, in its fourth formal meeting, the
Committee held deliberations on the reported travel
ban violations by sanctioned individuals Francois
Bozize' and Nourredine Adam. During the meeting,
members heard statements from the representatives
of the Permanent Missions to the United Nations of
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Republic of the Congo,
Ethiopia, Kenya, South Africa and Uganda. Committee
members also received a short briefing from the Office
of the Special Representative of INTERPOL to the
United Nations.

On 12 June, Committee members heard a
presentation by the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts
via telephone link with regard to the Panel's progress
update submitted to the Committee on 20 May. During
the presentation, the Panel drew attention to the lack of
cooperation from some States in the region and noted
scepticism with regard to the prospect of the agreement
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
being implemented as signed.

On 3 August, the Committee discussed the arms
embargo and related exemptions procedures via video
teleconference with representatives of the Government
of the Central African Republic, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the arms
expert and armed groups expert/Coordinator of the Panel
of Experts. Following that meeting, and in connection
with a request from the Central African authorities, the
Committee agreed to revise its guidelines to allow the
Central African Republic itselfto submit arms embargo
exemptions requests, in addition to supplying States.

On 21 August, during its fifth formal meeting,
the Committee again discussed the arms embargo and
related exemptions procedures with representatives

of the Permanent Missions of the Central African
Republic, Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Republic of the Congo, the Sudan, and South Sudan.

The formal meeting on 21 August was followed by
informal consultations of the Committee, during which
the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts presented
the Panel's mid-term update, submitted on 29 July.
In addition to providing an overview of the findings
and recommendations of the mid-term update, the
Coordinator expressed the view that the Committee's
decision on 20 August to add four additional names
to its sanctions list had been timely and important,
with real consequences on the ground. He called on
the Committee to consider adding the names of more
individuals and entities to its sanctions list.

With regard to the mid-term update, the Coordinator
furthermore noted that the management and storage
of weapons stockpiles still remained a major issue
in the Central African Republic. He highlighted that
the Panel had continued to investigate armed groups
in the country that had committed grave violations
of international humanitarian law, while meeting
the criteria set by the Security Council for sanctions
designations. Following the meeting, the Committee
proceeded to arrange for the dispatch of letters in line
with the Panel's recommendations.

On 10 September, Ibriefedthe Committee on my trip
to the Central African Republic from 25 to 28 August.
The trip represented a long-awaited opportunity to
receive feedback from the ground on the implementation
of the sanctions regime from a wide range of actors in
the Central African Republic, including Government
officials, diplomatic missions, MINUSCA senior
management and mining authorities, as well as local
religious, civil and opinion leaders. The visit also
served to pave the way for improved communication
and collaboration between the Panel of Experts and
country authorities. During my visit, I also met with
representatives of the Economic Community of Central
African States and the African Union. I concluded
that the arms embargo was still very much useful and
essential in the Central African Republic context, and
recommended the improvement of the weapons-storage
capacity of the armed forces of the country. I also noted
the extent to which violence against children was a
major issue in the Central African Republic. In that
connection, I recommended that there was a need to
add more names to the Committee's sanctions list, in
particular in relation to the exploitation of children and
to sexual violence.

Also on the issue of children, on 3 December,
members of the Committee and the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict held a joint meeting
with Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, with regard to the impact of conflict on
children in the Central African Republic. Citing names
of perpetrators, the Special Representative called upon
the Committee and the Panel of Experts to continue to
conduct investigations on armed groups recruiting and
using children in the Central African Republic. In that
regard, I would like to inform the Council that I have
encouraged members of the Committee to consider
further designations in connection with statements
of case that were proposed by the Panel of Experts in
July and October 2014 and in January and November
2015. With the latest statements of case submitted on
18 November, the total number of cases submitted
by the Panel stands at 25, of which 20 pertain to
individuals and five to entities. As the names of only
five individuals and one entity are currently on the
Committee's sanctions list, I hope more names will be
submitted in the remaining weeks of my chairmanship.

I also would like to inform members of the Council
about the follow-up efforts made by the Chair with the
delegations of Kenya and South Africa with regard
to the reported travel ban violations, respectively, of
sanctioned individuals Francois Bozize' and Nourredine
Adam to South Africa, and the letters transmitted by
the Chair in that connection on 30 October, which
requested both delegations to reply by 6 November.

On 5 November, the Permanent Mission of South
Africa replied to the Panel of Experts, indicating
that South Africa was unable to meet the deadline of
6 November and would respond in a timely manner
once the necessary processes had been completed.
Since then, the Committee has not yet heard again
from the delegation of South Africa. With regard to the
Permanent Mission of Kenya, while I am aware that
the Panel of Experts met in New York with Kenya's
Director of the United Nations and Multilateral Affairs
Directorate, who was visiting from the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs in Nairobi, no reply has been received
from Kenya in connection with my letters of 30 October
concerning Adam's flight to Nairobi.
With the agreement of the President of the Council
and the members of the Council, therefore, and along
the lines of a similar initiative undertaken by the
Council's President and the Chair of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Committee in November, I
would like to propose that the President and myself
hold joint bilateral meetings with the delegations of
Kenya and South Africa with a view to obtaining a
definitive response regarding the Committee's letters
of 30 October. It is my firm conviction that, if Member
States continue to be unable or unwilling to implement
the Council's travel ban in the context of the Central
African Republic sanctions, the Council's silence will
send the wrong message not only to Member States in
the region and beyond, but to the sanctioned individuals
themselves - a message that there are no consequences
when one violates a travel ban imposed by the Security
Council.

