Mr. Adom (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the holding of this high-level
briefing. We are delighted to see you, Sir, once again
presiding over our discussion, which is part of the very
rich programme of work of the Kuwaiti presidency of
the Security Council for the month of June. Like those
who spoke before me, I would like to thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit,
Secretary-General ofthe League ofArab States, for their
informative briefings on the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States in maintaining international peace and security
at both the regional and the international levels.

The regions of the Near and Middle East, North
Africa and the Horn of Africa are facing conflicts
whose intensification is a source of concern for the
international community. Despite the multifaceted
involvement of the United Nations in the pursuit of
lasting peace and stability in the region, these crises are
becoming further entrenched and increasingly complex,
to the great regret of the international community.

Political instability and changing security threats
in Syria, Yemen, Palestine, the Sudan and Somalia,
with their devastating humanitarian consequences,
have over the years considerably weakened the
legitimate aspiration for a lasting peace nurtured by the
populations concerned.

In that regional context, marked by a lack of space
for viable political compromises among the parties to
the conflicts, United Nations support for the mediation
efforts and good offices ofregional organizations, in the
context of preventive diplomacy, is extremely relevant.
My delegation believes that the regional approach to
the settlement of ongoing disputes, based on Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, is essential
to greater ownership of peace processes.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League ofArab States therefore seems to be an approach
that should be fostered. It promotes joint analysis of the
root causes of conflicts and joint visits to crisis areas,
as well as the development of coordinated responses, in

the context of a strategic partnership, which also helps
to strengthen regional capacities for conflict prevention
and management.

My delegation therefore shares the view that, in the
light of the complexity of the current political, security
and humanitarian challenges, cooperation between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States should
be further strengthened. That is the essence of the
draft presidential statement on cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States that
will be adopted at the end of the meeting and which we
clearly support.

United Nations support is crucial. My country is
pleased that the presidential statement to be adopted
reaffirms the importance of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations and urges
the League of Arab States to contribute to conflict
resolution efforts in the region.

Cote d'Ivoire also welcomes the clearly expressed
resolve of the Security Council and the Council of the
League of Arab States to work together to establish
peace and stability in the region voiced at their
consultative meeting in Cairo in 2016.

In that context, we welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/592) issued in August 2018,
which highlights the readiness of the United Nations
and other regional organizations to support the Arab
League in building its capacity for conflict prevention
and management. Moreover, Cote d'Ivoire believes the
announcement by the Secretary-General of the opening
of a United Nations liaison office to the League of
Arab States, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 73/267, adopted in December 2018, to be
entirely appropriate. As representatives know, that
announcement was made at the thirtieth ordinary
session of the Arab League summit, held in Tunis in
March.

United Nations support should also focus on the
economic and social development efforts of the States
of the region within the League of Arab States in order
to robustly address the underlying causes of the crises
in the region. That support will also ensure coordinated
responses to the humanitarian challenges.

In that regard, my country therefore encourages
United Nations bodies, programmes and specialized
agencies to provide assistance to the League of Arab
States in order to jointly implement development
projects for the benefit of the people of the region. Cote
d'Ivoire has faith in the capacity of the Arab people,
who are rich in their cultural diversity and enormous
economic potential, to meet the current challenge and
achieve peace and stability. Very close cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States is therefore absolutely essential.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire reaffirms its support
for the Secretaries-General of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States and encourages their
readiness to act in a concerted way to resolve the
current conflicts in the Arab world and internationally.

