Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras)(interpretation from Spanish): On several occasions Honduras has
expressed concern at the hostilities and deterioration in
security conditions in Liberia, since they represent a
threat to the peace process, tend to deepen the political
crisis and negatively affect the observance of human
rights and humanitarian assistance. At the same time,
Honduras has regretted the Liberian parties' lack of
political will to comply with the Abuja Agreement and to
make a serious commitment to maintain the cease-fire.

For these reasons, my delegation welcomed the fact
that the faction leaders and Liberian civilian groups have
expressed agreement with the decisions adopted by the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Foreign Ministers at the Summit meeting held on 17
August last, with respect to a revised five-stage
implementation timetable for the Abuja Agreement, the
recommendation to establish a code of conduct for the
members of the Council of State and the transitional
government and the conditions to be met for holding free
and fair elections.

There is no need to emphasize the importance of the
faction leaders' acceptance of the ECOWAS decisions for
the effective implementation of the peace process in
Liberia. We hope that this time the Liberian parties will
effectively comply with their agreements and
commitments to enable the holding of free and fair
elections in May 1997, as anticipated.

As emphasized in the draft resolution the Council is
about to adopt, the continued support of the international
community for the Liberian peace process, including the
participation of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL), depends on the Liberian factions'
showing the will to resolve differences peacefully and
achieve national reconciliation, pursuant to the
commitments agreed to at Abuja.

My delegation also believes that a positive sign for
the Liberian peace process is that the security situation is

 

improving in various parts of the country and that the
cease-fire in Monrovia is holding. We nevertheless regret
the attacks and acts of intimidation directed against the
personnel of ECOMOG, UNOMIL and the international
organizations and bodies that provide humanitarian
assistance, as well as the looting of their equipment. It is
deplorable that the factions do not respect the personnel
status of these missions and that all the property stolen has
not yet been returned.

My delegation also recognizes the importance of
increasing the number of the UNOMIL military observers
so that the Mission will be better able to verify
disarmament when it takes place and will furthermore be
able to undertake wider-ranging patrols, as well as that of
the measures recently adopted by ECOMOG to strengthen
its presence in Liberia and to guarantee its viability as a
real peace-keeping force, even though it still does not have
sufficient human and financial resources to carry out its
tasks. We also recognize the ECOWAS efforts to restore
peace and to establish a democratically elected government
in Liberia.

For these reasons, and in View of the importance of
continuing the presence of UNOMIL in Liberia, my
delegation agrees with the extension of its mandate for a
three-month period and will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council.

