Mr. Nesho (Albania): We are very concerned
about the difficult humanitarian situation in Iraq, which
has resulted from the dictatorial policies of a regime
that acts against its own people and that, even in its
final days, has shown a willingness to sacrifice
everything, its own people and country, in order to
maintain power. As a member of the coalition of the
free countries for the liberation of Iraq, Albania
requests that this regime step aside now to spare the
people of Iraq from being exposed to further danger
and suffering.

Any attempt to protect the lost cause of a regime
that is responsible for the destitution and death of
millions of Iraqis and other people in the region, in the
name of state sovereignty and fear of change, is an
attempt that not only frustrates the hopes of a people
who long for freedom, but also delays our common
action to assist the people of Iraq in overcoming their
fragile humanitarian situation.

Albania welcomes the initiative of Secretary-
General Kofi Annan to take the necessary measures to
reactivate the oil for food programme. We call upon the
members of the Security Council to fully support the
Secretary-General by providing him with the necessary
authority and flexibility to meet the humanitarian needs
of the people of Iraq.

The adoption without delay of the resolution on
humanitarian assistance to Iraq by this body will serve
to restore the efficiency and unity of the Security
Council, which is imperative, in view of the most
recent events.

Now is the time for our nations and the Security
Council to focus on the challenges of the future with
the will and the necessary pragmatism that make
possible our cooperation.

Albania, as part of the coalition of the willing led
by the United States and United Kingdom, together
with many countries all over the world, will strive to
advance liberty and peace in Iraq. The new Iraq will be
democratic and will live in peace; it will no longer be a
threat to its neighbours or to the world.

By assuming that responsibility and by fighting
for a free world that is not threatened by weapons of
mass destruction and terrorism, we will remain faithful
to the vision of the founders of the Organization and
accomplish its goals. As Winston Churchill once
stressed,

"Make sure that the force of right will, in the
ultimate issue, be protected by the right of force."

