Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Mr. President, our delegation
welcomes your presence here in New York this week
to moderate and enhance the work being done by the
Kuwaiti presidency. We congratulate you and the team
you represent for this excellent work.

We also extend our thanks to Mr. Antonio Guterres,
Secretary-General of the United Nations; Mr. Ahmed
Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States; and Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Poland, for their valuable briefings,
which contribute to a better understanding of the topic
we are considering today.

Like other delegations before us, we condemn the
attack on ships in the Gulf of Oman and believe that
meetings of this nature present a unique opportunity
to reflect on possible ways to strengthen cooperation
in areas where the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations share a common interest as
it relates to the maintenance of international peace and
security.

Our delegation is from a country and a region that
greatly value the efforts and mechanisms of the United
Nations to respond to threats to international peace
and security. So far this year, this is the third time we
have had a meeting of this sort, which demonstrates
the willingness of the Council to make more effective
the implementation of Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, which establishes the fundamental
basis for the participation of regional and subregional
organizations in this arduous task, which is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council. This dynamic
confirms the recognition of the United Nations of
the need to work with these international partners,
who benefit from their geographical proximity to the
places threatened by international peace and security
challenges.

Since the last decade, many parts of the world
have been especially affected by increasing political
turbulence, wars and terrorist attacks - a situation
that affects, in particular, various parts of the Arabian
peninsula, northern Africa and the Horn of Africa. We
believe that the League of Arab States, of which the
majority of States from those regions are members,
possesses special knowledge that enables it to deal
judiciously with the cultural issues that have often
been a factor in the conflicts of its member States. That
cultural and linguistic expertise is invaluable when it
comes to knowledge-based mediation, which gives the
League of Arab States an advantage with respect to
conflicts in its geographical region.

There have been important references confirming
the League of Arab States as a necessary partner of the
United Nations in addressing international conflicts. To
cite just one, I would point to the Arab Peace Initiative,
adopted for the first time at the Beirut Summit in 2002.
Although it has not resolved the dispute, it continues to
be cited to this day in most ofthe statements made and to
be made, making it one of the best-known contributions
to peace in relation to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

Furthermore, bearing in mind the fact that most
of the States members of the League of Arab States
are also members of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and that another significant proportion
belongs to the African Union, my delegation calls
on the League of Arab States to partner with other
regional organizations with a View to promoting joint
coordination and economizing effort.

Finally, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea notes
the prevailing need for the Security Council, as the
highest guarantor of international peace and security,
to preserve the trend of integration of regional and
subregional organizations into the collective system of
global security as the best way to face the challenges
that threaten the peace and security of our planet.

