Brazil is thankful to the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council for organizing this high-level open video-teleconference on pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace. We also thank Secretary-General Antdenio Guterres, former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and all the other briefers for their insightful considerations. Brazil attaches great importance to the effectiveness of United Nations efforts to build and sustain peace. Within our collective peace and security paradigm, investment in sustaining peace has proven to be most cost-effective approach. Particularly when considered in comparison with crisis-oriented approaches to maintain peace and security, the long-term engagement provided under the peacebuilding framework tends to be better suited to addressing underlying causes of conflict and strengthening national ownership and capacities to sustain peace. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic poses additional challenges to already vulnerable populations in conflict-affected countries. Brazil has supported the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire in the wake of this crisis, as, in our view, the historic humanitarian pause proposed by resolution 2532 (2020) deserves our full unwavering support. Bearing the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, the Security Council has a crucial role, under the terms of the Charter of the United Nations, in contributing to strengthening international cooperation efforts to alleviate the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic in the context of sustaining peace. Brazil encourages the United Nations and its Member States to enhance support of nationally defined responses to the pandemic. It is important to speed up cooperation projects tailored to the specific needs of populations on the ground and to prioritize initiatives that generate concrete results for those communities. In that context, promoting access to safe, quality, effective and affordable medicines, vaccines and medical products and supporting a multisectoral approach are essential elements in the fight against COVID-19 that can contribute to lasting peace. Special attention must also be given to the balance between short- and long- term support. Similarly to security threats, humanitarian and health crises tend to focus our attention on the most immediate needs of populations at risk in conflict- stricken countries. Even though some of that emergency assistance can fall outside of the domain of development cooperation, it is essential that new humanitarian pledges be appropriately integrated into broad peace efforts and converge with the long-term goal of promoting structural development and lasting peace. Since the beginning of April, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has redoubled its efforts to counter the possible negative impacts of COVID-19 in peacebuilding efforts. The PBC is particularly well-positioned to help conflict- affected and post-conflict countries address multidimensional challenges pertaining to the intersection between development and peace. The PBC should therefore continue to offer its platform to host discussions on the specific needs of countries engaged in peacebuilding, at their request. By making full use of its advisory capacities, the PBC can also assist the Security Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council to coordinate their efforts and better serve the interests of Member States. Peacekeeping missions have also offered relevant contributions in assisting national efforts in response to the pandemic. Together with Indonesia, Brazil has chaired the working group responsible for discussing the peacebuilding and sustaining peace pillar of the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Through the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, Member States have agreed that the role of peacekeepers as early peacebuilders should be further enhanced and properly funded. Given the emergence of the COVID-19 crisis, there is an urgent call for peacekeeping missions to strengthen these components and improve their coordination with other forms of United Nations presence in the field in order to ensure that nationally defined peacebuilding and development goals can be fully realized. The continued support from the international community throughout the whole peace continuum is also especially important during mission transitions and drawdowns, with the aim of preserving hard-won peacebuilding gains and preventing countries from relapsing into conflict. Finally, as we recall the commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, as well as the upcoming anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, Brazil would like to acknowledge the disproportionate toll that the pandemic has taken on women and girls, especially in the context of conflict-affected countries. In this sense, we call on the international community to recognize the challenges facing women peacebuilders and local women's organizations during the crisis, including those caused by a lack of funding, some of which has been diverted to projects dealing directly with COVID-19. As established by the Security Council, the presence of women on the ground has a positive impact on peacekeeping and peacebuilding initiatives, including the protection of civilians, a role made only more crucial in these trying times. Brazil extends its support to international initiatives under way to mitigate the additional difficulties brought about by the pandemic on the work of women on the ground.
