Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
formally welcome you today, Mr. President, to the
Council. I congratulate you and your team on presiding
over it and thank you for the great work you have
already done this month.

Every year, thousands of people go missing amid
Violence and armed conflict. Every one of those missing
persons is an individual - a mother, a father, a son, a
daughter, a sister, a brother. Their absence is directly
felt by their loved ones for a lifetime. Uncertainty
about the fate of family members, not knowing whether
they are dead or alive, can continue for many years
after the fighting ends. The trauma that causes can
undermine relationships among communities and
makes peacebuilding and reconciliation harder.

The circumstances in which disappearances occur
can vary greatly. As armed conflicts create significant
mass displacement, many migrants, refugees or
internally displaced people go missing because they are
afraid or unable to contact their families. Combatants
and civilians may go missing as a result of abductions,
mass atrocities, forced disappearances, arbitrary
detentions and, of course, extrajudicial killings.
Women and children may be particularly at risk of
being abducted for sexual exploitation or enslavement.

The actions of non-State armed groups pose a
particular challenge. In north-east Nigeria, Boko Haram
has abducted hundreds if not thousands of women and
children, including 274 girls kidnapped from their
secondary school in Chibok in 2014. Five years on,
more than 112 of those girls are still missing. In Iraq,
between 5,000 and 7,000 Yazidi women and girls were
abducted and subjected to sexual slavery by Da'esh
in 2014. Today, more than 3,000 Yazidi women and
children remain unaccounted for. Given the scale of the
global missing persons phenomenon, resolution 2474
(2019), adopted this morning, provides an important
opportunity to review and strengthen international
cooperation on this issue.

The United Kingdom welcomes Kuwait's
leadership on this important and complex issue and
we were pleased to vote in favour of the resolution
that Kuwait submitted. The resolution underlines the
existing international legal obligations in this area
and builds on the work of existing mechanisms. It also
underscores that States bear the primary responsibility
to protect their civilians and uphold the human rights of
all individuals within their territory.

But we need international cooperation in
addressing the issue of missing persons, both during
and after conflicts. After conflicts, international
support to resolve this issue is frequently an important
factor in promoting post-conflict peace, security
and reconciliation. In that connection, I would like
to commend the work of the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement and the International
Commission on Missing Persons for providing long-
term institutional capacity and technical expertise to
Governments with regard to the location, recovery and
identification of missing persons.

As we have heard today, the issue of missing
persons is a complex and prevalent problem in Iraq and
Kuwait, but also in many conflict situations around
the world.

In Kosovo we welcome the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
and the Government of Kosovo to address legacy
issues, including investigating cases of missing
persons. According to the International Committee
of the Red Cross, more than 17,000 people are still
registered as missing after the conflicts that broke out
in the former Yugoslavia in the 19905. Justice for all
victims and their families is a crucial part of future
stability. The United Kingdom calls on both Pristina
and Belgrade to support all necessary action, which
must include assisting existing domestic war-crimes
courts in ensuring that outstanding cases of war crimes
are heard. We urge political leaders to focus on those
efforts rather than divisive political rhetoric, which
only perpetuates antagonism.

Resolution 2474 (2019), adopted today, highlights
the actions that Member States can take to prevent
people from going missing in armed conflict. But sadly
there are too many examples of States deliberately
targeting civilians in armed conflict, including through
arbitrary detention and enforced disappearance. The
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
reported in 2012 that enforced disappearance was used
by the ruling regime in Syria to eliminate opposition
groups and create a climate of fear. The Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic estimates that at least 60,000 people have gone
missing in Syria since the beginning of the civil war.
Another 17,000 are believed to have gone missing as a
result of Government repression before the beginning
of the conflict. The United Kingdom underlines
the importance of the work that the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 is undertaking on accountability and takes note
of its plans to develop a system to categorize and
classify material that might be relevant to locating
missing persons.

Long after a conflict ends, families and
communities are deeply affected by those who remain
missing. Since the beginning of my diplomatic career,
in Cyprus, I have met many families in this position,
from a range of conflicts. They suffer every day, and
those of us who have met them cannot fail to be moved
by their suffering. They relive conflicts as others are
able to move on. Whatever positions that Member
States around this table take on individual conflicts, let
us all agree collectively that resolving cases of missing
persons should be a humanitarian priority, and let us
try to remove this issue from the political arena.

