Mr. Wittig (Germany): This is the first time that
Germany is taking the floor in the Council as one of the
new non-permanent members. Allow me to express my
country's determination to assume the responsibility
associated with membership in the Security Council.
Germany will contribute to the work of the Security
Council in the interest of the United Nations as a
whole.

Like others, I would like to express our gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Sudan, Mr. Haile Menkerios, and to President
Benjamin Mkapa for their informed and encouraging
briefings.

Germany welcomes the peaceful voting during
the referendum and joins others in congratulating the
parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
and the people of the Sudan. Germany also extends its
gratitude to the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission in Khartoum and the Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau in Juba. Without their tireless
efforts and careful preparations, this success would not
have been possible. Germany is also grateful for the
invaluable contribution of the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan under the leadership of Special
Representative Menkerios. We commend all domestic
and international monitoring teams that followed the
process closely.

My country took part in the observer mission of
the European Union, and Germany also supported voter
education, continues to support the Southern Sudan
Police Service and is engaging in intense political
dialogue with the parties. We are happy to have been
able to contribute to the success of the referendum
process.

All parties in the Sudan now need to continue to
cooperate in good faith in the resolution of their
differences. Multiple and serious challenges remain.
The violence in Abyei during the first days of the
referendum demonstrated that a swift and durable
solution of the question of Abyei was of the utmost
importance. We urge all parties in the area to refrain
from using violence and to seek peaceful solutions to
their conflicts. We urgently call upon the parties to the
CPA to reach an agreement on Abyei as well as on
other remaining CPA and post-referendum issues, such
as citizenship, the rights of Northerners in the South
and of Southerners in the North, wealth sharing, border
demarcation and security arrangements. All these
issues have the potential to undo the progress realized
so far.

We therefore suggest that the Sudan Consultative
Forum, under the joint chairmanship of Thabo Mbeki
as Head of the African Union High Level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan and the United
Nations, meet at the earliest convenience to address
those questions.

The parties and the Security Council also need to
look beyond the CPA and be prepared to act swiftly to
address the challenges ahead and prevent future
conflict. In any event, the Security Council and the
international community will have to continue to
extend their support to institution-building in South
Sudan.

Furthermore, we must not lose sight of the
developments in the Northern part of the Sudan. It is in
the interest of regional stability to provide a
perspective there, including an economic perspective to
master the upcoming challenges. Debt relief, free trade
and economic and development cooperation in the
North and the South are necessary to open a path
towards a peaceful and prosperous future.

The positive news on the referendum must not
divert our attention from the situation in Darfur. We are
very concerned about the continuing violence in that
region and about the displacement of thousands of
people. The situation of children in particular should be
one of our primary concerns. We call upon all parties
to the conflict to fully respect the humanitarian
principles, including humanitarian access.

We are especially concerned about the abduction
by an unidentified armed group of three Bulgarian
members of the United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service in Darfur. We demand their immediate release.

We also repeat that those responsible for the most
serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole committed in Darfur must be
brought to justice. In that context, we recall resolution
1593 (2005).

We support the Doha peace talks and call upon all
parties to participate in the peace process hosted by the
Government of Qatar, as well as to cooperate with
Joint African Union-United Nations Mediator Bassole.
We expect all parties to carefully study the proposals
elaborated by the mediation in Qatar and we urge all
parties to the conflict in Darfur to continue
negotiations and to conclude a ceasefire agreement
immediately and without preconditions.

We repeat our calls to ensure full and unhindered
access for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) throughout the
mission area. While we support all efforts by
UNAMID, particular attention must be paid to the
mission's core mandate, namely, the protection of
civilians and humanitarian access.

For several years now, the Security Council has
assumed responsibility for the situation in the Sudan
and the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, which led to the Southern Sudan
referendum. The determination and the unity of the
Council have been key to the negotiations and the
preparations that preceded the referendum. The parties
to the CPA were always able to count on the support of
the Council. At the same time, what the Council
expected from the parties in the Sudan was very clear.
By holding this meeting today, three days after the
conclusion of the polling, the Security Council again
sends a strong message of concern and responsibility to
the parties and people in the Sudan.

The referendum in the Sudan shows what the
Council can achieve for the maintenance of
international peace and security if it acts in a timely
and united manner that includes clear messages. We all
know that huge challenges remain for peace and
stability in the Sudan. Germany is ready to contribute
to the work of the Security Council towards a peaceful
and prosperous future for the Sudan.

