Mr. Rishchynski: It is a great honour to brief the
Security Council on this occasion. The passage of Sierra
Leone from the Security Council's formal agenda marks
the crossing of an important threshold. Sierra Leone is
making the transition from the special attention to post-
conflict countries to a more traditional development
footing. It has established political stability, restored
basic security, reinvigorated democratic processes,
built important national institutions and generated
economic growth. Those are tremendous achievements.

It is often said that there can be no peace without
justice. A pertinent development in Sierra Leone is
that, in partnership with the international community,
the country established a Special Court for Sierra
Leone to bring to justice the perpetrators of horrific
crimes committed during their war. The Special Court
can take pride in both that contribution and in setting
a number of firsts, such as the first conviction of a
former Head of State since Nuremberg, Charles Taylor.
The Special Court set precedents concerning attacks on
United Nations peacekeepers, child soldiers and forced
marriage, and it was the first international tribunal to
successfully conclude its mandate. The Special Court
was a true partnership between Sierra Leone, the
United Nations and Member States, with great credit
due to its judges and staff, the Management Committee
and, most importantly, the Government and people of
Sierra Leone.

(spoke in French)

In addition to this progress, it is also worth noting
the speed with which Sierra Leone managed this
transformation. Fourteen years ago, the country hosted
the world's largest peacekeeping mission. At a time
when much policy attention is focused on managing
periods oftransition, Sierra Leone stands as an example
of what it is possible to accomplish with successively
smaller peace operations successfully giving way to an
integrated peacebuilding office and a United Nations
country team led by a resident coordinator. More
broadly, Sierra Leone is a success story built on steady
progress, able support from the United Nations system
as a whole, committed bilateral assistance and, above
all, the dedication of Sierra Leoneans.

While the withdrawal of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) should be properly celebrated, it should
also not be mistaken for an end point. Despite such
significant progress, a number of problems remain.
The root causes of the original conflict cannot be fully
addressed in little more than a decade. Corruption
requires continued attention, and youth unemployment
remains high. Security and justice sector institutions
will require sustained capacity-building, especially if
they are to retain the public trust. Surging investment
in natural resources and challenges associated with
managing land tenure hold potential for conflict at
the communal level. As time passes, we hope that
Sierra Leoneans will also be able increasingly to
expect concrete improvements in health, education,
employment, and infrastructure. We commend the
Government of Sierra Leone for having identified these
various challenges in its Agenda for Prosperity and for
taking steps to address them.

(spoke in English)

At the same time, recognizing these realities
highlights the need for sustained support. Too often,
the international community has failed to adequately
persevere for the full duration of peace consolidation
efforts. I am very pleased to report that initial indications
in Sierra Leone are very positive. Bilateral donors have
remained steadfast in their commitments and some are
increasing their funding. The United Nations country
team is prepared to absorb key residual responsibilities
from UNIPSIL, particularly in the key areas of conflict
prevention and security sector reform, thanks in part
to the Peacebuilding Fund. United Nations technical
assistance is also being provided for the constitutional
review process, which represents a tremendous
opportunity to strengthen democracy, enshrine human
rights, address women's rights, reform land tenure, and
consider natural resource management. As with all
such processes, the constitutional review also holds the
potential to generate political tensions if not managed
carefully.

For its part, the engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) with Sierra Leone will continue
over the course of the coming year, albeit in a
significantly scaled-down form. When we returned
from our most recent visit to Freetown in late February,
impressed by the level of consensus on this point, the
Government of Sierra Leone, national stakeholders,
diplomatic partners, and the United Nations country
team all expressed the utility of the PBC's political
accompaniment.

(spoke in French)

Its future role will be lighter than it is now, with
the emphasis on serving as an advocate with the
international community and responding to needs as
they arise by mobilizing international attention. As
Chair, I plan to maintain close communication with the
Government, its international partners and the United
Nations country team. Coordination among a smaller
steering group ofparticularly interested Member States
will allow for a more adaptive approach and a reduction
in the number of formal configuration meetings.
Recognizing that this new role is precedent-setting for
the Commission, 1 also intend to conduct a light stock-
taking exercise in approximately one year with a view
to Sierra Leone's exit from the Commission's agenda, if
appropriate at that time.

(spoke in English)

Sierra Leone has shown us all that recovery from war
is possible. In the process, it has also proved again that
the United Nations can tackle complex peacebuilding
challenges and see them through to completion. It has
demonstrated that investment in peace on the part of
international partners can reap significant dividends,
as best expressed by Sierra Leone's transformation
from a recipient of peacekeeping support 15 years ago
to a valued troop-contributing country today. Most
importantly, at a time when the international community
is faced with a series of terrible crises that afflict us all,
Sierra Leone shows that a society determined to build a
better future can indeed succeed. We should celebrate
that development.

