Mr. Brahimi: I am extremely grateful to the
Secretary-General and the President for their kind
words. It is an honour to address the Council one more
time - the last, I think, on Afghanistan. And I am
particularly pleased to do so under your presidency,
Ambassador Munoz. It was a privilege to receive you,
Sir, in Kabul last fall, and I would like to thank you
again for your interest and support. Allow me also to
thank all your colleagues, the members of the Council
who, soon after your own visit, made a truly historic
fact-finding trip to Afghanistan under the able and
energetic leadership of Ambassador Pleuger.

As a result of the extensive meetings you all had
then, in Kabul, in Mazar-I-Sharif and in Herat, there is
not much I can tell the Council today that members do
not already know. In addition, the Council has before it
the Secretary-General's report, which describes in
some detail recent developments of note, and there is

no need, therefore, to cover in my remarks all aspects
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

However, this report was completed before the
end of the Constitutional Loya Jirga, as the Secretary-
General just told the Council, and I propose to use this
opportunity to brief the Council on this Loya Jirga and
then to discuss in broad terms the state of the peace
process in Afghanistan: what has been achieved and
what has not, the challenges ahead and where, in my
view, the Afghan authorities and the international
community will need to focus their efforts if our shared
goals are to be achieved.

The transitional political process of the Bonn
Agreement is a plan to restore peace and stability to
Afghanistan by reforming, strengthening and, where
necessary, rebuilding the institutions of State. The
success we may ascribe to it will depend upon how far
Afghanistan will have managed to establish viable,
accountable and representative State institutions that
can ensure security for the people and establish a
credible base for the development of the country.

The Bonn process has certainly accomplished a
great deal since December 2001. I will mention only
some important achievements here. Large-scale
conflict has not returned, a humanitarian crisis was
averted early on and the political timetable has for the
most part been kept: from the installation of the Interim
Authority on 22 December 2001 through the holding of
the Emergency Loya Jirga in June 2002, the formation
of President Karzai's Administration and now the
successful conclusion of the Constitutional Loya Jirga.

Under President Karzai's leadership, the Afghan
Administration has overseen some worthy
accomplishments, including the articulation of a
national development framework and the national
budget, the adoption of a new national currency, the
first steps in the formation of a national army and a
national police and the return to school of some 4
million boys and girls. During the same period, the
Independent Human Rights Commission established
itself throughout the country, and the groundwork was
laid for a number of key national reconstruction and
development programmes. Some of these are beginning
to reap benefits for the country, such as the road
reconstruction programme, the restoration of the power
grid, increased agricultural activity, the national
solidarity programme and the national emergency
employment programme.

A further step in the Bonn transitional plan was
achieved on 4 January with the near unanimous
acclamation of the new Constitution. The
Constitutional Loya Jirga was to a large degree
representative of Afghanistan taken as a whole and
included delegates from every province and from
communities such as the Kuchis - or nomads -
Hindus and Sikhs, refugees, internally displaced
persons and the disabled, as well as other minority
groups. Women's political participation increased, with
women delegates comprising approximately 20 per
cent of the Constitutional Loya Jirga.

To the best of our knowledge, there was no
widespread pattern of intimidation or fraud, and
individual cases of complaints were investigated by an
executive committee that overturned electoral results in
a number of cases where wrongdoing was established. I
am not saying that the process was flawless. This was
an exercise that took place in an insecure environment.
Security conditions had deteriorated since the
Emergency Loya Jirga, and extremists had repeatedly
threatened to disrupt the Loya Jirga process.
Furthermore, with insufficient security sector reform
and practically no disarmament done, factional leaders
were left with leverage in the political contest.

The elections also showed a resurgence of some
of the factional groupings, with stronger showings than
for the Emergency Loya Jirga. This has potential
consequences for the forthcoming legislative elections.
Jihadi parties organized themselves well in the North-
East. Jumbish, a mainly Uzbek organization, took the
lead in forming a block of votes from the North, while
in Badghis and Herat, for example, the majority were
Jamiat, the mainly Tajik party, and Ismael Khan
supporters.

Much of the Constitutional Loya Jirga unfolded
before the country on live radio and television
broadcasts, providing a type of public debate not seen
in the country for many, many years. The Loya Jirga
reached early consensus on some 120 of the 160
articles of the draft constitution, but it saw difficult
debate and hard bargaining on a number of issues.
Many of these were issues one would expect to be
contentious in any constitutional process: the form of
Government, the role of the courts in constitutional
review and their relative power versus the executive
and Parliament. Other issues were particular to the
current Afghan context and were related to local and
national identity, including various issues related to
language.

There were somewhat worrying but not
unexpected signs of polarization along ethnic lines.
The Pashtun contingent represented a majority in the
Loya Jirga and was particularly intent on redressing
some of the perceived political disenfranchisement of
the past two years. Its unity of purpose may well
influence the remaining stages of the political
transition. On other issues, there were complaints that
Jihadi leaders used domineering tactics to push for
their own agenda, but not with much success. As the
Loya Jirga extended beyond its originally planned 10
days into a third week, there were real concerns that
agreement might not be reached.

In the end, the delegates proved willing to reach
compromises and to make concessions in order to
arrive at a text that all could accept, and the
Constitution they ratified reflects this balancing of
concerns. For example, the strong presidential system
has been revised to give the National Assembly greater
oversight over presidential appointments. Also,
although Pashto is the language of the national anthem,
the Constitution recognizes minority languages as
official in the areas where they are the language of the
local majority. This Constitution requires adherence to
international instruments and mandates the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission to protect and
promote human rights. Significantly, the political
participation of women is greatly enhanced by the
Constitution. At least 25 per cent of the seats of the
lower house of Parliament will be reserved for women.

I believe that the new Constitution and the
process that achieved it should be a source of pride for
the people of Afghanistan. They have proved that,
despite the adversity they continue to face, a peaceful
constitution-making process could be achieved. The
fundamental law they have newly written should, if
implemented, provide a solid foundation upon which to
continue the task of addressing the real needs that face
Afghans on a daily basis.

There is so much to be done that, unfortunately,
Afghans and their international partners cannot afford
to rest long on the laurels of a successful Constitutional
Loya Jirga. From the Loya Jirga itself a number of
major tasks immediately present themselves.

First is the task of implementing the Constitution
to give life to it. At the closing ceremony of the Loya
Jirga, I made the point that President Karzai, his
Government and all Afghans will now have the
challenge of making of the Constitution they adopted a
living reality. This is, of course, the challenge of any
constitutional order. However, in Afghanistan, where
State institutions remain weak, the capacity of the
Government to fulfil the promises of the new
Constitution requires a lot of hard work from the
Afghans themselves and sustained international
assistance. This is all the more pressing because the
debate at the Loya Jirga has raised the expectations of
Afghans that their Government and its international
partners will now deliver on their promise of peace and
stability.

The fact that Afghans reached agreement on the
new Constitution is a great accomplishment, but
ultimately the test of each element of the Bonn process
will be whether or not Afghanistan is moved forward
towards what I have referred to previously before the
Council as the irreversibility of peace. From that
perspective, the new constitutional order will have
meaning for the average Afghan only if security
improves and the rule of law is strengthened. And for
too many Afghans, the daily insecurity they face comes
not from resurgent extremism associated with the
Taliban - destabilizing as that is - but from the
predatory behaviour of local commanders and officials
who nominally claim to represent the Government.

Thus, if expectations have been raised, they are
likely to focus on the needs that have been there since
the start of the peace process and remain unmet: the
disarmament of factional forces, the protection of the
basic rights of every Afghan citizen, the demand for
increased reconstruction, the reform of national
institutions so that they are more professional and more
representative, and reform, also, across the
Government to ensure that all Afghans feel that it
better represents them.

These are the first major challenges in
implementing the Constitution because they remain the
challenges of the peace process as a whole. Addressing
them will also create the conditions for the success of
the national electoral exercises, the legislative drafting
processes and the other tasks that are more directly
called for in the implementation of the Constitution.

The programmes that make up the security sector

reform initiative for Afghanistan are well known to this
Council and they are updated in the report of the
Secretary-General. Over the past two years of the Bonn
process, the creation of a capable, unified and loyal
national army and police has certainly shown progress,
with the able and committed assistance of the United
States and France on the army-building side, and
Germany and the United States for the police. But I am
sure these partners will not disagree that, two years
into the Bonn process, we are not as far as we should
be if the central Government is to assert its authority.
Further gains could certainly be made if the effort to
reform the national security institutions, the Ministry
of Defence, the Ministry of the Interior and the
intelligence services were to pick up pace as this, too,
has been slower than required, in large measure
because of limited cooperation in key parts of the
Government.

The appointment of a new top cadre of 22
Ministry of Defence officials, welcome as it was, is not
enough reform to show for two years of trying. I
believe the Afghan people expect more, and so should
the international community. As we have discussed
before, the security institutions will need to be seen as
truly national, rather than factionally dominated, if the
national army, the national police and intelligence are
to replace the factionalized forces that continue to
dominate the landscape. Disbanding the factional
structures will also depend on successful disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), and thus the
disarmament and demobilization of the factions and the
building of a national army and police are really part
and parcel of one and the same effort.

Now, I am afraid that the DDR programme has
also not progressed far enough and this, too, is due in
large measure to insufficient cooperation from key
partners. There can be only two ways to conduct a
DDR programme. Involuntary disarmament may be
contemplated if one has at one's disposal the forces
necessary to compel cooperation. Voluntary
disarmament, on the other hand, such as we are
pursuing, requires fully cooperative partners. And, so
far, cooperation has been measured, at best. With the
experience of the pilot projects in Kunduz, Gardez,
Mazar-I-Sharif and Kabul to draw upon, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
will be reviewing the DDR programme with its
Government and international partners to see whether
improvements might be made and acceleration of the
process achieved. It will be necessary to look at an
increased incentive structure for mid- and senior level
commanders, but I fear that without better cooperation
from the faction leaders - who, let us remember, are
Government officials - the problem of factionalized
armed units will continue to bedevil the peace process.

Having said that, the threat factional forces pose
to the peace process has been increasingly compounded
by the terrorist tactics of extremists aimed at causing
the peace process to fail altogether. The pattern
continues of challenging the central Government's
authority and disrupting the peace process by attacking
targets of opportunity, irrespective of their civilian
status, be they Government, non-governmental
organization, United Nations or ordinary citizens. In
the period since I last briefed the Council, a number of
serious attacks have occurred, including, last
November, a car-bomb attack on the United Nations
compound in Kandahar and the tragic and revolting
murder in Ghazni of Bettina Goislard, a staff member
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. A bomb exploded against the external
wall of a UNAMA guesthouse in Kabul mercifully
produced no victims. And, on 6 January, another bomb
in Kandahar, aimed at Afghan militia forces, killed and
injured innocent children and civilians.

The recent attacks and threats must be taken to
confirm that the United Nations, as such, is now a
target in Afghanistan. These attacks coincide with clear
signals that extremist elements calling themselves
Taliban or supporters of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar are
reorganizing, issuing statements and trying to rally
support against the peace process. For months now,
these attacks have constricted the area of operations of
the United Nations and the non-governmental
organization community in the south, east and south-
east. This has the effect of blocking reconstruction and
development activities and limiting the presence of the
Government in the affected areas.

A number of measures have been taken in
response. The United Nations Security Management
Team has taken steps to minimize United Nations staff
exposure to risk, including by increasing security
measures at our compounds and reducing staff in high-
risk areas. UNAMA will require further funding for
these and other protective measures.

The costly and intensive efforts by the United
States and Pakistan to interdict extremist elements at
the border deserve recognition. At the same time, there
are also press reports, generally in the Pakistani press
itself, relayed by the media worldwide, about
"infiltration of terrorists" from Pakistan, and other
reports claiming that Taliban leaders are moving more
or less freely in and between cities in Pakistan. It is
encouraging that Pakistani and Afghan authorities are
now discussing these issues of concern in a positive
and constructive manner. I believe it is Vital that the
two countries continue to cooperate and take all
possible measures to address this situation. The strong
bonds of history, religion, and culture that unite
Afghanistan and Pakistan are well known. Officials and
common people alike, in both countries, are well aware
that conflict and strife in one country will unfailingly
and directly affect the other. The growing cooperation
between the two countries against terrorists, criminals
and other spoilers deserves to be recognized,
encouraged and strongly supported.

I should also note here that, in my View, much
more can and should be done by the Government of
Afghanistan to ensure that in the areas where the
Taliban and other extremists are operating they do not
gain from dissatisfactions in the population. The
Government, along with UNAMA, United Nations
agencies and international security forces, is working
out integrated packages to improve district level
governance, strengthen the formal and traditional
justice system, increase the presence of police and
reach out with focused reconstruction assistance to
communities. These so-called "provincial strategies"
will focus first on areas in the south and elsewhere
suffering from insecurity, poor governance,
marginalization for geographical or political reasons
and a sense of isolation. There is also more that the
Government can do to reach out to those individuals
and groups that have not been part of the process so far
but that are not responsible for criminal activities and
are willing to participate peacefully in the rebuilding of
their country.

As the Secretary-General makes clear in his
report, the deterioration in security continues at
precisely the time when the peace process requires the
Government and the United Nations to broaden their
presence in the field, to complete the electoral
registration and other activities, such as the census and
ongoing reconstruction programmes. As the report
further points out, throughout the constitutional
process, the threat was mitigated by limiting exposure,
by not holding new district level elections and by
concentrating activities in urban centres protected by
available security resources. However, recent attacks in
urban areas are challenging that approach for the
registration of voters. Naturally, the national electoral
registration and, later, polling exercises cannot be
conducted from behind a hardened compound wall.
Electoral teams must go to the voters, and each eligible
and willing voter must be served directly at the village
level.

UNAMA and the interim electoral commission
are planning to absorb into the Afghan Electoral
Commission's secretariat staff from the constitutional
secretariat. They may be better able to travel and work
locally than international staff. However, if the process
itself is targeted, then I am afraid that Afghan
nationality may not be a sufficient source of protection.
Furthermore, successful electoral exercise will require
more than security for electoral staff; it will require an
environment that allows for a fair political contest. The
prominence at the Loya Jirga of leaders who continue
to wield personal control over factional forces raises
serious concerns in this regard and reminds us once
again of the need for accelerated security sector
reform, for DDR and for increased international
security assistance.

It is too early to draw lessons from the first two
years of the Bonn process, but I firmly believe that one
clear lesson relates to the difficulty of carrying out
post-conflict transitional processes without equivalent
and dedicated security assistance. Until Afghan
security institutions are further built up, there will be a
need in other parts of the country for the sort of
assistance that the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) has so ably given in Kabul.

UNAMA, along with almost all Afghans,
received with great anticipation the news of the
resolution adopted by the Council providing for the
expansion of ISAF. The recent launch of the German
provincial reconstruction team (PRT) in Kunduz is a
welcome sign that some form of expansion is
beginning in earnest. My colleagues and I at UNAMA
have met with NATO planners on the ground, and we
look forward to the creation of more ISAF-led PRTs.
Also welcome is the intention of the United States to
create a broader PRT presence in the south. The PRT
concept has proved to be of value, particularly where
they have focused their activities on improving security
conditions.

While I continue to believe that the PRTs are a
"second best" to a straightforward expansion of ISAF's
peacekeeping functions, I do hope that they will be
given the resources and the mandate to help accelerate
security sector reform, participate in the Government's
and UNAMA's efforts to manage and defuse local
tensions and, more generally, help coordinate security
support for the Bonn process - all the more so if there
is some capacity for ISAF to conduct forward
deployments of more robust forces when and where
necessary, as I understand is being considered.

It is cause for concern, however, that the pace of
PRT deployment is running behind that of the political
process. The presidential elections will require
improved security, and the legislative elections even
more so. As the Secretary-General notes in his report,
it might be possible to hold presidential elections with
a few areas of the country remaining off limits,
although that has its risks. Doing so with legislative
elections, however, would mean disenfranchising
people along ethnic lines, and that would not be
tenable. Therefore, I would urge the members of NATO
and other countries contributing troops to ISAF to take
all measures possible to provide ISAF with the
resources necessary to expand sooner rather than later.

I have taken much of the Council's time, but, if I
may, I should like to say a few words about drugs. One
of the most worrying aspects of the drug trade is how
much the Afghan economy - and therefore the
population - is coming to depend on it. The
Afghanistan Opium Survey 2003, conducted by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
estimates that the income of opium farmers and drug
traffickers in 2003 - totalling an estimated $2.3
billion - was equivalent to more than 50 per cent of
the country's gross domestic product. It is also
estimated that, in 2003, 1.7 million people -
representing approximately 7 per cent of the
population - were involved in farming the opium
poppy. Also in 2003, the opium poppy was grown in 28
out of the country's 32 provinces. Those statistics are
all the more alarming when one considers that,
according to the preliminary results of the UNODC
farmers' intentions survey, conducted in the latter half
of 2003, farmers are intent on growing the opium
poppy again in 2004 and with greater intensity.

The central Government has shown a
commitment to tackling the problem. But to date,
efforts have concentrated on building the capacity of
Government institutions such as the Counter-Narcotics
Directorate and the counter-narcotics police of
Afghanistan and on drafting legislation. While those
activities are indeed essential in the long-term fight
against drugs, they have not had an immediate effect on
the amount of opium cultivated or trafficked.

Drug interdiction campaigns will also have to be
intensified. That responsibility is shared by all
authorities involved in law enforcement, including the
counter-narcotics police, the border police and all
military forces in the country. However, as is
recognized by the Afghan national drug control
strategy, the problem will not be solved over the long
term without development and achievements being
made in other sectors, including in providing
alternative livelihoods, in building up the judicial and
penal systems and in reducing demand for opium
derivatives both domestically and abroad. The
Government; the United Kingdom, as lead nation; and
the UNODC are working together and with others to
meet those formidable challenges.

At the outset, I said that Afghanistan had
achieved much in the past two years. However, as I
believe I have said before to the Council, those
achievements also mean that there is now even more to
lose and more to protect. The Afghans and their
international partners - including the Council - will
have to chart the way forward carefully. The success of
the Constitutional Loya Jirga and of the political debate
that has begun does offer hope, but it is a success that
must be quickly capitalized on, lest it do no more than
raise false expectations.

And I believe the key challenges that must
quickly be addressed remain the same today, after the
Loya Jirga, as they were described in the Secretary-
General's report before the Loya Jirga: broadening the
popular base of the Government and strengthening a
system of governance based on the rule of law;
improving security; and increasing the pace of
reconstruction and service delivery.

There are many indications that, in those three
areas, not enough progress is being made, and some of
the gaps may even have widened over the past year. On
the security front, those indications are many, and they
have been detailed often to the Council. Concerning the

base of popular support for the Government, for
example, there were clear indications at the Loya J irga
of disaffection among Pashtuns who thought they were
not receiving a fair degree of representation in the
Government. On the reconstruction front, the
assistance in the south, the east and the south-east is
slowly decreasing because of insecurity. In the
economic field more generally, the Minister of Finance
has noted that the hurried estimates carried out at the
height of the crisis for the 2001 Tokyo conference need
to be revisited, and he is conducting a re-costing
exercise to determine actual investment needs in order
to achieve basic financial sustainability and to prevent
the domination of the national economy by the
narcotics industry.

Following its visit to Afghanistan in early
November, the Council recommended that the
Secretary-General explore ways to give new impetus to
the Bonn process. His report discusses some of the
possibilities, and he again alluded to them in his
statement a moment ago. UNAMA circulated a non-
paper on the subject in Kabul to the Government and
the diplomatic corps. The paper noted that a second
Bonn-type conference was one possible way to re-
energize the commitment of all concerned to address
the three gaps in the peace process that I just
mentioned. Some interlocutors observed that there may
be other means to address these gaps, and that a large
conference is perhaps not necessary. However, what is
important and, I personally believe, very urgent, is that
some means are identified in order to improve and
accelerate the performance of the Government and its
international partners in implementing the Bonn
process, lest these gaps undermine the progress that has
already been made.

As I near the end of my far-too-long briefing, I
would like to thank the Council once again for the
remarkable support that it has shown for Afghanistan.
The coherent and sustained support of the Council, and
the generosity and close collaboration of the wider
international community, have been essential to the
progress made.

Furthermore, I cannot conclude today's briefing
without a few words about the people whom I left
behind in Afghanistan - first, an expression of
profound gratitude, respect and admiration to President
Hamid Karzai. It was a privilege to know and work
with such an Afghan patriot, dedicated to his country
and his people, modest, honest and selfless. I cannot
thank him enough for the frank, open and close
cooperation I have consistently enjoyed with him. I
would like, from here, to wish him, once again, success
in his noble mission.

My thanks go also to the members of President
Karzai's Government for their cooperation and
patience. Many have become close friends, and I wish
them well. It is also important to me to salute, from
here, the people of Afghanistan. I am proud, and I
believe that the Council and the United Nations at large
can be proud, too, of the confidence that the
overwhelming majority of the people of Afghanistan
have in the United Nations. A few days ago, at a
particularly tense and difficult moment during the Loya
Jirga, a delegate, speaking from the rostrum, said that
they, the delegates, had full confidence in UNAMA.
That was humbling to all of us, and we are grateful to
the people of Afghanistan for the warmth of their
feelings towards this Organization and towards the men
and women - Afghans and non-Afghans - who are
working for the United Nations over there.

It is also my pleasant duty to say a word about
colleagues and friends in UNAMA and the rest of the
United Nations country team in Afghanistan. Speaking
the other day in Kabul, I said that the secret of
whatever success I had been fortunate to achieve in
Afghanistan was that I had a team of particularly
talented and dedicated colleagues - I just watched
them work and took the credit for their achievements.
To all of them, I will simply say, "Thank you, my very
dear friends and colleagues, and may God protect you
as you continue the good work you are doing in
Afghanistan".

I would like to recognize, too, our colleagues here
at Headquarters: the Deputy Secretary-General, the
Executive Office of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs and all other
departments, as well as those in other parts of the United
Nations - the agencies, funds and programmes - for
the unfailing support we received from all of them.

Last but not least, may I say how deeply indebted
I feel to the Secretary-General. Throughout these very

long months - first in New York when we were
preparing the Bonn Conference, then in Bonn and,
later, in Kabul - he was always there for us, ever

supportive and protective, always encouraging us and
reassuring us in moments of doubt. I thank him most
sincerely and look forward to continuing to serve this
Organization under his inspiring leadership.

