Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes Mr. Zebari, Foreign
Minister of Iraq, to this meeting. We also thank Special
Adviser Gambari and Assistant Secretary-General
Warren Sach for their briefings. We would also like to
thank you, Ambassador Khalilzad, for your briefing on
behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I).

Iraq has made notable progress in the political,
security and reconstruction fields. We should
acknowledge the efforts made by the Government of
Iraq. We welcome the recent notable improvement in
the security situation in Iraq. Achieving sustainable
peace, security and stability are preconditions for
addressing the other problems confronting Iraq.

We note with appreciation that the capabilities of
Iraqi security forces have improved gradually. We hope
that they will soon take on the difficult task of
independently maintaining national security and law
and order. We also expect that MNF-I will genuinely
and earnestly carry out its mandate under the relevant
resolution of the Security Council and, in its
operations, strictly abide by international humanitarian
law and human rights law and maintain close
consultations with the Government of Iraq.

In order to consolidate the gains made in the
improved security situation in Iraq, it is imperative to
vigorously promote the political process and bring
about genuine national reconciliation. We hope that all
Iraqi parties and factions will attach importance to the
national interest and intensify dialogue and
consultation. With regard to major issues having a
bearing on the future of the country, as part of a fair,
open and inclusive political process, the Government
of Iraq should listen closely to views and establish
strong political consensus. We encourage the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to
continue to play its positive role in promoting political
reconciliation in Iraq.

The provincial elections scheduled for this
autumn are of great significance to the political process
and national reconciliation of Iraq. We support the
Government of Iraq in making the serious preparations
required to ensure the smooth conduct of the elections.
UNAMI should treat electoral assistance as a short-
term priority and use its own strengths in this area to
assist Iraq.

If the political process represents the front wheels
of a vehicle, then economic reconstruction and
development represent its rear wheels. Only when the
front and rear wheels move in tandem can Iraq move
ahead steadily. Iraq has a wealth of natural and human
resources. It has great potential for economic recovery
and development.

Within the framework of the International
Compact with Iraq, the international community,
including the countries of the region, has extended a
hand of cooperation. The key now is to translate
commitments into firm, concrete action. At the recent
Review Conference of the International Compact in
Stockholm, the Government of Iraq put forward a new
plan and vision for its economic reconstruction and
development, to which the international community
should respond positively.

The Development Fund for Iraq is a major source
of funding for the reconstruction of the country. We
hope to see stronger governance of the Fund and
greater respect for Iraq's ownership, in order to ensure
the effective and transparent use of the Fund to the
benefit of all the people of Iraq.

Finally, I wish to express our appreciation to
UNAMI, under the leadership of Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for the work it has performed. We support the
continuation of UNAMI's assistance to the
Government and the people of Iraq after August of this
yean

