The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Djibouti, Egypt, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Morocco, Pakistan, Qatar, Spain and
Tunisia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
ofthe Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Baali
(Algeria), Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti), Mr. Aboul Gheit
(Egypt), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Al-Kadhe (Iraq), Prince Zeid Ra 'ad Zeid
Al-Hussein (Jordan), Mr. Barg (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Bennouna (Morocco), Mr. Ahmad
(Pakistan), Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar), Mr. Arias
(Spain) and Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 29 March
2002 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2002/332 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
today, Friday, 29 March 2002, regarding the
situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the rules
of procedure and with previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in response to the request contained
in letters dated 29 March 2002 from the Permanent
Representatives of Jordan and Qatar to the United
Nations, which have been issued as documents
8/2002/329 and 8/2002/331, respectively.

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to photocopies of document
8/2002/330, dated 28 March 2002, from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations.

I welcome the presence of Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, and I give him the floor.


