Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you for convening
this debate, Madam President. I would like to thank
Special Representative Sandra Honore for her detailed
presentation. I also thank the Permanent Representative
of Haiti, Ambassador Denis Regis, for his statement.

The Secretary-General's most recent report
(S/2014/162) invites us to discuss options for the United
Nations presence in Haiti after 2016, and at the same
time reminds us of ongoing challenges - persistent
issues on the security, social and economic fronts, and
the political divisions that have delayed the Haitian
people's full enjoyment of democratic stability. In
addition to those challenges, Haiti must confront a
cholera epidemic with the highest number of cases in
the world.

At the same time, it is fair to acknowledge that
Haiti has come a long way on the path to stabilization.
Progress on the humanitarian situation, in particular the
relocation of displaced people, is encouraging, although
forced evictions are a cause for concern. Recent positive
economic prospects confirm our confidence in the
potential for Haiti's development. On the political front,
in particular, the recently signed El Rancho agreement
presents a vital opportunity to break with old patterns
and practices that run contrary to institutional progress

and have continued to hold the country back. In that
regard, I would like to recognize the key role of the
mediators who are providing the necessary space and
support for the inter-Haitian dialogue. We expect that
the political dialogue will, in the short term, lead to
the swift implementation of concrete commitments and
allow for normalization of the country's democratic
life with the holding of pending elections in 2014 and
presidential elections in 2015.

That complex picture is a reminder of the
integrated nature of the challenges Haiti faces in
this advanced stage of the stabilization process. This
remains a fundamental circumstance as we discuss
the best strategy for consolidating the stabilization
gains secured so far with the crucial contribution
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). In that context, I should like to convey
Brazil's strong support for the work being done by
Special Representative Sandra Honore and her team.

On the security front, the Secretary-General's
report informs us ofthe progress achieved by the Haitian
National Police in implementing its development plan
with the key support of MINUSTAH. That should not
divert us from the importance of translating our support
for strengthening the justice and security sectors
into concrete benefits for the population and greater
protection of basic human rights, including social and
economic rights. To help establish that fundamental,
rights-based connection between institutions and
citizens, it is key that MINUSTAH continue to pursue a
comprehensive approach to stability.

Brazil welcomes the deeper integration of
community projects to reduce violence within the
spectrum of the Mission's rule-of-law activities, as
well as the efforts to tackle weaknesses in the judicial
sector and the issue of prolonged pre-trial detentions.
Stabilization tools such as quick-impact projects and
the community projects to reduce violence become
even more important as we move forward with the
implementation of MINUSTAH's consolidation plan,
with further reductions of its military component.

It is a positive development that the situation
has remained stable in the departments vacated
by MINUSTAH's troops. It indicates that a well-
calibrated, responsible, progressive and situational
approach is best suited to consolidating gains without
compromising security. We believe such a careful,
gradual and responsible approach should continue to
prevail in our planning for a sustainable transition.

It is the security situation on the ground, its prevailing
social and political dimensions and Haiti's capacity to
assume increasing responsibilities that should continue
to guide us 4 not self-imposed budgetary constraints
or arbitrarily conceived time frames unrelated to Haiti's
specific situation. The Council should not sacrifice
hard-earned security and stability at the risk of paying
a higher price in the medium term. Neither should it
pursue the establishment of new and needed missions to
the detriment of, and at the expense of, active ones that
have not fully discharged themselves of their purpose.

As the Secretary-General himself points out, a
comprehensive strategic assessment will be needed
for an informed decision on the options presented in
his report or any other alternatives deemed suitable.
We hope that this exercise will improve the concrete
situation on the ground, identify opportunities for the
further transfer of responsibilities where they present
themselves, and take into account the need to ensure that
key objectives such as electoral processes and political
national dialogue are met with adequate support. Close
and effective coordination with the Government of
Haiti will remain a decisive requirement in this context.
I take note with encouragement of the final paragraphs
of the statement made by the representative of Haiti in
that regard.

It is clear, especially in the light of the security
requirements for upcoming elections, that no abrupt
interruption of the support provided by a peacekeeping
presence is advisable. Brazil would favour options that
maintain a military capability to support the Haitian
National Police, as needed, under Chapter VII. We
are also of the view that the present Latin American/
Caribbean profile of the Mission should be fully
preserved throughout its reconfiguration process.

The ultimate transition must be a Haitian one - a
transition away from past instability and back to the
original Haitian dream that inspired an entire region
to seek independence as a way to ensure a dignified
life for all. We stand firmly behind this objective in
solidarity with our Haitian brothers and sisters.

