Mr. Ryan (Ireland): We welcome President
Kagame to the Council today. Rwanda has suffered the
pain of civil war and genocide. In Ireland, we
understand the consequences of intercommunal
violence and the difficulties of building trust and
understanding between communities which have been
engaged in deep and sustained Violence.

The Rwandan people and their Government have
our full support and understanding in their struggle to
build a free, secure, democratic and human-rights-
based society founded on equality and on respect for
diversity. We would be very interested in hearing any
comments from President Kagame on progress towards
intercommunal reconciliation within Rwanda.

Rwanda and the region will be unable to recover
from their wounds while war continues in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; earlier, President
Kagame rightly stressed that fact. Ireland subscribes
fully to the stated position of the European Union,
which is that lasting peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo can be achieved only through a
negotiated peace settlement that is fair to all parties,
through respect for the territorial integrity and national
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and for democratic principles and human rights in all
States in the region, and through taking account of the
security interests of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and of neighbouring countries.

We welcome the reassurance by President
Kagame that Rwanda is ready to implement the Lusaka
Agreement and to assist in bringing about an early and
peaceful resolution of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. President Kagame has
highlighted to us the three main challenges which he
sees in this process. We recognize the security concerns
which led to the presence of Rwandan troops on the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
we agree that any lasting settlement will have to take
account of the armed groups in the region, including
members of the former Rwandan Armed Forces (ex- FAR) and Interahamwe. However, we are not
convinced that these concerns justify the extent of the
current Rwandan military presence in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo. The same reservation applies to
the number and disposition of troops deployed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by other
neighbouring countries, regardless of the reasons put
forward for their presence.

We join the Secretary-General in our interest in
hearing from President Kagame about the timetable he
would envisage for implementing the Harare
disengagement plan, in particular when we can expect
Rwandan troops to withdraw from Pueto, as we
understand this to be under discussion between his
Government and the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). Ireland looks forward with anticipation to
the report that the Secretary-General is now preparing,
which will contain a revised concept of operations for
MONUC.

At the same time, we are concerned about any
illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by the various
parties to the conflict. It is seriously damaging the
international standing of those who are allegedly
involved. We encourage all parties to give the United
Nations panel of experts established to investigate this
situation all the information it requires. We hope that
Rwanda will build on the readiness, which is already
shown, to cooperate with the panel in its work.

The events ofthe past few days have given rise to
a rare stirring of hope for the Congo and for the region
as a whole. We still await the longed-for wind of
change, but there is at least a sense of movement in the
air. The visits to the United Nations of President
Kagame and of President Joseph Kabila, and their
meeting in Washington, have shown that the dynamic
for peace can come from within the region itself. The
Secretary-General earlier complimented the
statesmanship which enabled that meeting to take
place, and we agree with that.

Ireland urges President Kagame to continue his
contacts with all the parties to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We look forward to
further progress in advance of the forthcoming New
York meeting with the members of the Lusaka Political
Committee.

