Mr. Rivas (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this informative meeting. I also thank the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and Austrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Integration, Mr. Sebastian Kurz,
for his detailed briefing.

As was mentioned yesterday (see S/PV.7886), at
a time when the world is ravaged by new risks, such
as violent extremism, nationalism, organized crimes
and other factors, that are enmeshed in a feedback
loop within unresolved conflicts, it is more important
than ever to have the support of solid international,
regional and sub-regional organizations acting in a
coordinated manner.

Uruguay attaches the greatest importance to
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the framework of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. In that respect, my
country participates in valuable regional organizations
and mechanisms, some long-standing like the
Organization ofAmerican States and the Agency for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, established pursuant to the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean, and others more recent, like the
Union of South American Nations and the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, which have
proven their worth and have contributed to peace in the
region. The role played by the regional organizations
in matters of good offices, mediation and peaceful
settlement of disputes, as well as in the appropriate
implementation of their control mechanisms, is based
on intimate knowledge of local realities and provides a
crucial supplement to the work of the United Nations.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe is the broadest organization dealing with
collective security. It covers a wide geographic area
and has 57 members, as others have mentioned. It
has a great deal of experience in resolving conflicts.
Uruguay recognizes the organization's values and
the ten principles of the Final Act of the Conference
on Security and Cooperation in Europe, which are in
line with the purposes and principles enshrined in the
United Nations Charter.

We also recognize the contribution of the
organization to the promotion of mechanisms for
dialogue, confidence-building and conflict-resolution
measures, as well as the work it carries out through
its various missions on the ground that support the
implementation of the relevant regional agreements.
Among its priorities are important topics germane to
international peace and security, such as the current
conflicts in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Moldova,
Nagorno Karabakh and Ukraine, as well as the fight
against radicalization and terrorism, and the protection
of human rights. I would like to stress the momentum
that accompanies the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the employment of a gender-sensitive
approach in its work in various conflict situations.

Finally, I wish Austria every success in its
chairmanship and in the attainment of its objectives,
which will surely contribute to a peace that will
transcend the European continent and benefit us all.

