Mr. Jonasson (Iceland): "The best thing is when
you pass out, because then the pain stops." That is a
quote from a University student in Hama contained in
a report by the High Commissioner for Human Rights
on the large scale practice of torture in Syria. No one
should ever have to experience anything like that.

The violations committed in the conflict against
the civilian population, including children, are horrific
and incomprehensible. Nobody who commits such
violations can expect to escape accountability. We
continue to call on the Security Council to refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.

We strongly support the Geneva process and
a political solution to the crisis in Syria. However,
the Council must also exercise its leadership role in
fostering a political and peaceful solution. The parties
have demonstrated that they are not willing to lay down
arms without international action, and the Council has
yet to demonstrate that it is doing everything in its
power to prevent further human tragedy. Considering
the serious consequences to regional peace and security,
I ask the Council to please take action.

The Government of Syria, along with all other
parties to the conflict, must strictly abide by international
humanitarian and human rights law, including by
affording immediate access to humanitarian assistance
to ease the suffering of civilians. That is not a choice; it
is an obligation. It is unacceptable that people are still
starving - as the world has witnessed in Yarmouk.

We would like to use this opportunity to commend
all who have been working under the extremely
challenging circumstances in Syria to provide
humanitarian assistance to the population, including the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

On the Palestinian question, the peace process
has come to a standstill. We applaud Secretary of
State Kerry for his direct involvement and dedication
during the past few months and we sincerely hope that
the parties will return to the negotiating table. We all
know, however, that the process itself is not the aim.
A process is only a means to an end, which is to reach
an agreement on all final status issues that will, most
importantly, lead to the end of the occupation and result
in two States living side by side in peace and security.
If negotiations do not resume soon, the Security
Council will have to revert its attention to the conflict
and become actively engaged in finding a peaceful
settlement.

Although the peace process has come to a standstill,
the same cannot be said about the situation on the ground
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. Settlement activities have accelerated since
direct negotiations started last year. Also, Palestinian
property rights continue to be violated by the near
impossibility of acquiring building permits and by the
restricting of access to their land. Settler violence also
continues unabated.

With that in mind we call upon Israel, the
occupying Power, to strictly comply with its obligations
under international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law. That entails
ceasing all settlement activities and preventing
provocations around the holy sites in Jerusalem, with
the understanding that all such provocations can have
far-reaching consequences on peace and security in the
region far beyond Israel and the State of Palestine.

Finally, we welcome the recent reconciliation
between Fatah and Hamas. It is hoped that will lead to
a unified approach to a peaceful settlement with Israel.
However, any unity Government that emerges from the
deal should uphold the principle of non-violence, remain
committed to achieving a two-State solution and a
negotiated peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and to accepting previous agreements and
obligations, including Israel's legitimate right to
exist. Furthermore, the reconciliation should lead to
an improved situation on the ground. In that regard,
we once more stress the importance of ending the
indiscriminate rocket attacks from Gaza and of lifting
the blockade against Gaza.

We also welcome the accession of the State of
Palestine to the main human rights treaties for the
benefit of the Palestinian population. This step can
only strengthen the rule of law.

