Ms. Graham (New Zealand): At the outset I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this important debate, and to thank the delegation of
France for their tireless efforts as Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. May I also
commend the Special Representative and all United
Nations agencies involved in this vital work.

The Secretary-General's recent report on children
and armed conflict (5/2006/826) makes very sobering
reading. It is a wake-up call for all of us. Children
continue to be disproportionately killed in conflict
situations. The recruitment and use of child soldiers is
also rife, even where action plans are in place. The
grave violations documented in the report are carried
out with seeming impunity.

But the report of the Secretary-General also
demonstrates that while grave violations continue,
there has been some progress. New Zealand welcomes
steps taken to deploy the monitoring mechanism across
the seven situations designated as priorities for the first
2

phase of implementation, and the initial work on
developing and implementing action plans. Further, the
deployment by Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of child protection advisers into
peacekeeping operations is an important step in helping
raise awareness among United Nations civilian police,
military observers and peacekeepers that operate on the
front lines.

Rehabilitation and reintegration work has also
progressed. Tens of thousands of children and former
child soldiers are benefiting through programmes such
as the United Nations-backed Afghanistan New
Beginnings Programme, and the demobilization,
reintegration and prevention of child soldiers
programme in Burundi, in partnership with UNICEF
and the World Bank. New Zealand's International Aid
and Development Agency (NZAID) has continued its
work in support of children affected by armed conflict,
funding programmes through Save the Children in
Niger, Zimbabwe, Somalia, Mozambique and the
Solomon Islands.

There is no ambiguity: no situation involving
children in armed conflict is acceptable. We need to
take further measures to ensure the protection of
children in such situations.

New Zealand supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation that attention not be limited to child
soldiers, but focus on the wider impact of armed
conflict on children, including killing and maiming of
children, rape and other grave sexual violence,
abductions, attacks against schools and hospitals and
denial of humanitarian access for children. It also
important to ensure that equal care and attention is
given to children affected in all armed conflicts, not
just selected situations.

For action to be effective, all parties need to
ensure that adequate resources and funding are
available for rehabilitation and reintegration
programmes and other associated activities.

The work of an expanded monitoring mechanism
will provide further deterrence to those that carry out
despicable acts against children. In connection with
this effort, we strongly support the ongoing work of the
International Criminal Court to bring to justice those
individuals responsible for the gravest breaches.
Parties that commit grave violations against children
should expect that the international community will
take measures against them.
06-63153

Finally, Mr. President, we call on all Members to

show real commitment by signing and ratifying the

Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of

the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict.

