Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): My delegation welcomes
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia Ivica Dacie and
Ambassador Vlora Citaku of Kosovo back to New York
and thanks them both for their statements. We are also
grateful to Special Representative Zahir Tanin for his
comprehensive briefing.

Listening to the statements today, I wish to call on
both sides to focus on the way forward. Priority should
be given to implementing outstanding commitments
in a spirit of dialogue, cooperation and constructive
engagement and in securing a promising future for
Kosovo. An end should be put to the negative politics of
division and exclusivity, which are counter-productive
and will not help to build confidence and trust between
the two sides. We appreciate the assurances given
by Belgrade and Pristina to remain committed to the
European Union-facilitated dialogue and we hope to
see an intensification of efforts towards implementing
existing agreements.

I share the concerns, as elaborated by Mr. Tanin
today and the Secretary-General in his latest report
(S/2016/99), about the violent protests by the opposition
and their supporters in Kosovo who are against the
August 2015 package of agreements between Belgrade
and Pristina and the territorial delineation agreement
with Montenegro. We call on the relevant parties to
refrain from adversarial politics in Kosovo, to cease
the use of violence and inflammatory rhetoric and to
resolve their differences through legitimate channels
via dialogue and engagement.

The Kosovo Parliament and the rule of law must
be respected. Resorting to violence and intimidation
will not bring the parties any closer to their political
aims. Instead, it may de-legitimize their struggle and
derail the democratic progress painstakingly built by
Kosovo over the years. The politics of division serve
only to hold the progress towards nation-building
and development ransom. Hence, we commend the
commitment and efforts made by Kosovo leaders to
engage in an inclusive dialogue to resolve the issues,
and we applaud the competence and restraint shown by
the Kosovo police in responding to the violent protests.
The people of Kosovo would benefit from more traction
in these areas.

Malaysia is pleased with the progress made by
Kosovo during the reporting period, including the
signing and subsequent ratification of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement with the European Union
(EU). We believe that this is a key step towards peace,
stability and prosperity for Kosovo and the region.
We call on the leaders of Kosovo to remain steadfast
in implementating the Stabilization and Association
Agreement and the socioeconomic reforms necessary
for regional integration.

We also take note of the developments in the
implementation of the 2014 Brussels Agreement,
including the integration of former Serbian civil
protection personnel in northern Kosovo into various
Kosovo institutions. We hope to see more progress
made in the implementation of that landmark
Agreement, including the integration of the judiciary
and the creation of an association of Serb-majority
municipalities in Kosovo. The advances made by
Kosovo relating to the establishment of the specialist
court is yet another step in the right direction. Malaysia
reiterates the need to ensure accountability and to
promote closure and reconciliation for the people of
Kosovo. In that regard, we commend the decision of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands to host the specialist court.

On the economic front, Malaysia applauds the
cooperation between the Belgrade and Pristina
Chambers of Commerce during the reporting period.
Such collaboration deserves our strong support,
as it could open the doors to further commercial
opportunities to the benefit both sides.

Malaysia is gravely concerned about the creeping
influence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
in the region. We commend the steps taken by the
authorities in Kosovo to combat terrorist threats and to
address the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.
We simply cannot afford to have terrorist groups
manipulating the religious, racial and cultural divide
in the region, and in Kosovo in particular, to serve
their twisted and violent agenda. We therefore wish
to see continued high priority accorded by the Kosovo
authorities to combating that global menace. In that
regard, Malaysia stands ready to support Kosovo in its
fight to combat radicalization and violent extremism.

In conclusion, Ijoin other colleagues in reaffirming
support for the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, which continues to play a key role
in promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo. We also commend the leadership ofthe
Special Representative and the important roles played
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in

Europe, the Kosovo Force and the EU towards peace
and stability in Kosovo.

