The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Croatia.

Croatia shares the concerns expressed over the
serious humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. We
understand that resuming humanitarian activities and
the provision of basic supplies to the civilian
population of Gaza is a matter of urgency. Croatia
welcomes the humanitarian effort to alleviate the
situation of the Palestinian people, but it should not
lead to instrumentalizing the suffering of the civilian
population for other purposes. There exist established
channels and procedures for delivering aid. We believe
that those should be followed in the interest of all of
the parties and beneficiaries of such actions.

We note, for example, that the ministers for
foreign affairs of the League of Arab States, meeting in
Cairo, pledged in their statement that their
Governments would send food and medicine to Gaza
and said that they would coordinate with Egypt and
Jordan to ensure that their supplies enter Gaza.

Israel's legitimate security concerns should not be
casually disregarded, as it has been confronted with
hostile shipments in the past. Furthermore, the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip cannot be seen
in isolation from its wider background and its
underlying causes, at the heart of which is Hamas'
usurpation of the legitimate institutions of the
Palestinian Authority in Gaza. We hope that the five-
month period of calm in Gaza and southern Israel will
persist for the benefit of both sides, leading to the
improvement of living conditions for the civilian
population of Gaza and the opening of the crossings for
the movement of persons and goods.

Regrettably, the renewed rocket attacks into Israel
from Gaza are calling into question the commitment of
Palestinian groups to prolonging the calm. Such acts,
which give rise to Israel's exercise of its undeniable
right to self-defence, are irresponsible and
unacceptable and have to be brought to an end.

Croatia believes that only a political settlement
that is a two-State solution can fundamentally alter the
socio-economic situation for the Palestinian population
and guarantee security for Israel. At this moment in
time, all efforts should be focused on preserving and
advancing the dynamics of the peace process started
last fall in Annapolis and on ensuring its transition into
the year 2009.
I resume my functions as president of the
Council.

The representative of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya
has asked to make a further statement. I give him the
floor.

