Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): It is very nice to see
you, Mr. President, presiding over today's meeting,
and I thank our French colleagues for their work on
resolution 2480 (2019). I must also bid Ambassador
Delattre farewell and thank him for his leadership in
the Security Council. I am grateful for his friendship to
me personally, as well as for the friendship between our
Missions and our countries, which I know will remain
strong in all circumstances.

The Council has heard appalling accounts of
intercommunal violence in central Mali in recent
months, including the massacre of 160 people during
the Council's visit to Mali in March. Urgent action to
tackle the root causes of violence in central Mali is
needed to save lives and reduce human suffering. It is
also important with respect to wider regional stability.

The mandate agreed today will crucially allow
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to support
a comprehensive strategy to stabilize central Mali but,
while MINUSMA has a role to play, any efforts in
central Mali must be Malian-owned, politically led and
genuinely inclusive, including through the participation
of women and civil society actors.

It is right that the primary strategic objective of
MINUSMA remains focused on support for the peace
agreement. It has been six years since the Council
adopted resolution 2100 (2013), which established
MINUSMA, four years since the parties signed the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and
over a year since the parties committed to a road map
for the implementation of priority actions.

Yet the key political actors are still failing to
deliver their commitments to their people, while brave
peacekeepers and innocent Malian civilians continue to
lose their lives. Once again, we urge all the parties to
redouble their efforts to meet the benchmarks set out in
this resolution. All Malians deserve to live their lives
free of fear and insecurity and to reap the dividends of
a lasting peace.

