Mr. Osorio: (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate. I commend your particular
devotion to this issue and your preparation of the
concept note (S/2012/685, annex), on the basis of which
we carried out arduous negotiations.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
issuing his annual report on children and armed conflict
(S/2012/26l). I am also graterful for the briefings by
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Herve Ladsous, Mr. Anthony
Lake and Mr. David Tolbert. I wish to again welcome
Ms. Zerrougui as the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, as well as to assure her of my
Government's commitment and readiness to work with
her office in order to strengthen protection for children
affected by armed conflict in various parts ofthe world.

As I said in explaining Colombia's vote, my
delegation would like to again draw attention to the
series of existing norms on the protection of children
in armed conflict. It is therefore necessary to examine
the ways they have been implemented and how they are
functioning and to carefully consider whether or not it
is necessary to adopt new instruments.

When consisdering this matter, it is important
to continuously bear in mind that the Council must
assess and focus on situations of armed conflict that
represent a serious threat to international peace and
security. It must draw a clear distinction between such
situations and others not on its agenda. Each case must
be individually analysed to determine appropriate
responses to the specific circumstances and contexts of
each situation.

Moreover, I think that it is important to emphasize
in our discussion on this issue that the Council and other
United Nations entities must strictly adhere to the agreed
mandate, which has been formulated in absolutely clear
terms. We must deal with the protection of children in
armed conflict, which would exclude any situation that

could not be defined as such a conflict. For those cases
there are other bodies and others ways of dealing with
the issue. When the Council decided that the report of
the Secretary-General should include a second annex
referring to situations not on its agenda, namely, "other
situations", it did so clearly with the understanding that
these would, in all cases, refer to parties to an armed
conflict as determined by the applicable standards of
international law.

In order to improve its consideration of the
issue of children and armed conflict, it would be
appropriate for the Council to consider strengthening
national capacities for the protection of boys and girls.
Reporting and monitoring tools can prove useful, yet not
definitive. In that context, the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict must
evaluate the efficiency of existing mechanisms in order
to help to strengthen States' national capacities. That
has been a core concern of the Colombian Government,
for which the defence of children is not only an
obligatory constitutional tenet but also an ethical and
moral imperative for any civilization. Colombia has
established an intersectoral commission with that goal
in mind, which works under the mandate of a document
created by our country's economic and social council.
State bodies bearing responsibility on the matter work in
harmony to achieve a comprehensive policy to prevent
the recruitment of children and other Violations against
them throughout Colombia, with special emphasis
on areas and locations where the greatest challenges
in relation to the issue have been identified. In that
regard, I would like to refer to the "My rights first"
programme, which is a comprehensive prevention plan
that aims to provide children opportunities to develop
freely and to be able to use their free time for games
and leisure activities.

Taking into account the context of this debate,
I should like to point out that sanctions only make
sense when a Government fails to heed appeals by the
international community. However, applying sanctions
to armed non-State actors in situations not on the
Council's agenda pose a panoply of complications,
starting with the fact that clearly this can have a bearing
on fundamental interests of the country involved, as
well as on matters of national security. Similarly, the
targeted sanctions mechanism is applicable only in those
situations on the Council's agenda, where the Council
has determined, pursuant to Article 39 of the Charter
of the United Nations, that such situations constitute a
threat to international peace and security. The Council's
readiness to adopt this sort of measure when it comes to
persistent perpetrators cannot therefore be considered
as applicable to situations referred to in annex II of the
annual report of the Secretary-General.

In conclusion, we believe that the issue of the
protection of children in armed conflict requires
improved dialogue and continuous consultation
between the United Nations system and Governments,
which bear primary responsibility on the issue. For our
part, our Government remains ready to work and to
cooperate jointly on this issue.

