The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Australia.

I would like to thank the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his
report (S/2014/777, annex) and for his continued efforts
to secure lasting peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Mr. Inzko's briefing has underlined the
continuing challenges facing Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including from persistent political paralysis. We
remain concerned by the lack of progress on a broad
range of economic and governance reforms, which
are essential to creating conditions of greater equity,
inclusiveness and opportunity for all Bosnians. Bosnia
and Herzegovina has not made concrete progress
towards its own aim of Euro-Atlantic integration. That
is all the more dispiriting when considered against the
good progress made by some of its closest neighbours.

Australia reaffirms its strong support for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We remain deeply concerned by the
continued use of inflammatory and divisive rhetoric by
some leaders of the Republika Srpska, including during
the recent elections. The Republika Srpska President's
public praise for indictees Radovan Karadzie and
Ratko Mladic' and the suggestion that streets and
public buildings should be named after them are deeply
concerning examples.

We recognize the challenges that persist in Bosnia
and Herzegovina following the unprecedented flooding
in May, which devastated much of the country, together
with parts of Croatia and Serbia. Australia is encouraged
by the inter-ethnic and regional solidarity that
characterized the local and community response to the
floods. We call for the rapid adoption of comprehensive
recovery strategies to facilitate reconstruction efforts.

We welcome the peaceful and orderly conduct of
the 12 October general elections. It is now vital that
all political actors work constructively to ensure the
swift formation of government at all levels to promote
economic growth and engender a sense of trust in
the functioning of the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Australia welcomes the fact that the overall security
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains calm and
stable. We acknowledge the activities of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR) Operation
Althea in support of peace and security in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Over the past six months, the mission also
assisted with flood recovery efforts and the creation
of a safe and calm environment during the elections.
Australia welcomes the resolution 2183 (2014), adopted
this afternoon, extending EUFOR Althea's mandate
for a further 12 months, and we acknowledge, because
this is a very important point, that the mandate and the
presence of EUFOR-Althea has the strong support of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The disposal of excess ammunition in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains important. The displacement of
mines during the floods and landslides in May has added
a new dimension to the problem. Australia welcomes
the work done in that regard by the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in cooperation with EUFOR Althea
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe.

To conclude, many of the issues raised during
today's debate have also been raised at previous Security
Council debates on this issue. Political deadlock
continues, with some leaders continuing to threaten to
roll back the progress achieved since the mid-1990s.
The leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina should look
beyond the divisions of the past and focus on the urgent
the governance and economic reforms needed to steer
the country towards a peaceful and prosperous future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

