Mr. Sharma (Nepal): It is our privilege to have
the Foreign Minister of Singapore presiding over this
very important and timely open meeting of the Security
Council to mark the independence of East Timor.

Today, a new nation has emerged from the blue
and often turbulent waters of the South Pacific. East
Timor has broken out of a cage of history in which it
was trapped for centuries and has taken the first flight
of freedom into the open blue sky. East Timor's
independence is a dream come true for its people. On
this very happy occasion the Government and people of
Nepal most heartily congratulate the newly elected
President, Mr. Xanana Gusmao, and the Government
and people of East Timor at their monumental
achievement and join them in celebrating this
exhilarating moment.

Nepal welcomes East Timor into the community
of nations with open arms as an equal and respected
member. We profoundly commend the dedication and
sacrifice of the people of East Timor that made their
freedom possible.

Like so many other countries, Nepal is proud to
have been involved, through its participation in
peacekeeping, in the evolution of a free nation. Private
Devi Ram Jaishi nurtured the sapling of East Timor by
making the ultimate sacrifice. So many other young
men and women made their invaluable contributions
under United Nations auspices to make this dream
come true. I pay tribute to Private Jaishi and other
heroes from around the world whose sacrifice and
dedication helped make possible the dream of
independence for East Timor. I also commend the
United Nations for its untiring effort to make this
happen. I appreciate the Government of Indonesia for
respecting the will of the East Timorese people.

The chapter on the birth of a free nation has come
to a happy close with the independence ceremony
concluded in Dili Sunday night. There are many
chapters yet to be written in a long history that awaits
East Timor. They must be chapters on durable peace,
sustained democracy and freedom, and sustainable
economic and social development. I call on the
international community to assist East Timor to write
those chapters.

Nepal remains committed to contributing in
whatever way it can to make East Timor a viable,
vibrant and stable State, one able to stand on its own
feet and pursue peace and development. That is why
we are committed to continuing with the successor
mission to the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor.

I wish the Government and people of East Timor
success in meeting the challenges before them on the
way to forging a peaceful, prosperous and just society
in the new nation.

