Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): In the interests of saving
time, I will deliver a shortened version of my statement,
the full text of which will be circulated.

My delegation would like to thank the Swedish
presidency for organizing today's open debate on the
important and pressing topic of conflict prevention and
sustaining peace. We are also grateful to the Secretary-
General for his insightful remarks. Azerbaijan greatly
appreciates and fully supports the appeal for peace
that he made on 1 January. My country will be an
active and strong partner in contributing genuinely to
the Organization's joint efforts to make 2017 a year
for peace.

The principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes
is one of the cornerstones of the Charter of the United
Nations and the international legal order. Its primary
objective is to ensure that States are committed to
respecting one another's sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence, and refraining
from the threat or use of force in their international
relations. International law requires not just that we
work to produce a successful outcome by preventing
or resolving conflicts, but that those outcomes be
achieved through a process that is consistent with
specific norms. Without that, no solution can provide
the necessary foundations for sustainable peace and
long-term stability.

As a matter of priority, special attention should be
given to the implementation of resolutions adopted by
the principal organs of the United Nations, particularly
the resolutions relating to the peaceful settlement of
disputes and to conflict prevention and resolution. It
is also important to stress the role of the rule of law
in establishing a stable and durable peace. Nor can we
ignore the critical imperative of shedding light on real
facts and of combating impunity. Such efforts must be
free of selectivity and politically motivated approaches,
however difficult or even unrealistic that may seem.

Armenia's continuing aggression against my
country has led to its seizure of a significant part of
Azerbaijan's territory, including the Nagorno Karabakh
region and seven adjacent districts and some exclaves.
It has claimed the lives of tens of thousands of people,
ruined cities and livelihoods, and resulted in the
forcible expulsion of more than a million Azerbaijanis
from their homes and properties. Serious violations
of international humanitarian law, amounting to war
crimes, crimes against humanity and acts of genocide,
have been committed in the course of the conflict.

Next month will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary
of an atrocious crime committed by Armenian armed
forces and their affiliates against the civilians and
defenders of the town of Khojaly in the Nagorno
Karabakh region of Azerbaijan. What happened in
Khojaly in February 1992 was the largest massacre of
the conflict. The following year, the Security Council
adopted four resolutions - resolutions 822 (1993), 853
(1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993) - condemning the
use of force against Azerbaijan, the occupation of its
territories, the attacks on civilians and the bombardment
of inhabited areas. In its resolutions the Council
supported the principle of respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, affirmed that
the Nagorno Karabakh region is an integral part of
Azerbaijan and demanded the immediate, full and
unconditional withdrawal of the Armenian forces
from all of the occupied territories of Azerbaijan. At
a time when there was a real possibility of halting the
bloodshed, saving the lives of thousands of people and
investing in development and prosperity, Armenia
continued with its annexationist policy.

Very little, if anything, has changed since then. The
Security Council's principled demands have still not
been implemented, and the mediation efforts conducted
for almost 25 years within the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe have yet to yield results.
Armenia persistently refuses to start meaningful peace
negotiations, obstructs the conflict settlement process,
regularly resorts to various provocations aimed at
escalating the situation in the conflict zone and tries
to consolidate the current status quo. The only way to
achieve a durable and lasting solution is to ensure the
immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal
of the Armenian armed forces from the Nagorno
Karabakh region and the other occupied territories
of Azerbaijan. That is what international law and the
Security Council demand.

