Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, to the Security Council, and thank
them for their participation in today's meeting and for
their informative briefings.

Our meeting today is a continuation of that held
yesterday morning (see S/PV.8626). The two meetings
share many elements, in particular cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security, as well as strengthened partnerships and
efforts to address challenges and threats to international
peace and security.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations has enjoyed significant progress that
deserves praise and admiration. Joint frameworks for
peace and sustainable development have been signed
this year. Furthermore, annual joint conferences have
been institutionalized at the summit level between the
two Organizations. A joint statement on cooperation
in support of peace operations has also been adopted.
Cooperation between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council continues,
including through the convening of annual meetings,
and we hope that this year's thirteenth session will be
held in Addis Ababa in October.

Given the foregoing, we stress the importance of
maintaining these efforts, which have yielded many
achievements, and of building on them, in particular
through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, in
order to ensure that peacekeeping missions are more
efficient, better equipped, stronger and safer. This
requires robust Security Council mandates, as well as
sustainable and predictable funding. In that regard, we
commend the continued commitment of the African
Union to covering 25 per cent of the costs of peace
support operations.

The concerted efforts made to address challenges
to peace and security through preventive diplomacy
and mediation must be the first line of defence in the
prevention of conflict. We can cite various examples
in this regard. The best way to sustainably silence the
guns is to build lasting peace and prevent conflict
through continued work to establish foundations for
peace, which can be achieved only by building societies
in which all citizens can effectively participate. In order
to reach lasting peace and achieve the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, in particular the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), the root causes of violence
and conflicts must be addressed before they erupt.

The African Union Agenda 2063 cites several factors
needed to prevent and resolve conflict. First of all, the
culture of peace and tolerance must be strengthened
by teaching children and young people the value of
peace. Other concepts also have to be strengthened.
These include good governance, democracy, human
rights, the rule of law, justice and addressing the root
causes of disputes, which we well know to be numerous
and interlinked.
Development is one of the pillars of the United
Nations in establishing sustainable peace, security
and human rights. That is why the State of Kuwait
attaches great importance to this pillar. We offer our
support, participation and partnership to all the African
countries, and we do so because we believe that Africa
is the strategic continuity of the Arab world, all the more
so since 10 Arab countries are members of the African
Union. That is why the State of Kuwait, in presidential
statement S/PRST/2019/5, emphasized the importance
of tripartite cooperation and coordination among the
United Nations, African Union and the League of Arab
states on issues of regional peace and security.

Furthermore, the report of former Secretary-
General Kofi Annan entitled "The causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa" (S/1998/318) asserted that
there can be no peace without development and no
development without peace. This vision is in line with
one of the principles and pillars of the foreign policy
of the State of Kuwait, in particular the development
policy adopted by the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic
Development; since 1961, the Fund's development
contribution to 51 African States has come to nearly
$10 billion.

On several occasions, Kuwait has confirmed that
we will pursue our efforts to support the implementation
of the SDGs in Africa, either through governmental
and popular cooperation or through institutions of
the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development,
which considers Africa to be a major platform for its
development activities in such areas as health, energy,
education, water and infrastructure.

Furthermore, the Amir of Kuwait, His Highness
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, was
a guest of honour at the 2012 Summit of the African
Union held in Addis Ababa. He was the first Arab
leader outside of the African Union to attend such a
summit, which is an illustration of the importance
Kuwait attaches to the African continent in general and
the African Union in particular. It also demonstrates the
solid relationship between the State of Kuwait and the
African Union as a whole, and anchors the relationship
and partnership between the League of Arab States and
the African Union.

In this context, the State of Kuwait hosted the third
Africa-Arab Summit, held in November 2013 under
the rubric "Partners in development and investment".
At the Summit, the State of Kuwait also committed
to allocating soft loans in the amount of $1 billion for
infrastructure under the supervision of the Kuwait
Investment Authority. Furthermore, the Amir of
Kuwait, His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-AhmadAl-Jaber
Al-Sabah, launched the Abdulrahman Al-Sumait
Prize for Development in Africa, a lofty humanitarian
initiative allocating $1 million as annual money prize
to support development research in the areas of food,
health and education in Africa. With the contribution of
the State of Kuwait, the Prize encourages economic and
social development, as well as human capacity-building
in the African continent.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait is counting
on the United Nations and its bodies to promote the
capacity of African States to implement the Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative, the importance
of which the Security Council stressed in resolution
2457 (2019). Furthermore, the African Union 2063
Agenda, which is consistent with the SDGs and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, also has
to be implemented in cooperation with donor States.
The State of Kuwait, as an observer in the African
Union, will continue to cooperate with its members
to promote the capacities of the Union for achieving
peace, progress, prosperity, conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as maintaining peace, security and
stability in Africa, while reaffirming the importance of
finding African solutions to African problems.

