Mr. Lowcock: Though we sometimes forget this,
the last 70 years have in fact been relatively peaceful.
The late Hans Rosling pointed out that one reason
for that is that except for reasons of self-defence, war
between States became illegal, thanks to the Charter
of the United Nations. But where conflict persists, it
is civilians who now bear the brunt. Wars have forced
nearly 70 million people to flee their homes. As
combatants in recent times have increasingly resorted
to siege and starvation as weapons of war, and as
conflict has prevented farmers from reaping their
harvests, destroyed vital infrastructure and disrupted
commercial trade, hunger levels have once again
increased after decades of decline. Some 60 per cent
of people affected by food crises now live in conflict-
affected countries.

Today's conflicts are marked by more direct attacks
on humanitarian workers, and on medical workers and
their facilities, than used to be the case. The Aid Worker
Security Database reported 317 attacks on aid workers
last year, which resulted in 113 deaths. The World
Health Organization reported 388 attacks on health
personnel or facilities in 2018, resulting in the deaths
of more than 300 people and injuries to 400 more. In
some places, medical workers also now face criminal
prosecution simply for doing their job of treating sick
or wounded fighters. Increasingly, we see the deliberate
and organized use of rape as a weapon of war. One
in five displaced women who are asked say that they
have experienced sexual violence. Children are being
recruited into armed groups, forced into early marriage
or used as suicide bombers. They are being barred from
education as their schools are attacked or taken over.
The United Nations verified more than 21,000 grave
violations of children's rights in 2017. In towns and
cities, belligerents use explosive weapons designed for
open battlefields, resulting in mass civilian casualties,
enormous destruction of infrastructure and long-term
disruption of essential services. All ofthese things have
a big impact on humanitarian operations.

First, protracted conflicts and chronic crises
have caused humanitarian needs to spiral. This year,
139 million people are in acute humanitarian need,
most of them because of armed conflict. That is three
times as many as a decade ago. Combatants deliberately
hinder humanitarian operations, slowing them down,
driving up costs and blocking aid from reaching the
people most in need. Violence against humanitarian
workers, including killing, maiming, kidnapping and
abduction, also obstructs humanitarian operations.

International humanitarian law is designed to
minimize human suffering in war, including by
safeguarding humanitarian activities, and therefore
ensuring greater respect for international humanitarian
law is one of the most effective ways to safeguard the
humanitarian space. This year we mark the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, which are
complemented in important ways by their Additional
Protocols. Many countries have also signed treaties
prohibiting or restricting weapons and enshrining
international criminal law. And this year marks the
twentieth anniversary of the protection of civilians in
the Security Council.

The Council has taken practical steps to safeguard
humanitarian action in the past. The United Nations
peace operations mandated by the Security Council
support and enable humanitarian access and apply
sanctions to those who obstruct it. Resolution 2286
(2016) covers the protection of medical personnel and
facilities in armed conflict. We therefore have a strong
legal framework for safeguarding humanitarian activity
in conflict. The problem is that the fighting parties
and their backers do not always follow it, and this has
grave consequences. I therefore want to offer proposals
in five areas that could generate greater respect for
international humanitarian law and safeguard the
humanitarian space.

First, we should promote policies and practices to
strengthen adherence to international humanitarian
law. That includes endorsing such political
commitments as the Safe Schools Declaration or the
French declaration on the protection of medical and
humanitarian personnel. The Council could seek much
wider endorsement for such commitments. Related
efforts also include developing policy frameworks that
establish the authorities that are responsible for the
protection of civilians, as well as reviewing policies
and practical measures for implementing international
humanitarian law. Examples of that include establishing
civilian-casualty mitigation measures, developing
policies to avoid the use of explosive weapons with
wide-area effects in populated areas and making
arms exports conditional on respect for international
humanitarian law.

Secondly, we should broaden and deepen the
understanding and acceptance of existing rules,
including the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols. I am sure that Peter Maurer will touch on this
point, but experience has shown that fighting parties
often have an incomplete understanding of international
humanitarian law. Providing training for armed forces
and members of non-State armed groups on how to
respect humanitarian law can help, and Member States
should assist humanitarian organizations in spreading
such knowledge.

Thirdly, we should enable humanitarian and medical
activities. All parties should adopt clear and simplified
procedures to facilitate humanitarian access. They
should establish civil-military coordination platforms or
humanitarian notification systems to facilitate parties'
respect for humanitarian operations. Council members
and other Member States could do more to advocate for
rapid and unimpeded access to people in need, including
by adopting clear, simple, expedited procedures and
by supporting humanitarian organizations to engage
with armed groups for humanitarian purposes. States
can also take practical measures to minimize the
impact of sanctions and counter-terrorism measures
on humanitarian action. The Council is about to hear
a very important presentation on that by Professor
Modirzadeh. In addition, States can adopt measures
to protect medical care, in line with the Secretary-
General's recommendations on resolution 2286 (2016).
Those recommendations include, for example, ensuring
legal protection for medical personnel when they
are acting in line with medical ethics and adopting
preventative measures to minimize the impact of
hostilities on medical care.

Fourthly, with regard to compliance, States and the
Security Council could promote the universalization
of international humanitarian law and human rights
treaties. The right kinds of incentives and penalties can
boost compliance. For example, sanctions imposed by
the Security Council can be a powerful tool to promote
compliance and States can exert their diplomatic,
political and economic influence over parties to a
conflict in order to strengthen compliance.
Finally, regarding accountability, States certainly
need to do much better in holding individuals to account
when they commit serious violations of international
humanitarian law. For example, by adopting legislation
that encompasses the full range of international crimes
and jurisdiction over them and by strengthening the
national capacity to carry out impartial, independent
investigations into allegations of war crimes and,
crucially, to prosecute suspects when the evidence
justifies such a step. Where national accountability
systems are insufficient, there should be more support
for international or hybrid accountability mechanisms,
including the International Criminal Court. Supporting,
financially or otherwise, the systematic collection,
analysis and documentation of evidence of violations
of international humanitarian law is very important as
part of that process.

Lastly, let us never forget that accountability for
serious violations of international humanitarian law is
required by law.

