Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): What will it
take? Syria is in the midst of a horrific conflict and
the worst is probably yet to come. The United Kingdom
and France have called this emergency session because
eastern Aleppo and other besieged areas are today
facing new depths of crisis, as the three briefers have so
clearly described. History may show that it is, perhaps,
the most horrific conflict of our lifetimes.

We have faced horror before. We and those who
have sat in these very chairs before us have collectively
adopted 2,321 resolutions - 2,321 decrees from
the world's highest authority on international peace
and security. We have sent peacekeepers to war zones.
We have stemmed conflict. We have defied great
odds, bridged divides and have answered the call of
humankind for seven consecutive decades. And yet
on Syria, sitting here in the Chamber today, after over
five years of fighting and the deaths of close to half of
a million people, after the displacement of 11 million
people from their homes, with 1 million more under
siege, the Security Council has completely failed to act.
Stephen O'Brien asks why; the answer is simple. Time
and again, Russia has vetoed to prevent the Security
Council from finding the unity necessary for ending
the war. Therefore again I ask, what will it take?

I have met members of Syrian civil society. I have
met impartial aid groups, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Medecins Sans
Frontieres. I have met doctors who have treated the
wounded in makeshift hospitals in Aleppo, and they tell
me what is expected: the bombs are directly responsible
for the greatest number of deaths. To stop the deaths,
stop the bombing. But those numbers are simply the
deaths that we can count today. As difficult as it is to
imagine, there is even more horror looming under the
surface - horror that could be on an even larger scale;
an agonizingly slow and painful death.

That is what the United Nations is talking about
when it briefs us on the status of besieged areas in
Syria. Sieges are now a routine item of discussion when
the Council discusses Syria. We cannot begin to think
that sieges are now common, that they are somehow a
simple matter of fact. They maybe a regular part of the
conflict in Syria but they are anything but regular. What
they are a deliberate act of starvation and withholding
of medical care. The Syrian regime and Russia have
been executing a plan that has now laid 1 million people
under siege. And "executing" is an all-too-appropriate
word because without a change in policy and a change
of heart, that is exactly what it is - the slow, painful,
bitter execution of 1 million Syrians cut off from aid
convoys and the world.

The United Nations has an aid plan. It is not
an opposition plan. It is not designed to aid one side
over the other. Its sole purpose is to save lives and
alleviate suffering. As Stephen said, the aid convoys
are ready to roll, but they must have permission from
the regime - permission that has been systematically
denied. This is the United Nations - the impartial
body the world looks to in the bleakest of situations.
Russia is a leading member of the United Nations and
crucial to the eventual solution of the Syria conflict.
Why, then, can Russia and the Syrian regime not sign
up to the United Nations aid plan?

First they said it was because of terrorism. Then
we reminded them that 100,000 children could not
be terrorists. Then they said that it was because of
the opposition. The opposition has now agreed to the
United Nations plan for eastern Aleppo. What is today's
excuse? What is the excuse for employing the medieval
tactic of siege? What is the excuse for the continued
bombardment - dropping bombs at a disturbing rate
over the homes of children and families? What is the
excuse for the continued endorsement of war crimes?
The ancient city of Aleppo as we know it is on the verge
of being wiped from the face of the Earth. Today we
speak of reaching those who remain, tomorrow there
may not be an Aleppo to reach. If that comes to pass,
the excuses of the Syrian regime and of Russia will
have played a substantial role. Let me be absolutely
clear about what needs to happen in Aleppo.

First, there needs to be an immediate ceasefire in
order to give civilians respite from the bombs and to
allow humanitarian access. Secondly, like the armed
opposition groups have done, Russia and the regime
must agree to cooperate on the United Nations four-
point humanitarian plan. Thirdly, those civilians who
want to leave the city must be allowed to do so safely
to areas of their choosing, with protection assured by
impartial monitoring. We are receiving reports today
of the Syrian regime bombing Syrian families who are
fleeing Aleppo on foot with their belongings. I call
on Russia and the regime to commit to the Council
today that no civilians will be attacked as they leave
Aleppo. The deliberate targeting of civilians in such
circumstances would be a war crime and we will hold
those responsible to account.

Words cannot describe what is currently happening
in Aleppo. We have heard talk of a circle of hell, a kill
zone, a giant graveyard. Within that kill zone - that
circle of hell - are 100,000 children. We have all been
discussing it long enough. We have seen the headlines,
the images and the videos. Think back to the last face of
a Syrian civilian you saw. The gruesome fact is that too
many of them are destined to become a statistic - and
maybe they already are - another number in the
death toll, another figure in a United Nations situation
report of people starving in Aleppo, another statistic
in a headline that reads "Seven children dead in school
bombing". We made a habit of allowing those statistics
to be created, and we must break that habit.

Egypt, New Zealand and Spain have drafted a very
reasonable draft resolution calling for lO-day ceasefire
to stop the bombing and let aid in. There should be a
vote on that draft resolution as soon as possible. If not
today, then I call on the Council to meet again before
the end of this week to review the situation in Aleppo
and for us to move swiftly to adopt that draft resolution
to deliver a ceasefire and the full implementation of the
United Nations humanitarian plan.

