Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate on peacekeeping
operations facing asymmetrical threats. I am grateful
for the very interesting briefings provided earlier today.

Threats and challenges to the United Nations
peacekeeping enterprise are not new. The Congo in
the 1960s, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Rwanda in the
19905, Sierra Leone in 2000 and several others since then
precede the current stresses that peacekeeping faces.
What is different now is that the new normal consistently
requires staying and operating in volatile environments
where parties involved are not only using technological
advances in adapting destructive weaponry to their
benefit, but are wedded to transnational ideologies and
linked to transborder networks of crime and terror. Illicit
violent organizations are gaining increasing control
over territory, markets and populations. Although such
phenomena are not limited to peacekeeping missions
alone, they impact peacekeeping in a manner like never
before. All this is new.

At one level, we can focus on the technical fixes
to address such situations. To address these issues, we
can call for the development of doctrinal principles
on the use of offensive capabilities for peacekeeping
missions that operate in asymmetrical and war-fighting
environments. Following this approach, we can adopt
new technology, intelligence gathering, standby and
quick-reaction capabilities, and force enablers and hope
they will do the trick. Notwithstanding the problems
associated with a blurred distinction for the United
Nations when a mission operates in an asymmetrical
environment in parallel with a non-United Nations
force, we can, as a pragmatic way forward, work
with regional and other organizations, especially in
situations that require responses that go beyond the
nation-centric peacekeeping model. In short, we can opt
for further policy and operational guidelines on how to
use versatile force to match diverse threats and levels
of Violence and the implementation of force protection
measures as a solution.

Tackling the challenges faced by peacekeeping
today, however, needs more than an up-to-date tool kit.
Peacekeeping operations differ from war fighting and
peace enforcement in the sense that they do not entail the
use of force as a central modus operandi. Peacekeeping
is not about fighting an enemy, and the evolution towards
more robustness has not fundamentally changed this.

The lesson learned from the history ofpeacekeeping
is that lasting peace is not achieved through military
and technical engagements, but through political
solutions. Peacekeeping is not a strategy in itself,
but rather a strategic tool. It requires collaboration.
Peacekeeping requires a political consensus among
Security Council members, troop contributors and
others on the costs, limits and dangers of operations in
high-risk environments. However, what we see coming
out from the Security Council today is not consensus,
but dissensus. Resolution 2304 (2016), which in August
revised the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan, is a case in point. It
was adopted with little agreement within the Council
itself, little groundwork with the host Government and
without effective consultations with the troop- and
police-contributing countries that have to implement it.

The Council needs to revisit the way mandates
are designed. It cannot underestimate the complexity
of bringing about peace. United Nations peacekeeping
operations, in the way they are agreed upon, planned
and implemented, can deliver only limited successes.
The Council should therefore mandate an operation
to do only what the United Nations is structurally
and politically organized to do, rather than provide a
multiplicity of mandates and raising expectations that
cannot be fulfilled, and then absolving itself of all
responsibility. This current approach is not sustainable.

Specifically, the assertive conception of the use
of force should be adopted with the utmost prudence,
and in any case should be ad hoc. This is so because
a military option carried out by United Nations
peacekeepers cannot be a long-term response to what are
fundamentally political problems. It is for the Council
to address these politically rather than militarily.

In essence, the solutions that we seek lie as much in
a better understanding of what is out there as in a more
introspective understanding of what plagues us in here.
This is the philosophical dilemma that the Council, an
organ set up more than 70 years ago and in a world
that was very different, now faces in a fundamentally
changed security landscape.

