Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Madam, on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council. We wish you every success in
leading the Council's work this month.

We express our deep gratitude for the work of the
Permanent Representative of the Congo and his
friendly delegation and for their wise leadership of the
Council throughout their presidency last month.

I also welcome the presence of Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Commissioner of the United Nations
International Independent Investigation Commission,
and thank him for his briefing. We note the contents of
Mr. Brammertz's report, as well as its objectivity,
professionalism and positive references to Syria's
efforts to cooperate with the Commission, to respond
constructively to all the Commission's requests, and to
6
provide it with all the necessary information in a
timely manner.

I wish to stress that the cooperation of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic with the
Commission is based on its eagerness to uncover the
truth about the assassination of the former Prime
Minister of Lebanon, the late Rafik Hariri, and to
expose those who were behind the crime.

The report before the Security Council today
includes a step-by-step clarification of the Committee's
technical work at the scene of the crime and on the
means used to commit it. We hope that the
Commission, newly reconstituted a few months ago,
will uncover the truth concerning those truly
responsible for committing the crime.

In that context, we reiterate the assertion we have
made on previous occasions to the effect that the
greatest threat to the investigation is the attempts by
certain parties within or outside our region to use
developments in the investigation as an excuse to jump
to a priori conclusions unfounded in clear evidence or
proof, and to provide false evidence that may be
exploited for purposes, including the desire to pressure
my country, that are far removed from those for which
the Commission was established. The fact is that a
revelation of the truth must await the Commission's
completion of its task.

I wish briefly to refer to the report before the
Security Council and to make the following general
remarks, without addressing its substantive details so
as not to prejudice the investigation, which we believe
must be objective, impartial, independent and free of
all politicization and political interference.

First, the report notes that Syrian cooperation with
the Commission has been satisfactory. We emphasize that
Syria has cooperated tirelessly and fully with the United
Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission from the moment it began its work to this
very day. In that context, the special judicial commission
established in Syria is prepared to follow up on
coordination and cooperation with the International
Commission and to respect all requests for assistance it
may submit. We note that the accuracy and clarity of the
requests presented to the Syrian judicial commission has
allowed us to provide the International Commission with
the requested information in record time.
06-38709

Secondly, in the framework of cooperation

between Syria and the United Nations International

Independent Investigation Commission, the report

notes Syria's positive response to requests made by the

Commission with respect to the provision of
information and documentation. It further notes that

"[t]he Syrian Arab Republic has responded to all
of the Commission's requests in a timely manner
and in some instances comprehensive responses
were provided" (5/2006/375, para. 103).

I would stress here that Syria will continue to extend
its efforts in that area.

Thirdly, Syria supports the emphasis in the report
on the necessity of carefully and accurately analysing
and assessing the evidence in accordance with the
highest standards and parameters of international
criminal procedure, in particular with respect to false
testimony provided to the Commission for well-known
political reasons.

Fourthly, we note that the Commission has made
requests for assistance to 13 other States in addition to
Syria and Lebanon. In that context, we would like to
emphasize that Security Council resolution 1595
(2005) called upon all States to cooperate fully with the
International Independent Investigation Commission,
in order to uncover the truth behind the assassination
of the late Rafik Hariri.
06-38709

Fifthly, we have noted with satisfaction the
continued confidentiality of the investigation; we
welcome such confidentiality and would like it to
continue.

Sixthly, Syria agrees with the report as regards
the need for adequate time to complete the
investigations and gather all the necessary solid
evidence and proof before moving on to the next step.

In conclusion, Syria agrees with the importance
of providing the international investigation with all the
resources and time it needs to finish its work, enabling
it to gather true evidence in the absence of
politicization and false and erroneous hypotheses.
Here, we would like to emphasize that, through the
Syrian Judicial Commission, Syria will continue to
cooperate actively in order to help the International
Commission. Once again, I would like to emphasize
that Syria's cooperation is based upon its wish to find
and reveal the truth, something which is in our best
interests.

