Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the presence of the
Prime Minister of Mali and the other ministers who are
attending this afternoon's meeting.

The search for peace and reconciliation in Mali
continues to face great challenges due to ongoing
conflict among armed groups, intercommunal violence
and delays in implementing essential parts of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation. However,
we recognize and commend the progress made in the
implementation of some areas of the Agreement, in
particular with regard to the establishment of interim
authorities, the launch of an accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, the
resumption of the constitutional review process and
the convening of consultations with human rights
and civil society organizations on draft legislation for
national agreement.

However, we regret the slow pace of implementation
of some essential areas of the agreement, such as
reform of the security sector and the establishment of a
northern development zone in Mali, among others. That
lack of progress in implementing fundamental areas of
the agreement contributes to the Malian people's loss
of confidence and hope for change in their efforts to
live in a nation of lasting peace and opportunities. We
urge the Government and the Platform coalition of
armed groups to continue their joint efforts to move
forward the implementation of the agreement, for the
welfare and progress of their own people. Moreover,
we call for the necessary resources to be provided so
that the interim authorities can effectively fulfil their
commitment to implementing the agreements endorsed
in resolution 2423 (2018).

The Dominican Republic expresses its concern
about the prevailing security situation in northern and
central Mali, as well as intercommunal violence and
the attacks perpetrated by terrorist groups against the
Malian defence and security forces, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), international forces and the civilian
population, in particular women and children. In that
context, we commend the efforts of MINUSMA and the
Government in combating impunity, and we welcome
the inauguration of the regional office in Kidal of the
Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission.

We strongly condemn the deaths of 18 soldiers
and the injuries inflicted on 77 other members of the
peacekeeping forces in the past six months, as well as
the attack perpetrated in the town of Mopti, in central
Mali, during which more than 70 people lost their
lives. We express our condolences to the families of the
victims. We hope that no effort is spared to identify and
bring to justice the perpetrators of those attacks.

The Dominican Republic firmly believes that the
inclusion of women has great potential to transform
societies and contribute to peace and security. In that
regard, we welcome President Keita's efforts to increase
the number of women in decision-making positions.
We advocate continued efforts, such as the introduction
of quota systems, in order to achieve meaningful and
equitable representation in all areas of decision-making.

In that same vein, we believe that young people
must participate in stabilization efforts in Mali. The
determination of young people and their projects for
consolidating peace create a multiplier effect in their
communities. In that regard, we support the efforts made
by UNICEF, UNESCO, the International Organization
for Migration and the United Nations Development
Programme to actively involve young Malians in the
implementation process of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation. No society can prosper and no peace
agreement can last if women and young people are not
empowered to play a part in consolidating peace and
rebuilding the nation.

Allow me to turn to the adverse effects of climate
change as a multiplier factor of the fragile internal
situation of Mali. That is nothing new. Mali has spent
years dealing with recurring climate-related events,
such as droughts and variable levels of rainfall, for
which herders and farmers have paid a high price, as
well as the majority of Malians, who depend on such
economic activities for a living.

Climate vulnerability in Mali, a landlocked country
with a particularly arid area of territory, together with
its extremely fragile, violent and insecure domestic
situation, jeopardizes the scope of the country's
development and a peaceful future for its population.
Ofparticular concern to us is the humanitarian situation
triggered by the convergence of all those elements,
particularly food insecurity and a lack of access to
water resources.

However, we also believe that that represents
a major opportunity. A better understanding of the
risks associated with climate change that are directly
affecting the security situation in the country is the
primary duty of the Security Council and, in particular,
of MINUSMA. We must work hand in hand with the
Government of Mali and its relevant institutions to
establish mechanisms for assessing risks and designing
plans and strategies to strengthen the resilience of the
most affected sectors. In that context, we must also
establish information and cooperation channels with
local communities in order to expand early-warning
mechanisms that contribute to joint planning for the
impact of those climatic shifts. All of those elements
must be aligned with the multidimensional approach of
MINUSMA, while meeting Mali's national priorities of
resilience and sustainable development.

To conclude, the Dominican Republic commends
the work of MINUSMA and the various national and
international actors that come together in Mali to bring
peace and stability to the country and other bordering
States in the region. Moreover, we are convinced
that, in order to overcome the challenges facing Mali,
we will need a comprehensive strategy to implement
processes that can make progress on issues related to
peace, development, climate change and security, with
the equal participation of women and young people.
Only then, by investing in the different areas of change
in Malian society, will the Security Council, the United
Nations and the international community be able to
bring lasting peace to Mali and ensure the sustainable
development of its people.

