Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for having
scheduled this meeting between the Security Council
and the Secretariat. We would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Kenzo Oshima for the excellent
briefing he has just given us.

I would like to take this opportunity to stress the
political aspect of the meetings that you have been
organizing in recent days on the human tragedies in the
world. Yesterday, we were talking about the situation
of children. Today, we are talking about the situation of
civilians. The extent of tragedies in conflicts in Africa,
the question of refugees and the situation in the Middle
East should give rise to more sacrifice and solidarity
and to increased interest on the part of the Council. We
have seen in some conflicts that as soon as the
humanitarian element appears, it helps to resolve
problems and to rally people that desire peace with
justice and equity. But this meeting is a rather
methodological one, aimed at strengthening dialogue
between the Council and the Secretariat on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The Security
Council is seeking ways to translate agreed principles
into specific action, as was suggested just now by
Ambassador Mahbubani and several other colleagues,
to improve and even change the daily experiences of
civilians that suffer the horrors of armed conflict.

I have listened with interest to the two statements
made by Mr. Oshima and by my colleagues in the
Council. It is clear that progress is being made by the
Secretariat. We hope that the work will be completed as
soon as possible in the three areas described by
Mr. Oshima. We support the holding of consultations at
the expert level, and we believe that they should be as
broad-based and open as possible.

I do have, however, a question to put to
Mr. Oshima. Could he give us some indication of the
timetable planned for finalizing the initiatives that have
been proposed, knowing that the Council will proceed
to an evaluation next November? In other words, when
do you intend to submit a draft road map and aide-
memoire?

