Mr. Motoc (Romania): I cannot start without
expressing outrage at and strongly condemning the
terrorist attack in Grozny, Russian Federation.
Romania's sympathy and condolences go to the victims
and the bereaved families and to the people and the
Government of the Russian Federation.

On the issue at hand, I join other members of the
Council in thanking the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) (S/2004/333) and Special
Representative Sharma for his briefing. My delegation
welcomes the participation in this Council meeting of
Senior Minister Ana Pessoa of Timor-Leste.

As Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Ireland on behalf of the European Union, I will limit
myself to making a few brief comments.

I take this opportunity to congratulate the
authorities of Timor-Leste for their steady efforts and
encouraging achievements towards developing their
country as a stable and democratic nation. All the
remarkable progress that has been achieved so far has
brought closer the moment when responsibility will be
transferred from the international presence to the
people and the Government of Timor-Leste. The
Security Council, bilateral donors and the wider
international community have invested enormous
energy and expectations in Timor-Leste.

Remarkable success has been achieved so far, but
further international assistance will be required in
order to consolidate and secure its irreversibility. That
vision is reflected in the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in his special report of February
2004 (S/2004/117) and is developed further in his most
recent report. This vision is shared by Romania, which is
supportive of the Secretary-General's recommendations.

As the report states, ongoing international
support continues to be essential to enable Timor-Leste
to reach a critical threshold of self-sufficiency.
Romania believes that that support can best be
provided through a continued multisector United
Nations presence in Timor-Leste that includes a limited
military component.

The extension of UNMISET for a further one-
year consolidation phase with a reduced size and a
modified mandate will consolidate momentum for the
development of full Timorese self-sufficiency and will
confirm Timor-Leste as a fine example of successful
United Nations peacekeeping and peace-building.

Finally, I wish to express Romania's satisfaction
with the continued development of cooperation
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia. We hope that the
political commitment will be shortly followed by
concrete results in the finalization of an agreement on
the border line, as well as in addressing the issue of
former refugees remaining in West Timor. Likewise,
we encourage the strengthening of bilateral cooperation
in bringing those responsible for serious crimes to
justice.

