Mr. Owada (Japan): At the outset, I wish to state that
the delegation of Japan is pleased to see the successful
completion of the mandate of the multinational protection
force in Albania. Taking advantage of this felicitous
occasion, I wish to offer some comments on behalf of the
Government of Japan.

First of all, I wish to commend all those involved in
the multinational protection force during the past four and
half months. In the view of the Government of Japan, the
multinational protection force has done an excellent job in
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance and in
creating a secure environment for the activities of
international organizations in Albania. It is gratifying that
the task of the force has been smoothly accomplished in
close cooperation with the Albanian authorities and the
international organizations concerned.

During the Security Council's initial deliberation on
the authorization of the force in March of this year, Japan
stressed that it was important that the Security Council, in
authorizing peacekeeping activities by forces not under the
direct command and control of the United Nations, proceed
with utmost care and prudence so as to ensure that their
operations were conducted in accordance with the letter
and the spirit of the Charter and strictly within the
mandate authorized by the Security Council. I am happy
to state that the current operations of the multinational
protection force have been carried out in full accord with
this basic position stated by my Government. I wish to
note that this operation also constitutes an important
precedent of a militarily and politically coordinated
multinational action under Chapter VII of the Charter,
providing a comprehensive framework to deal with a
humanitarian crisis in one country, thus preventing the
spillover of the crisis which might affect peace and
security in the broader region.

Thanks to these efforts by the multinational
protection force and by other international organizations,
as well as to the constructive activities of non-
governmental organizations, the humanitarian situation in
Albania has improved significantly. Particularly
noteworthy is the parliamentary election held in June,
which was followed by the establishment of the new
political leadership. Although a limited number of
unfortunate incidents were observed during the electoral
process, my Government is of the view that the election
may be deemed as acceptable, given the prevailing
circumstances. It represents a very important step forward
towards restoring the political, economic and social order
of Albania. The Government of Japan welcomes the
formation of the new Government of Albania and hopes
that the new Government, in cooperation with all the
parties involved, will succeed in normalizing the situation
in the country.

At this juncture, the most urgent task of the new
Government, in my View, is the restoration of law and
order throughout the country. The security situation in the
country is as yet less than satisfactory: vast stockpiles of
weapons still remain in the hands of the local population
and violence by armed gangs is rampant. I should like to
emphasize in this context that the restoration of law and
order is also a prerequisite for attracting reconstruction
assistance from the international community.

It is also incumbent upon the Government of
Albania to draw up its own blueprint containing concrete
economic measures for the reconstruction of the country
as expeditiously as possible. The presentation of such a
blueprint will, I believe, go a long way towards
redeeming Albania's credibility in the eyes of the
international community. My Government urges the
Government of Albania to embark on this task without

 

delay, basing it on the advice of the relevant international
bodies such as the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund. I should particularly like to stress in this
regard the importance of the reform of the financial system,
in View of the recent experience in which the disturbances
in Albania were ignited by the collapse of pyramid
investment schemes.

Japan has been assisting the economic development of
Albania since before the recent disturbances. It has also
made a financial contribution to the electoral process. My
Government is committed to continuing to offer appropriate
assistance to Albania. It does so in the hope that the
Albanian people themselves have learned from the latest
unfortunate events a valuable lesson in democracy and in
the market economic system. After all, it goes without
saying that the primary responsibility for the normalization
process in Albania lies with the Albanian people
themselves. It is the conviction of Japan that they will make
their best efforts to achieve durable stability and
development.

I should like to conclude my statement by conveying
the profound gratitude of the Government of Japan to those
parties that have contributed to the success of the
multinational protection force. In particular, the appreciation
of my Government goes to Italy, which played the leading
role in this operation, and to the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and its Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights, as well as to the other
international organizations. It is now incumbent upon all of
us in the international community to offer our cooperation
to the Government and the people of Albania in their
endeavour to restore stability, foster democracy and
promote development in their own country, Albania.

