Mr. Lancry (Israel): In the days between 30
March and 4 April, the Council adopted two
resolutions on the situation in the Middle East -
resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) - in which it
first and foremost reiterated its earlier calls for a
meaningful ceasefire and placed specific demands on
both parties to help bring this about.

For Israel's part, we withdrew our troops from
Palestinian cities, including Ramallah; successfully
negotiated a peaceful end to the stand-off at the Church
of the Nativity in Bethlehem; and redeployed our
forces to the perimeters of population centres so as to
enable the Palestinian leadership to assert its authority
and fulfil its obligations. Those obligations included
adherence to a meaningful ceasefire; an end to all acts
of violence, terror and incitement; cooperation with
Special Envoy Zinni; and the implementation of the
Tenet work plan.

To this day, we still await any steps taken by the
Palestinian leadership towards the fulfilment of its
obligations. Not a single day has passed since the
adoption of resolution 1402 (2002) in which
Palestinian terrorists have not attempted to carry out
attacks against Israeli civilians. On many days, they
have succeeded. On days when they have failed, it has
only been as a result of the preventive actions of Israeli
security forces that have successfully thwarted dozens
of attempted attacks. What some have taken to calling
"incursions" are in reality preventive actions that have
saved countless innocent lives. As those engaged in the
war on terror know, to succeed against terrorists, they
must be thwarted before they reach the civilian
population centres that they so brutally target.

The devastating impact of Palestinian terror
continues. On 5 June, a Palestinian suicide terrorist
driving a car packed with explosives blew himself up
alongside a public bus near the northern town of Afula,
killing 17 Israelis and injuring over 30. On 27 May, a
Palestinian suicide bomber blew himself up at the
entrance to a crowded shopping centre in the Israeli
city of Petah Tikva, killing two Israelis - an 18-
month-old baby girl and her grandmother - and
wounding more than 50. On 23 May, a Palestinian
suicide bomber blew himself up in the centre of the
Israeli city of Rishon Lezion, killing two Israelis and
wounding more than 40 others. On the same day,
Palestinian terrorists attempted to blow up a truck at
the Pi-Gliloth petroleum and gas storage facility in
Herzliya - an attack that, had it succeeded, would
have entailed not only a massive civilian catastrophe,
but a severe environmental one as well. On 7 May, a
Palestinian suicide bomber blew himself up in a
crowded pool hall in Rishon Lezion, killing 15 Israelis
and wounding nearly 60 others. On 27 April, three
Palestinian terrorists entered the community of Adora
and went door to door, entering private residents and
opening fire on those inside. The terrorists murdered
five-year-old Danielle Shefi as she lay in her bed, and
three other Israeli civilians.

The long and tragic list goes on. Many times it
was Chairman Arafat's forces that were responsible.
On other occasions, it was organizations and
individuals who are recognized for their terrorist
activities and whose arrest Israel has repeatedly
requested, but who continue to freely roam the streets,
at liberty to plan and to carry out attacks at their
discretion. The situation persists despite the presence
of tens of thousands of Palestinian security personnel
who are more than capable of bringing them to justice
and who are legally obligated to do so.

On still other occasions, terror has emanated from
other regimes beyond our borders. The Government of
Syria, whose Permanent Representative currently
occupies the presidency of the Council, continues to
support and to encourage acts of Violence against
Israeli civilians. The terrorist organization Islamic
Jihad, which claimed responsibility for the 5 June
bombing in a statement released by the organization's
headquarters in Damascus, is but one of numerous
terrorist organizations based in the Syrian capital.
Hezbollah terrorists based in the south of Lebanon,
with the consent and support of the Syrian regime,
continue to launch cross-border assaults in direct
violation of Council resolutions. The glorification of
suicide attacks is a common feature of its political
discourse, as typified by the broadcast of Radio
Damascus; On 9 May 20002, this radio station stated,

"The wonderful and special suicide attacks,
which were executed by some of the sons of the
Palestinian nation, is a practical declaration
before the whole world of the way to liberate
Arab Palestinian land from Israeli colonialism."

Such activities testify to Syria's utter contempt
for the provisions of international law and for the anti-
terrorist objectives of the Council and the international
community. Moreover, they serve to unmask the
unbearable contradiction between, on the one hand, the
very nature of the Syrian Arab Republic's sponsorship
of terrorism and its practice of State terrorism and, on
the other, its membership on the Council - let alone
its Council presidency.

But Syrian contempt does not end with its
sponsorship of Palestinian terror. Its disregard for the
basic humanitarian values extends to its occupation and
foreign domination of Lebanon as well. In this forum
and in others, Syria has time and again accused Israel
of war crimes. Such a heinous allegation cannot for one
moment erase from the collective memory of the
international community the real war crimes and mass
murder perpetrated by the Syrian regime against its
own citizens in the city of Hama in 1982. Israel is
appalled by the conduct of the Syrian Government, its
obstruction of the path to peace in the region and its
subversion of any efforts for reconciliation between
Israel and its neighbours, all the more so in the light of
the fact that the international community has entrusted
it with guiding the work of the Security Council in the
defence of international peace and security.
Responsible members of the international community
who truly wish to see a peaceful conclusion of the
conflict in our region must demand that Syria
immediately halt its support for the terrorist groups to
which it grants safe harbour in its territory and abide
scrupulously by its international obligations under
Council resolutions.

I do not believe it redundant to stress again that
Israel has taken extensive measures in fulfilment of its
obligations under resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002). One needs only to exercise the slightest
scrutiny or open a newspaper to see that the
Palestinians have not taken even one step and that
Chairman Arafat has yet to lift a finger to fight terror.
This is why we find ourselves in the current
predicament. This was in part predictable. Through
most of April and May, attention was focused solely on
ensuring Israeli compliance with the resolutions of the
Council, while the Palestinians succeeded, by making
utterly false and misleading allegations, in deflecting
attention from their failure to take even minimal steps
to end the campaign of terrorism. Rather than holding
the Palestinian side accountable for deliberately
misleading the Council and flouting its resolutions, it
seems that today we are continuing the ritual of intense
scrutiny of Israeli actions while wilfully ignoring
Palestinian actions.

Palestinian duplicity reached unprecedented
heights with two unbelievable incidents in the past two
weeks. The first occurred in Ramallah, where, just a
few weeks after the publication of documentary proof
of the financial and logistical support provided by high
officials of the Palestinian Authority to known
terrorists, Israeli forces discovered an explosives
laboratory in a building belonging to Force 17,
Chairman Arafat's personal security force. More than
10 powerful explosive charges in various stages of
production, along with bags of explosives, documents
and Israeli army uniforms, were discovered in the
building. The Permanent Observer of Palestine, in his
letter to the Secretary-General dated 10 June 2002,
responded with a strongly-worded condemnation not of
the clear intention of official Palestinian elements to
carry out terrorist attacks Israeli civilians but of the
Israeli operation that foiled that plan. Can there be any
evidence more damning than that the very force
charged with fighting Palestinian terrorism is
constructing and operating explosives laboratories for
Palestinian suicide bombers?

Despite the protestations of the Permanent
Observer of Palestine, the discovery of the explosives
confirms the necessity of taking action to protect
Israeli citizens from the threat of terrorist attacks.
Unfortunately, the only thing separating the next
Palestinian suicide bomber from his Israeli victims is
the pre-emptive actions of the Israeli security forces.

The second incident was Chairman Arafat's
unbelievable invitation for Hamas and Islamic Jihad to
join his Cabinet. Those two organizations -
internationally recognized as terrorist organizations
committed to the destruction of the State of Israel,
dedicated to murdering Israeli civilians as widely as
possible and completely opposed to any peaceful
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East - should
have been dismantled in accordance with agreements
reached between the parties and resolutions of the
Security Council. Rather than arresting their leaders
and confiscating their weapons - as is his
obligation - Chairman Arafat has instead bestowed
unprecedented legitimacy upon them by treating them
as acceptable political partners.

Though these incidents are unbelievable, they are
not altogether surprising. Chairman Arafat remains, as
he has always been, caught between his history of
terrorism and his aspiration to be a statesman. He
pretends to partake of the fruit of peace, but he is
nourished by the practice of terrorism. This duality
imperils Palestinians and Israelis alike, allowing
terrorist networks to thrive while undermining the faith
of both peoples in the possibility of peace.

Under such circumstances, what does the
Palestinian leadership and the international community
expect us to do? Are we supposed to sit back and watch
as recognized terrorists freely roam the streets,
planning the murder of Israelis? Are we supposed to sit
idly while those forces that are supposed to be fighting
terror are instead practising terror? Shall we simply
ignore the fact that forces under Chairman Arafat's
control are manufacturing weapons and explosives
while he disingenuously condemns their actions in the
media?

Of course, we cannot. Still, we have not forgotten
that ultimately Israelis and Palestinians must find a
way to live together in peace. It is that consideration
that continues to inspire a measure of Israeli restraint.
We did not respond following the suicide bombing that
killed 15 in Rishon Lezion in order to give the
emerging diplomatic initiatives a chance at success. We
have welcomed the efforts of responsible parties,
including the "quartet", to help move Israel and the
Palestinians back to a constructive path.

Israel maintains that all aspects of resolution
1402 (2002) must be implemented together, including a
meaningful ceasefire that is bolstered by genuine steps
on the part of the Palestinians to end terrorism and
incitement and to cooperate with General Zinni in the
implementation of the Tenet plan and the Mitchell
report, which Israel has accepted, but which the
Palestinian side continues to reject. In the absence of
full and faithful implementation of resolution 1402
(2002), including all the necessary steps required of
both sides, we will be unable to create the proper
conditions under which the parties can return to a
political process, as called for by the Security Council.

Unfortunately, it is not only the Palestinian
leadership that is encouraging the intentional killing of
Israeli civilians. Terrorism, whether inspired by Syria
or executed by the Palestinians, must be fought
relentlessly and unconditionally or all our efforts will
be in vain.

