Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We would like to
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing.

We have taken note of the Prosecutor's fifteenth
report and update on activities regarding the situation
in Libya, which unfortunately demonstrate that
significant challenges remain. According to the report,
in the period from January to February, the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya documented 248
civilian casualties, which represents a sharp increase as
compared to previous months. A substantial number of
those causalities were caused by improvised explosive
devices, gunfire, remnants of war and shelling.

Ongoing political instability, a fragile security
situation and a breakdown in the rule of law have resulted
in the widespread abuse of human rights and Violations
of international humanitarian law. The current security
and political situation in Libya continues to create a
breeding ground for growing impunity for terrorist
groups and armed militias. In that regard, Kazakhstan
strongly condemns the 2 May attack on the Libyan
High National Elections Commission in Tripoli, for
which the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant claimed
responsibility. The perpetrators of such a heinous attack
should be held accountable.

We are deeply alarmed about reports of alleged
grave crimes relating to the abduction and subsequent
execution of members of the military and civil society
and political rivals or their family members. We are also
concerned about the fact that thousands of migrants
and refugees in Libya suffer abuses, trafficking and
detention under inhuman conditions.

Lastly, Kazakhstan believes that an effective and
credible Government is crucial in bolstering Libya's
commitment and capability to restore and promote
the rule of law, address impunity, protect basic human
rights and provide justice for past violations. To that
end, the international community's support to Libya
remains vital to restoring stability and security
throughout the country. Such stability and security
require the unification and reconstruction of all national
institutions, including political authorities, security
and defence forces. The United Nations and its Support
Mission in Libya have a key role to play in that process.

