Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia, Ambassador Augustine Mahiga,
for the valuable information he has provided, and we
welcome him to the Council. We also welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya, Mr. Moses
Wetangula, and the Permanent Representative of
Somalia, Ambassador Elmi Ahmed Duale, to whom we
listened attentively.

The recent and welcome appointment of
Ambassador Mahiga as Special Representative for
Somalia and head of the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia offers an opportunity to fine-tune
the United Nations approach towards Somalia and to
review the strategy to be followed, in view of the daily
threats to the security of the country and the imperative
need to protect the lives and basic living conditions of
its people.

Clearly, the prolonged instability in Somalia
currently poses a threat to peace and security in the
entire region. We reiterate our strong condemnation of
the acts of violence that occurred in Kampala in July as
well as of the constant indiscriminate attacks in
Somalia mounted by insurgent extremist groups,
including attacks against United Nations installations.
It is unacceptable that agencies such as UNICEF or the
World Food Programme should be the victims of direct
attacks aimed at impeding their work.
We reaffirm our gratitude to the countries
contributing troops to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), Uganda and Burundi, and their
ongoing commitment to peace. It is crucial that all
concerned countries support the peace process and
participate positively in the quest for stability in
Somalia and the region as a whole.

We welcome the decision of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union to promote the deployment of 2,000
troops to complete the Mission's strength, as well as
the support of the United States in that undertaking. We
hope that the increase in AMISOM's troop levels will
create better security conditions in Mogadishu that will
allow for the safe deployment of the United Nations
presence in the field, in accordance with the
incremental approach that the Council has supported.
We commend efforts to achieve the integration of the
United Nations presence in Somalia as a fundamental
element of a coordinated and coherent approach to
addressing the country's problems.

Concerning the political process, my delegation
echoes the Secretary-General's call for a resolution to
the political and reconstruction problems facing the
Transitional Federal Government and for the
accelerated adoption of the constitution before the
transitional period concludes in August 2011. The
Government's political unity is indispensable to
guaranteeing the security of its authorities and to
strengthening its credibility and legitimacy within the
country and abroad. It is equally important to build on
the progress made in strengthening the security sector,
including through the establishment of military and
police structures.

We acknowledge the support provided by
Uganda, Djibouti and Ethiopia in training officers, and
underscore the importance of ensuring that the support
of the Security Council and the international
community is focused on consolidating Somalia's
institutions in accordance with its own priorities.

Mexico deplores the escalation of violence by the
insurgent groups, which directly affects Somali
civilians, in particular the most vulnerable groups, such
as women, children and refugees. We reiterate our
appeal for full respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights, and call on the parties
immediately to cease their attacks, to avoid situations
that indiscriminately affect the civilian population, and

10-5364]
to permit access to and delivery of humanitarian
assistance. Furthermore, in view of the ongoing
recruitment and use of child soldiers in the conflict, we
call on all parties to release the children remaining in
their ranks, whom we recall are entitled to special
protection pursuant to the norms and principles of
international law. We support the decision of President
Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed to investigate the
presence of children within the armed forces of the
Transitional Federal Government, and consider it
necessary for the United Nations to assist Government
authorities in developing a plan of action for the
demobilization and reintegration of children into their
communities. We eagerly await the report that the
Secretary-General is preparing on this issue for the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

In view of the indiscriminate violence in Somalia,
it is necessary to remind its principal perpetrators of
the international criminal liability they shall incur for
such acts as those we have witnessed daily in that
country.

Within the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, my delegation reiterates its belief
that the arms embargo and targeted sanctions regime,
when used in a coherent and incremental manner, are a
valuable instrument of benefit to the peace process as a
whole through the full cooperation of the international
community. We welcome the reports we have received
from Members of the Organization pursuant to
resolutions 1844 (2008) and 1907 (2009), as well as
their commitment to the work of the Committee, in
view of the sensitive relationship between its work and
the humanitarian assistance activities in the country.

Finally, we trust that the upcoming high-level
meeting on Somalia to be convened by the Secretary-
General on 23 September will be an important
opportunity to reaffirm the Organization's commitment
to peace and security in Somalia, taking into account
the important observations that have been made here
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya. The
solution lies in Somalia itself, with international
support that requires a coherent approach and a
strategic, long-term vision.

