Mr. Roman-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on Guatemala's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the first time in its history, as well
as for your initiative in convening this open debate on
the situation in Haiti. Guatemala's presiding presence
at this debate reflects its unshakable commitment to
Haiti's situation, the only issue in the region on the
Council's agenda. We also welcome the presence of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui.

Haiti's security, stability, development and
consolidation are particularly important to Peru. For
that reason, my country has played an active part in
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) since 2004, with a military contingent
of 366 troops as well as officials at the Mission
headquarters. Peru is also a participant in the Group
of Friends of Haiti, the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Haiti of the Economic and Social Council, the Group
of Friends of Haiti of the Organization of American
States and the Latin American Political Coordination
Mechanism for Haiti.

Peru is convinced that there can be no social and
economic development that is sustainable over time
without solid institutions that promote and sustain such
development. We reaffirm the validity of the principle of
national ownership, by which the Government of Haiti
will lead the process of rebuilding its infrastructure,
consolidating its national institutions, strengthening
the rule of law, consolidating democracy and creating
capacities. In that regard, we believe that the work of
MINUSTAH continues to be essential to providing
the Haitian authorities with the security and support
needed to facilitate that process, in accordance with its
established strategy and national priorities.

It is in that context that my delegation would like
to draw the Council's attention to two aspects of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2012/678) that Peru
considers to be of primary importance: the first has to
do with the need for continued support for the Haitian
authorities in creating and strengthening solid public
institutions, which will enable the country to respond
effectively to the problems of security and development
facing it; the second has to do with formulating a plan
for reconfiguring and consolidating MINUSTAH,
based on the new conditions in Haiti and the current
needs of the Haitian people.

As was noted by previous speakers, the progress
that the Government of Haiti has made in strengthening
its democratic institutions and the rule of law is
encouraging. In that regard, some of the important
benchmarks are Parliament's ratification of the
choice of Lauren Lamothe as Prime Minister, the
establishment of the Superior Council of the Judiciary
and the publication of the constitutional amendments,
which, among other things, establish a quota of not
less than 30 per cent representation of women in the
Government. We welcome that development.

In recognition of the democratic desires of the
Haitian people, we call on all political forces in the
country to help in speedily establishing the Permanent
Electoral Council, the body responsible for ensuring
that the next electoral proceedings will be conducted
in a transparent, democratic and unhindered manner.
In that connection, I would like to highlight the
importance of the support of MINUSTAH and other
regional bodies in the area of electoral assistance.

The progress MINUSTAH has made in stabilizing
Haiti over the past few years makes it possible for us
to contemplate the future with optimism, by which
we believe that the time has come to begin a gradual,
orderly process of transition to a second phase in the
Organization's cooperation with Haiti. In that regard,
we concur with the Secretary-General as to the
importance of formulating a plan for reconfiguring
and restructuring MINUSTAH so as to consolidate
the achievements made in the area of stabilization. To
that end, we believe that it is essential to have more
and better coordination between MINUSTAH and
the various agencies and programmes of the United
Nations that have a presence on the ground. We also
call on the various United Nations agencies and donors
to channel their cooperation with Haiti through the new
aid coordination mechanism recently approved by the
Cabinet.

I would like to acknowledge the progress that has
been made in organizing and strengthening the Haitian
National Police, allowing it to take on a major role
in the protection and security of its citizens, as was
demonstrated by the recent transfer to the police of
security functions in four regions of the country. We
welcome the five-year development plan for the Haitian
National Police for 2012-2016, which will enable the
Haitian police to hire the officers necessary for it to
maintain public order and security throughout the
country in the near future, and to establish a solid
institution based on promoting strengthening of the
rule of law and respect for human rights.

Peru appeals to the international community to
focus on the issue of the Haitian people's food and
health problems. The improved stabilization must be
accompanied by improvements in health care and proper
nutrition for the people of Haiti, and the specialized
agencies of the United Nations should devote special
attention to those needs.

The significant achievements to date should not
give us the false impression that the work in Haiti
is over or even close to it. Experience has taught us
the dire consequences for some countries when the
Organization decides to withdraw its presence on the
ground too early, and we trust that we will not make the
same error this time. That is why my delegation would
like to know what will become of the continuity of the
important work we are doing together when the mandate
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Fernandez Amunategui, who has done truly valuable
work, comes to an end. We are sure that Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon will respond in a timely and
effective manner to that important issue.

Finally, my delegation is of the view that the
work in Haiti of the United Nations in general, and of
MINUSTAH in particular, is far from over. For that
reason, we trust that the Security Council will renew
MINUSTAH's mandate and will continue its permanent
support for building and strengthening solid national
institutions with the goal of achieving a robust rule of
law and a strengthening of Haiti's weak institutional
capacities by first strengthening its human and material
resources. That would require a focus on the three areas
directly connected to the current process of recovery
and reconstruction, namely, governance, security and
development.

