Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, let me express
mysincerecongratulationstoArgentinaonitsassumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, and thank
Ambassador Susana Ruiz Cerutti for holding this debate
on the very important occasion of World Humanitarian
Day. I would also like to thank His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, High Commissioner for Human Rights. and
Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their respective briefings.
Japan concurs and associates itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict.

Given that today is World Humanitarian Day, I
would like to focus on the humanitarian aspect of the
issues highlighted in the concept note prepared by
Argentina (S/2013/477, annex).

Ten years ago today, the bombing of the United
Nations headquarters in Baghdad claimed 22 precious
lives. Today, the operational environment for
humanitarian assistance has not improved; rather, on
the contrary, it has become even more difficult. A large
number of humanitarian personnel are working at grave
personal risk. In addition to journalists, who were the
focus of last month's open debate (see S/PV.6917),
humanitarian and medical personnel are among the
civilians to be protected in armed conflict. It is of grave
concern that those personnel, who contribute to saving
the lives of thousands of affected people, are facing
increasing danger.

In addition to direct attacks against them,
humanitarian personnel also experience difficulties
accessing people in need of assistance. In particular, the
arbitrary denial ofhumanitarian access, as pointed out in
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/376),
is a great concern. The denial or obstruction of rapid
and unimpeded humanitarian access puts the lives of
affected people at risk, and parties to conflict must bear
in mind the consequences of such actions.

Those issues are related to the question of how
to ensure accountability among parties to conflict.
The international community has established various
mechanisms, including fact-finding commissions,
international tribunals and the International Criminal
Court in order to ensure accountability. Furthermore,
in paragraph 4 of resolution 1894 (2009), the Council
reiterated

"its willingness to respond to situations of armed
conflict where civilians are being targeted or
humanitarian assistance to civilians is being
deliberately obstructed, including through the
consideration of appropriate measures at the
Security Council's disposal in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations".

In reality, however, the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is becoming increasingly difficult
in inverse proportion to the development of those
very same norms and mechanisms. We must not only
build tools to enforce accountability, but also analyse
fundamental factors by which humanitarian assistance
in armed conflict becomes perceived as adversarial by
parties to conflict. In order to do so, we need to hear
voices from the field where access is negotiated and
humanitarian operations are launched, and discuss
how norms and principles of civilian protection can be
realistically met.

We hope that the next report of the Secretary-
General, which is due in November, will also address
such fundamental issues concerning the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

