Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First,
let me express appreciation to Mr. Ging for his
sobering briefing.

I will focus on three points today: the need to uphold
international humanitarian law, in particular in Idlib;
the conditions for the voluntary, safe and dignified
return of refugees; and the need for a political process.

First, with regard to international humanitarian
law and Idlib, we have continued to witness the
consequences of intensified military action in Syria,
especially last month in the south-west. Cross-border
aid is needed to fulfil humanitarian needs in that area;
sporadic deliveries from Damascus are not sufficient.
We underline the need to uphold international
humanitarian law and protect civilians, including aid
workers and medical personnel. Even when hospitals
provide their coordinates to receive protection,
they are targeted from the air. Such practices reflect
shocking disrespect for international law and human
dignity and decency. The parties to the conflict should
provide protection to all civilians, especially to those
fleeing violence.

We share the concerns expressed in the Secretary
General's report (S/2018/777) with regard to further
military escalation in the north-west. Nearly 3 million
civilians, including 1 million children, live in Idlib.
Sixty per cent of them are internally displaced persons
who have fled violence elsewhere in Syria and sought
protection in the north-west. The Astana guarantors
of the de-escalation area should provide such
protection; that is their obligation under international
humanitarian law. We urge the Syrian regime and the
Astana guarantors to prevent an escalation of violence
in Idlib. The Astana guarantors and the Syrian regime
have to work towards a non-violent negotiated solution.
Upcoming meetings, such as the Istanbul conference,
should be used to find the solution. Parties need to
refrain from military action.

Secondly, with regard to conditions for the safe
return of refugees, Syrians - totalling approximately
5.6 million people - remain the largest group of
refugees worldwide. We remain grateful to neighbouring
countries for their hospitality and stress the importance
of international support and solidarity. We appreciate
the recent agreement on the humanitarian response
plan, although it is long overdue. Like our Peruvian
colleague, I would also highlight the dire plight of so
many internally displaced persons. Once again, we
stress the importance of a needs-based humanitarian
approach in Syria, not just now but also in the
coming year.

We are shocked by the recent publication of the
death records of hundreds of Syrians who died in the
regime's detention centres. We cannot talk about the
safe return of refugees so long as the regime is not even
prepared to protect its own citizens throughout Syria.
It remains unsafe to return to Syria. The 21 protection
thresholds, as defined by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
and which we strongly support, are not in place. For any
voluntary return, a safe political, social and economic
environment needs to be ensured to enable refugees
to return to their towns and villages and re-establish
themselves in safety and dignity. In line with the
principle of non-refoulement, guaranteeing voluntary
returns is at the core of such a process. It is crucial
that UNHCR and other protection actors have access to
monitor compliance with the 21 protection thresholds.

Related to that issue, we still have serious concerns
about Syrian Law No. 10. That law seems to attempt
to construct new demographic realities on the ground
and challenges the future of refugees and internally
displaced persons alike.

Thirdly, a political solution is needed. The pursuit
ofa strategy based on military violence and the violation
of civil rights will never bring long-term stability and
peace. Syrians need to see that they can trust their
own Government to bring peace. Ultimately, stability
and peace can be created only through an inclusive
political solution. The position of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands is clear and consistent. We support a
United Nations-facilitated political solution in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). There will be no reconstruction
support for Syria as long as a political transition has not
taken place.

In conclusion, let me echo the call from the
Secretary-General's report:

"[T]he perpetrators of serious violations of
international humanitarian law must be held
accountable. Such a step is central to achieving
sustainable peace in the Syrian Arab Republic."
(S/2018/777, para. 45)

In line with the Secretary-General, we call for the
situation in the country to be referred to the International
Criminal Court.

Let me end with a word of respect and appreciation
for aid workers and medical personnel who risk their
own lives for the victims of the violence in Syria.

