Ms. Wronecka (Poland): We are grateful to the
presidency for convening today's meeting on the
deteriorating humanitarian and security situation in
Idlib. Allow me to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and
Mr. John Ging for their informative briefings.

The conflict raging in Syria and the resulting
violence and violations of international law, including
human rights law, have brought suffering to the
civilian population of Syria at a scale that is unique
in today's world. We are concerned about the possible
intensification of hostilities in Idlib. Once again, we
stress that there is no military solution to the conflict and
that any attempt to bring about peace by force would be
counterproductive to an inclusive and credible political
process, under the auspices of the United Nations.

In the context of the current situation in Idlib, let
me reiterate Poland's position.

First, we call on the Astana guarantors and other
actors with influence on the ground to live up to their
commitments and to take all actions necessary to
protect the civilian population of Idlib. Secondly, we
stress again the need to secure full and unhindered
humanitarian access to Syria, including Idlib, and to
take all measures necessary to enhance the protection
of humanitarian workers. Thirdly, refugees must be
given an opportunity for a safe, free and dignified
return to their homes. A major military operation
in Idlib governorate may hinder that goal and
consequently create a new wave of refugees. The Idlib
governorate, having the highest number of internally
displaced persons in all of Syria, requires our special,
cautious approach.

Our particular concern is that we are witnessing the
destruction of Syria's crucial civilian infrastructure,
including medical and educational facilities. Such
destruction must stop immediately, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Intense bombardments and the shelling of schools and
hospitals in Idlib and other governorates not only have
an immediate and catastrophic impact on the living
conditions of civilians, but also significantly diminish
future efforts to bring about reconciliation in Syria and
to commence Syria's major reconstruction.

Poland is particularly concerned over the fate of the
most vulnerable victims of conflict: children, women
and members of religious minorities. We are alarmed
by the situation of children affected by the conflict,
especially in Idlib. Many children have been forced to
leave their homes in other parts of Syria, seeking safe
refuge in Idlib governorate, although they also face
the risk of Violence, displacement and loss of family
members. The escalation of military activities would
result in a major humanitarian tragedy, with children
falling victim once again.

At the same time, Poland strongly advocates
women's participation and empowerment in all aspects
of the process of finding a solution for the conflict in
Syria. While many men have been killed, imprisoned
or forced to leave their homes for war, women are
faced with the task of caring for their families in dire
circumstances in a display of heroism, perseverance
and resilience.

Let me conclude by emphasizing our concern about
the possibility of another chemical attack in Syria. The
use of chemical weapons is not only a horrifying act
of barbarism, but also an illegal act that could have
devastating consequences for the civilian population.
The perpetrators of such crimes must be aware that the
international community will do its best to bring them
to justice.

