Mr. Guehenno: Thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on recent
developments in Kosovo since Mr. Holkeri's last
briefing on 30 October.

The past two months have been eventful in
Kosovo, particularly with regard to political
developments that chart a way forward in Kosovo in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) and the agreed
policy of "standards before status".

On 5 November, an initiative to establish a
mechanism to review the Kosovo Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government's progress towards
meeting the benchmarks in the "standards before
status" policy, endorsed by this Council, was launched
under the auspices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri. The initiative is
designed to give new momentum to the "standards
before status" policy and to structure and refocus the
work of the Kosovo Provisional Institutions on meeting
the benchmarks contained in the eight standards:
functioning democratic institutions; rule of law;
freedom of movement; returns and reintegration;
economy; property rights; dialogue with Belgrade; and
the Kosovo Protection Corps.

As stated in the recent Presidential Statement, the
review mechanism, under the authority of the Council,
envisages regular and structured reviews of the
Provisional Institutions' progress in meeting the
standards, based on the assessments contained in the
Secretary-General's quarterly reports to the Security
Council. Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Holkeri, who will be in charge of the review
mechanism on the ground, will closely consult and
coordinate with key Member States, particularly those
in the Contact Group.

Depending on progress made towards reaching
the standards, as assessed during the periodic reviews,
a general review of the Provisional Institutions'
progress will be undertaken. A first opportunity for
such a general review should occur around mid-2005.
During the general review in 2005, progress by the
Provisional Institutions towards meeting the eight
standards will be assessed. Further advancement
towards the process leading to a determination of
Kosovo's future status will depend on the positive
outcome of the comprehensive review. If the
Provisional Institutions have not fulfilled the standards
by that time, it is proposed that they should be given a
further period in which to work on meeting them,
during which the periodic reviews would continue,
leading up to the next general review. It is clear that
there is no deadline and that the future status process
will not start automatically on the review date. A
prerequisite for any discussion on Kosovo's future
status remains the achievement of the eight standards.
At the same time, achieving the standards would lead
to a qualitative change in Kosovo, which is a goal in
itself and an essential precondition to advance
democracy and a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo.

An important step in the process was the launch
of the "Standards for Kosovo" document on 10
December by Mr. Holkeri, welcomed in the Council's
Presidential Statement of 12 December. The standards
document elaborates on the original standards and
benchmarks paper and contains detailed benchmarks
within each of the eight standards that Kosovo's
Provisional Institutions will be required to meet as part
of the review process. This document, together with the
upcoming joint implementation workplan, will provide
the basis for the periodic reviews of the progress
achieved by Kosovo's Provisional Institutions in
reaching the eight standards. The standards document
has been supported by the leaders of Kosovo's
Provisional Institutions. Kosovo's President and the
Prime Minister, the leader of the Kosovo Democratic
Party (PDK), as well as several leaders of non-Serb
minority communities who participated in the launch of
the document, have stated their commitment to the
process. Assembly President Daci and Alliance for the
Future of Kosovo (AAK) leader Haradinaj did not
attend the launch, despite lengthy consultations on the
document and their stated agreement with the
standards. Kosovo Serb leaders have also distanced
themselves from the document, following a statement
issued by the Government of the Republic of Serbia
that the document in its current form was unacceptable.

There was also disagreement between United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Provisional Institutions on the
introduction originally contained in the statement,
which included inter alia a sentence on full compliance
with resolution 1244 (1999), the Constitutional
Framework and other applicable law and the original
standards and benchmarks statement. This introduction
has had to be omitted for the time being owing to
opposition by the Kosovo Albanian leaders of the
Provisional Institutions to the term "applicable law."
Mr. Holkeri has stated that he will continue his efforts
aimed at ensuring that an introduction would be
incorporated in the document at a later stage that will
be in accordance with these fundamental principles,
drawing on language from the Presidential Statement
of 12 December. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General is discussing the wording of the
introduction with the Prime Minister.

The standards document will be followed by a
joint implementation workplan for the Provisional
Institutions to provide transparency and clarity to all
involved. The workplan will set out in detail the
specific, concrete and measurable steps that these
institutions will need to take towards achieving the
benchmarks and will differentiate between the
respective responsibilities of UNMIK and the
Provisional Institutions. A steering group, co-chaired
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Kosovo Prime Minister, has been formed to
lead the process and in its first meeting on 10
December set up five joint UNMIK/Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government working groups, which
will elaborate an implementation workplan. At present,
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
representatives are actively participating in the drafting
of the workplan. As was the case with the standards
document, UNMIK intends to keep Belgrade fully
abreast of the process of elaboration of the work plan.
We will keep the Council regularly informed on
developments and, once the plan is complete, it will be
presented to this Council.

UNMIK has continued the transfer of non-
reserved responsibilities to the Provisional Institutions
and will finalize the transfer of the non-reserved
competences in chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework by the end of 2003. A small number of
specific responsibilities will not become operational
until the relevant legislation is passed - for example,
legislation on the creation of an independent media
commissioner. In addition, UNMIK has continued to
seek to increase the involvement of the Provisional
Institutions in an advisory and consultative capacity in
the administrative and operational functions in the
specific reserved areas identified in chapter 8 of the
Constitutional Framework. Their increased
involvement will not affect the powers and
responsibilities of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in those areas, and those reserved
responsibilities will not be transferred. As part of the
process, UNMIK is reviewing the Kosovo
Government's proposal to create additional structures
within the Government, or as liaison between UNMIK
and the Government, in order to build capacity and
increase transparency. One such measure, which has
already been implemented, is the appointment of a
Kosovo Government liaison in the Office of the Special
Representative.

No laws have been promulgated in the past two
months. However, the Government approved seven
draft laws, and has forwarded them to the Kosovo
Assembly, including a draft anti-discrimination law,
which was initiated by the Office of the Prime
Minister. For the first time, the Assembly initiated a
 

draft law on gender equality - sponsored by the
Assembly's Gender Equality Commission. The
Assembly has held a number of public hearings on
draft laws - on anti-discrimination, gender equality
and health - and the Assembly's budget and finance
and economy committees have been holding twice-
weekly meetings with municipalities and offices within
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
UNMIK to discuss budget proposals for 2004. Recent
plenary sessions of the Assembly, however, have been
marked by severe procedural violations and
inconsistency in the counting of votes. A significant
number of Assembly members have raised objections,
but the practice has not yet been corrected.

On 11 December, following a motion by the
Kosovo Government, and acting on a recommendation
of the Assembly's committee for judicial, legislative
and constitutional framework matters, the Assembly
adopted a decision to abrogate all laws, decisions and
acts relating to Kosovo enacted in Yugoslavia and
Serbia after 22 March 1989. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri,
immediately issued a determination that that decision
of the Assembly was beyond its competence and was
without validity and effect.

As a result of enforcement of the rule of law
through timely interventions at the local level, UNMIK
civil administration has reported signs of improvement
in the municipalities acting within the scope of their
responsibilities in accordance with UNMIK Regulation
No. 2000/45, on local self-government. UNMIK
municipal representatives have intervened in order to
suspend decisions relating to the misuse of public
funds and attempted misappropriation of lands under
the administration of the Kosovo Trust Agency. As a
result of the civil administration's welcome action and
intervention, there has been an increase in the
constructive engagement between UNMIK and local
officials in the municipalities.

The representation of Kosovo Serbs and non-Serb
minorities remains poor in the structures of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government: none have
reached the target percentages and the disparity in the
proportional representation persists in senior-level
positions. Progress remains slow in that regard within
the 30 municipalities as well. Generally, non-majority
communities also have little impact on the decision-
making process, particularly in the municipalities. The
use of official languages in assembly sessions in
municipalities tends to be satisfactory; however, the
translation of official documents in many
municipalities remains reliant on UNMIK initiatives
and resources. While the timely provision and quality
of official documents in all official languages varies by
ministry, the translation of official documents at the
central level is gradually improving and, contrary to
the municipal level, is not dependent on UNMIK or
international resources.

The past two months have been characterized by
an increase in serious crimes, including attacks against
Kosovo Police Service (KPS) officers. Two KPS
officers were murdered near the town of Decani, in the
region of Pec, on 24 November. Encouraging successes
in investigations against organized crime may be a
cause for some of those attacks. Crimes directed
against Kosovo Serbs decreased, as did ethnically
motivated crimes. A number of public demonstrations
took place across Kosovo. Two significant public-order
incidents occurred in Mitrovica. On 28 November, a
crowd demonstrated against the decision to take down
an Albanian flag that had been illegally raised over the
Mitrovica municipality; and, on 6 December, a violent
mob attacked a World Bank delegation and the Kosovo
Prime Minister during a visit to northern Mitrovica.
UNMIK condemned that attack, in which one member
of the World Bank delegation was slightly injured and
four vehicles, including two police vehicles and a
United Nations bus, were burned.

UNMIK police have made progress in the arrest
of suspected perpetrators of serious crimes. For
example, the police arrested one suspect in the case of
the bombing of the railway bridge in northern Kosovo
earlier this year, as well as suspects on charges relating
to war crimes committed against Kosovo Albanians in
1999, trafficking and suspected terrorist activities.
Since the beginning of September, the anti-trafficking
unit has made 25 arrests, closed down 128
establishments and rescued 70 victims of prostitution.
Police have also seized 36 kilograms of heroin and 6
kilograms of other narcotics. UNMIK has established
an investigation task force, comprised of
representatives of the United Nations Office of Internal
Oversight Services, the European Union Anti-Fraud
Office and the Financial Investigation Unit, which will
coordinate investigations of fraud and corruption
involving Kosovo's Provisional Institutions, public
enterprises and UNMIK.

The development of the KPS and the local
judiciary continued. Seven police stations are now
under KPS command. Six additional judges and one
prosecutor from the Kosovo Serb community were
appointed, although parallel judicial structures still
exist in four Kosovo Serb-majority municipalities, as
well as one in Nis.

On 4 November, the Dubrava Commission of
Inquiry issued its recommendations on the prisoner riot
and resulting fire at Dubrava Prison on 4 September.
The recommendations are being implemented within
budget constraints. The situation at Dubrava remains
tense due to crowded conditions throughout the penal
system. However, prison officials have stabilized the
situation.

Regional police cooperation was enhanced with
the signing of a cooperation agreement with
Montenegro, adding to the existing protocols with the
police authorities in Belgrade, in Albania and in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. That regional
approach produced success on 29 November 2003,
when a Kosovo-Albanian businessman abducted in
Serbia was rescued and four Serbian abductors were
arrested in the first joint operation by UNMIK police
and Serbian police.

Although freedom of movement has improved
somewhat, it still remains an obstacle to many people
in certain areas of Kosovo. Controls on movement
between the southern and northern parts of Mitrovica
have been lifted. Members of the Kosovo Serb
community in northern Kosovo have yet to avail
themselves of the UNMIK-issued vehicle registration
plates, which could improve their freedom of
movement. Nonetheless, UNMIK has reported that a
moderate number of Serbs from elsewhere in Kosovo
and in the remainder of Serbia are visiting Pristina and
speaking Serbian on the city's streets without incident.

The rate of minority returns has continued to
increase, although the overall number of returns
remains low. As of 30 November, a total of 3,370
members of non-majority communities returned this
year, including over 1,300 Kosovo Serbs, reaching a
total of 9,485 overall.

The 2004 Strategy for Sustainable Returns was
launched last week, providing detailed information on
returns-funding needs for 2004, totalling €3 8.5 million.
The 2004 strategy also includes expanded engagement
by the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
displaced persons in the returns process, improved
information flow to displaced persons and addressing
property-related obstacles to return. The Kosovo
Government also concretely engaged in the returns
process. Seven million euros were allocated from the
2002 surplus in the Kosovo consolidated budget for
returns, with €5 million being used in municipal
returns projects and €2 million supporting
municipalities that contribute positively to returns.

Returns projects are ongoing in a number of
municipalities, with the active involvement of municipal
authorities. Security remains a problem in some areas,
and there is sometimes resistance at the community or
village level. While such resistance is generally dealt
with effectively through dialogue efforts, when such
steps are not taken, the result can be serious, as
illustrated last week in Klina, near Pec, where 11
persons who had attempted to return spontaneously
were met by Kosovo Albanian protestors. The Kosovo
Force (KFOR) had to evacuate the group of returnees
to prevent an escalation of the situation.

In response to pressure to ensure fair-share
financing, municipalities are spending more on
minority needs. Despite gradual improvement, less than
one-third of the municipalities have met the minimum
levels. The level of integration between communities
remains extremely limited. Kosovo Albanians and
Kosovo Serbs continue to use separate health care and
education facilities. No Albanian language schools that
offer classes in minority languages include Serbian. No
Serbian language schools offer classes in Albanian. In
addition, the provision of equitable public services to
all communities remains problematic. For example, the
Kosovo electric company continues to disconnect
minorities who have not paid debts accumulated by
illegal occupants.

(spoke in French)

The issue of privatization has been a prominent
issue in Kosovo during the past several months. While
there is consensus that privatization is necessary to
bring economic development to Kosovo, uncertainties
as to the legal and operational modalities according to
which socially-owned enterprises should be privatized
have slowed down the process. Yesterday, a Kosovo
Trust Agency (KTA) board meeting was held with a
view to move the privatization process forward. The
board made the decision to proceed with the
privatization of 23 enterprises from the first and second
waves of privatization and agreed that a third wave of
privatization, involving 19 enterprises, would be
carried out in the near future. After weeks of
controversy and uncertainty, these decisions will
facilitate the easing of political tensions associated
with discussions about privatization.

I wish to say a few words on the question of
dialogue with Belgrade. Unfortunately, UNMIK has
informed us that direct dialogue on practical matters of
mutual concern between Belgrade and Pristina has not
moved forward since the launching of the dialogue in
Vienna on 14 October 2003. In part, this has been due
to the position of the Kosovo Government, which, for
political reasons, has not publicly endorsed the process,
even though preparatory work is ongoing within the
Government. UNMIK hopes that this approach will
change following the launch of the standards
document, which includes dialogue with Belgrade as
one of the eight standards on which the process will be
judged. Another obstacle has been the Serbian
parliamentary election campaign, which has recently
resulted in the Coordination Centre for Kosovo not
being willing to discuss preparations for the dialogue.
We welcome with satisfaction the recent encouraging
statements by Foreign Minister Svilanovic' regarding
Belgrade's intention to proceed with the dialogue.

Regarding the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC),
on 3 December the Special Representative ordered the
suspension of 12 KPC members for an initial period of
six months, as a result of a joint KFOR and UNMIK
inquiry regarding allegations of those members'
association with organized crime, abuse of their
functions and other illegal activities. The investigation
was launched after the bombing of a railroad bridge in
northern Kosovo on 12 April 2003. A police
investigation is being carried out in order to determine
whether the grounds exist for dismissal or for criminal
prosecution of these KPC members. The KPC
leadership, as well as several Kosovo Albanian leaders,
initially resisted the decision. In the end, the decision
was accepted due to the resolute stand by the Special
Representative and the KFOR Commander, and to
interventions by the Kosovo Prime Minister.

In an unrelated incident in October, the head of
the KPC was arrested in Slovenia under a year-old
warrant against him issued by a parallel court operating
in Nis, in southern Serbia. He was released following
intervention by the Special Representative, who
informed the Slovenian authorities of the invalidity of
the arrest warrant handed down by this parallel court.

The Kosovo Protection Corps has made progress
in meeting standards. The organization has also
continued to improve the quality of its work within the
mandated function of a civil emergency agency,
training more members and fulfilling planned tasks in a
professional manner. The Kosovo Protection Corps has
intervened in emergencies ranging from forest fires to
floods. Outreach in non-majority communities has
continued. The Kosovo Protection Corps has provided
assistance to those communities in the area of medical
care, the provision of fuel and firewood and
construction lumber and the construction of fire
stations and water-supply lines. However, lack of
funding for equipment and training may hinder further
progress in that type of action. Non-majority members
of the KPC now represent five per cent of the KPC
membership. At the same time, supervision and
ongoing intervention by UNMIK, as well as KFOR
day-to-day supervision on the ground, remain
necessary, particularly regarding serious allegations of
misconduct, through ongoing investigation and
effective action.

In conclusion, I wish to highlight the fact that the
achievement of the eight standards remains a
prerequisite for the start of a political process leading
to the determination of Kosovo's future status. During
the entire process, UNMIK will remain very active and
in the lead on the ground in order to continue the
necessary momentum, while at the same time
safeguarding the authority given to it by the Council
under resolution 1244 (1999) and continuing to
exercise its reserved responsibilities fully and
effectively. UNMIK will also continue to monitor,
attentively observe and, when necessary, intervene, to
ensure the compliance of the Provisional Institutions
and municipalities with resolution 1244 (1999), the
Constitutional Framework and the other laws in force
in Kosovo.
We count on the Council's continued support for
consistent implementation of the "standards before
status" policy based on resolution 1244 (1999). The
support of the Council and key Member States for
UNMIK will be essential for the full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), including within the
framework of the initiative for implementing the
review process I described in my briefing, in order to
structure the way towards launching the political
process to determine Kosovo's future status.

