At the outset, the Dominican Republic welcomes the agreement between the United States, the United Arab Emirates and Israel to, inter alia, halt the Israeli annexation of Palestinian lands. This move could create vast opportunities to bring about peace in the Middle East through dialogue, cooperation and stability. It should open new paths for Israeli and Palestinian leaders to re-engage in meaningful negotiations. The Dominican Republic believes that this indeed significant diplomatic agreement needs to be a first step, perhaps a door-opener, towards a broader process that includes all Palestinian concerns, including the long-standing two-State solution, in line with United Nations resolutions. We encourage parties to end any unilateral moves and provocative narratives in different forms that could obstruct the current peace prospects and violate mutual rights. We invite them to engage with each other. For the sake of a common future of peace and stability, a broader dialogue, one that includes Palestinians, needs to follow this agreement. Let us seize this opportunity. The Security Council must ensure that the Israel-Palestine situation be resolved within the framework of the internationally agreed standards. We must convey a clear message of collective will to redirect the process towards a negotiated peace, on the basis of recognition and respect for mutual rights, including self-determination and independence. These principles need to remain at the core of any political process. In this regard, we also recognize the importance of an intra-Palestinian reconciliation. This must be initiated to allow the necessary national consolidation to advance the legitimate aspirations of its people and ultimately lead to a process of political renewal, based on free and inclusive elections. We encourage Palestinian leaders and the international community to concentrate all their efforts on strengthening national unity and supporting the election process. The Palestinian Government is still very much in need of external support. The humanitarian situation of the population in the West Bank remains dire. We encourage donor countries to continue to provide support with their contributions to allow the great basic needs of the Palestinian population living under occupation to be met. The devastating public health and humanitarian implications of the coronavirus disease pandemic has had negative consequences for health, food security and the development of the country. This, coupled with widespread insecurity, the electricity crisis and the lack of opportunities for the young, is a great concern for the Dominican Republic. We therefore commend the indispensable work done on the ground by humanitarian organizations and United Nations agencies, such as the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as well as the support of friendly countries, to alleviate suffering and bring about change. Reports of daily violence developing throughout the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, continue. The Dominican Republic reiterates its condemnation of any act of violence or intimidation against areas with civilians, including women and children, and the excessive use of force and condemns the indiscriminate launching of rockets and incendiary devices. There is no justification for carrying out such indiscriminate attacks, and it is imperative that every effort be made to achieve a complete and definitive de-escalation. We urge all parties to act with maximum restraint to ensure that the ceasefire is maintained and civilians are protected. Finally, we call for strengthening the international consensus on this conflict, relying on peaceful conflict resolution, international law and multilateralism. And in recognition of the important mediation role of the United Nations, we are hopeful that together Israelis and Palestinians, with our help and support, will be able to build bridges across the vast spaces between them.
