Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita and
Ambassador Mauro Vieira of Brazil for their very
comprehensive and useful briefings.

We would like to congratulate the people of
Guinea-Bissau on holding fair, credible and inclusive
elections, with a high voter turnout of almost 85 per
cent; it was very impressive. We also welcome the high
level of participation by women voters and concurrently
regret the low gender-diversity in the composition of
Parliament. We encourage continued support for the
effective participation of women in national affairs
within the framework of the women and peace and
security agenda.

At the same time, we encourage the elected
members of Parliament to be mindful of their duties
with respect to the people of Guinea-Bissau and to
surpass individual and party gains for the sake of the
collective interests and stability of their country. We
remind all stakeholders that avoiding a new impasse
over post-electoral power-sharing is a necessity to
ensure stability in the long-term perspective.

Poland urges and relies on the Guinea-Bissau
authorities to hold fair and credible presidential
elections, to be held as announced on 24 November,
with the assistance of the reactivated the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS) High-level Steering Committee
on Elections. We therefore call on Bissau-Guinean
stakeholders to provide firm political direction and take
leadership in the electoral process, step up the required
technical preparations and empower the electoral
management bodies to implement appropriate solutions
for timely and credible elections.

Poland is concerned about the lack of sufficient
action to combat drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime, issues that have been raised by a
number of delegations, which remain a serious threat
to national stability and security. In the same vein,
the socioeconomic situation and macroeconomic
climate, affected by the continuous political instability,
is worrisome, even with the perspective of 2019
investments. In that regard, we believe in Guinea-
Bissau's dedication to develop a national action plan and
strengthen the capacity of the Financial Investigation
Unit, as well as legal and institutional anti-corruption
frameworks. Ensuring worthier economic performance
is necessary to combat tensions on the social front, and
it needs political stability.

Last but not least, we support the progress made
in the prosecution of gender-based violence and in
addressing intercommunal violence related to land
disputes. However, at the same time, we urge the
authorities to establish the recommended national
human rights institution, in compliance with the Paris
Principles. Human rights are crucial for sustaining
peace and ensuring long-term stability, development
and security in Guinea-Bissau.

I conclude by highlighting how important it is that
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau continue to support the country in all the
efforts I mentioned, especially in the autumn period.

Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to the
former UNIOGBIS Special Representative, Mr. Jose
Viegas Filho, for his dedication and hard work, as well
as to the UNIOGBIS staff, the United Nations country
team, the Economic Community of West African States,
the Group of Five international partners represented
in Guinea-Bissau and all regional and international
partners. Likewise, I would like to warmly welcome
new Special Representative Rosine Sori-Coulibaly and
express our full support for her call. We believe that
her extensive experience and wisdom will successfully
lead us towards lasting developments in the direction of
a stable and prosperous future for all Bissau-Guineans.

