Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I apologize for taking the
floor, given the lateness of the hour. I shall respond
briefly to the points raised by the representative of
India. We deeply regret that he used this platform once
again to defame Pakistan and to indulge in fabricated
allegations. Incidentally, he made the same allegations
yesterday in the Sixth Committee. We categorically
reject all of those allegations as false, malicious and
self-serving.

Pakistan is proud of its role as a front-line State
in the fight against terrorism. Our law-enforcement
agencies are engaged in carrying out interdiction
operations against suspected terrorists - especially
along the Pakistan-Afghanistan border - and that fact
is well known to the world. All allegations of Taliban
elements regrouping in Pakistan are misleading and
totally wrong.

The Indian representative made a reference to a
so-called assumption, based on an investigation in
Austria, that the grenades used in the attack on the
Indian Parliament on 13 December 2001 were
produced in Pakistan. This is nothing but sheer
propaganda. If the Austrian company that was actually
the subject of these investigations had exported these
grenades to Pakistan, one could not rule out the
possibility of similar export to other countries,
including India.

As far as yesterday's article in The New York
Times is concerned, we have shared the information
with the concerned Security Council Committee. We
are certain that the article is based on false information
that must have been shared by the interested quarters,
who spare no opportunity to malign Pakistan. In fact,
the Indian allegations are an attempt to deflect
international attention away from the reign of terror it
has unleashed on the innocent people of occupied
Jammu and Kashmir in order to suppress their
legitimate struggle for the right to self-determination.

India's oppressive policies in occupied Jammu
and Kashmir constitute the worst forms of State
terrorism. As our Secretary-General has said:

"Internationally, we are beginning to see the
increasing use of what I call the 'T-word' -
terrorism - to demonize political opponents, to
throttle freedom of speech and the press, and to
delegitimize legitimate political grievances. We
are seeing too many cases where States living in
tension with their neighbours make opportunistic
use of the fight against terrorism to threaten or
justify new military action on long-running
disputes." (SG/SM/8518)

India indeed knows a lot about terrorism. It has
indulged in the worst form of terrorism against its own
nationals. Last year, the killing of 2,000 Muslims in the
Indian State of Gujarat was a living example. It is a
pity that India gets away with such acts in the name of
democracy and secularism. India has sponsored
terrorism against each one of its neighbours. One just
has to read the book entitled Indian Intervention in Sri
Lanka: The Role of India's Intelligence Services by
Rohan Gunaratna. The book says:

"More than 20,000 Tamil militants were
based in India. The first and second batch of
training was provided by the Indian Foreign
Intelligence Agency, the Research and Analysis
Wing, in Uttar Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh at
two Indian military facilities. After that they
set up their own training camps in South India."

There are well-documented reports that the Indian
intelligence agencies have sponsored and directed
renegade groups of Kashmiris to perpetrate terrorist
actions within Indian-occupied Kashmir as a means of
defaming the Kashmiri freedom struggle and
intimidating the Kashmiri people. This is recorded by
Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International and in
other credible reports.

We will shortly communicate to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee information on the activities of
India's consulates in Afghanistan in promoting
terrorism in Pakistan. Specific information will be
provided to the Chairman of the Committee on a
confidential basis. If the Indians so desire, we can
share this information publicly.

