Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I welcome
the dignified statement we just heard from the Prime
Minister of Ukraine.

If the current crisis were not so serious, we could
wax ironic about the recent statements made by Russian
diplomats to explain the apparent movement towards
the annexation of Crimea. That irony is based on two
facts. First, Russia constantly refers to the agreement
of 21 February, negotiated by the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Germany, Poland and France, which it refused
to endorse when it was signed. It has become a very
belated supporter of that agreement after Yanukovych's
shameful flight.

Secondly - and here the irony borders on
the surreal - Russia refers to the opinion of the
International Court of Justice, which ruled that the
unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo
was not illegal. Russia never recognized that opinion
and always disputed Kosovo's independence. We
therefore await with interest the logical conclusion of
that unexpected conversion - Russia's recognition of
Kosovo.

It is interesting to note that, in its opinion,
the International Court of Justice established two
conditions. One was the contested character of the
territory, which led to the existence of a unique legal
order, resolution 1244 (1999), and the second was the
non-use of force. Obviously, those conditions have not
been met in Crimea, the status of which was in no way
contested either by Moscow or the local assembly, and
where the Russian occupation allows one faction, which
received 4 per cent of the votes in the local elections, to
organize a mock referendum in the shadow of Russian
bayonets. As French Minister for Foreign Affairs Fabius
said this morning, "in Crimea Sunday the choice will

a"

be between 'yes' and 'yes .

But for Russia it is not a question of law, coherence
or logic; it is a question ofusing anything and everything
to justify the unjustifiable - the blatant and cynical
violation of the Charter of the United Nations, whose
foundation is respect for the territorial integrity and
non-interference in the internal affairs of its Members.

Everything is therefore in place for the annexation
of Crimea by Russia regardless of legal wrangling that
will fool no one. The Western media sees in this matter
the triumph of the Russian chess player who will have
checkmated the international community. I play chess
pretty badly, but I see here above all the immaturity of
a player who cannot help but try to take the rook and
ends up losing the game. Russia will gain Crimea and
lose its credibility. What will happen to the credibility
of Russian diplomacy when it tries to returns to its
foundations - respect for the territorial integrity of
States and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States - a diplomacy that encouraged and recognized
the secession in Georgia and annexed a region of
Ukraine? It will be met with nothing but sarcasm and
a shrug.

What will happen to the credibility of Russian
diplomacy in the former Soviet space? Are we not aware
that certain independent States had been conquered by
the Russian Empire before Crimea? Are we not aware
that there are Russian and Russian-speaking minorities
everywhere across that space? All that Russia will
find there is distrust and anxiety. What will happen
to the credibility of Russia in Ukraine? How can we
imagine a reconciliation between the spoiler and the
dispossessed? How can we understand the creation of
a new Alsace-Lorraine a century after 1914? No one
is asking Ukraine to choose between East and West.
Russia has succeeded in doing so by leaving Ukraine
no choice in the matter.

Finally, what will become of the rapprochement
between the European Union and Russia when Russia
tramples upon the values that led to the creation of the
European Union and the resolve to break the cycle of
invasions, occupations and demands? The European
Union can only see its error in believing that its
interlocutor shared the same objective. Russia will lose
the game, but no one will emerge unscathed, because
naked force will have imposed its logic. The fragile
fabric of international law - the only guarantee and
only barrier that small States have against the return of
war - will have been torn.

In this moment of confusion, it is right for the
Security Council to reaffirm the principles upon
which the United Nations is founded. France therefore
supports the draft resolution presented by the United
States of America and calls for its being put to a vote
before the holding of the referendum.

It is not too late. Let all of us, members and
non-members of the Security Council alike, launch a
final appeal to Russia. We understand the passions and
concerns. We want to respond to them, but through
respect for law and the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
That is the message that for a week now all our Heads of
State and Government have been sending to the highest
levels in Moscow.

Simple solutions are available; the principles
are well known. I even cited them here a week ago:
the return of the Russian forces to their barracks,
the deployment of international observers from the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to ensure the safety of the civilian population, the
establishment of a Government of national unity in
Kyiv, the swift holding of elections under international
monitoring (see S/PV.7125). Let us negotiate the terms.

Time is running out. If the illegal referendum is
held on Sunday, if Russia responds unfavourably, as it
has announced it would, we will be forced to let Russia
suffer all the political and economic consequences. I
say "forced" because we do not want to follow a path
leading backwards. I say "forced" because we will not
have a choice in the face of such a major violation of
international law on our continent.

Russia should resist the nationalist giddiness that
has engulfed it and which is always ill advised. Russia
should forget 1914 and understand that we are in 2014.
It should return to the principles that it heralded for so
long and that it tramples today. It should listen to what
the entire international community is telling it. If it
does, a solution is possible - a solution that respects
the territorial integrity of Ukraine and its independence
and ensures the rights of all communities of Ukraine.
It should not lose the chess game for the sake of the
limited and fleeting pleasure of taking a rook. That
would not be a worthy display of the talent of Russian
chess players, who are among the best in the world.

