Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to express our appreciation for your tireless efforts,
Mr. President, during your presidency of the Security
Council this month. I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing this morning, as well as Ms. Nada
Majdalani and Mr. Gidon Bromberg for theirs.

The Middle East is facing many threats to
international peace and security. However, the
Palestinian question remains its biggest challenge. It is
commonly recognized that a just, comprehensive and
lasting solution to the Middle East issue is the two-
State solution, with Palestine and Israel living side by
side in peace and security. To that end, it is necessary
to establish an independent Palestinian State within
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
line with the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Arab Peace Initiative, and to put an end to the Israeli
occupation of the occupied Arab territories, including
the Syrian Golan and the occupied Lebanese territories.

The State of Qatar reaffirms its principled and
firm position that the Golan is an occupied Arab land
and that Israel's imposition of its laws, jurisdiction
and administration on the Golan is null and void with
no legal effect. The State of Qatar also rejects any
attempt to undermine the status of Al-Quds, especially
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, which is enduring the ongoing
attempts of the Israeli occupying forces to storm it,
which is a clear violation of international legitimacy
and conventions.
The State of Qatar is working with the United
Nations and the parties concerned to calm the situation
and provide an environment conducive to peace
while alleviating the humanitarian situation of the
Palestinians, especially in the Gaza Strip, which is under
a fierce blockade. In that regard, His Highness Sheikh
Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar,
has allocated $150 million in emergency aid to address
the dire Palestinian humanitarian situation. Qatari aid
has secured enough fuel to generate electricity over the
last period.

The State of Qatar continues to emphasize its
position that the Syrian crisis can end only through
a political solution that meets the aspirations of all
the Syrian people, in accordance with the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015), thereby
maintaining the national unity, territorial integrity,
sovereignty and independence of Syria. We will
continue to work with the United Nations and our
international partners to achieve a political solution
based on legal and international terms of reference.

The State of Qatar is gravely concerned about
the military escalation in western Libya in advance
of the Libyan national conference, which threatens
to undermine the United Nations-sponsored political
solution. The dangerous escalation of the situation in
Libya and the attack on Tripoli have serious implications
for the unity of the country and the future of the
political situation that require the Security Council to
take decisive measures to deter those responsible for
the escalation. The State of Qatar fully supports the
legitimate Government of National Accord, which is
recognized internationally in keeping with Security
Council resolutions, as well as the efforts of Special
Envoy Ghassan Salame' to reach ajust political solution
for the brotherly Libyan people.

The nearly two-year-long unjust blockade imposed
on the State of Qatar constitutes a flagrant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
friendly relations among States, which obliges States
to refrain from escalating and fuelling conflicts and
to resolve disputes by peaceful means. We believe that
the fabrication of that crisis - whose objectives are
well-known - amid the tensions in our region not
only harms the State of Qatar and the vital Arabian
Gulf region but also creates a dangerous precedent in
international law by legitimizing illegal international
measures, violating human rights and undermining the
efforts of the Council to maintain international peace
and security.

The legal validity of the State of Qatar's approach
to the Gulf crisis was reflected in the ruling issued by
the International Court of Justice in July 2018, which
demonstrated the determination of the State of Qatar to
resort to the mechanisms provided by the international
law to resolve disputes.

The two-year-long blockade and the unjust
campaign against the State of Qatar have only served to
enhance Qatar's positive international standing and its
valuable contributions to international cooperation and

the maintenance of international peace and security.
We will continue that approach, which has been
acknowledged by the United Nations and the entire
world. In that regard, we wish to renew our support and
appreciation for the sincere mediation by His Highness
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah of sisterly
Kuwait. We also wish to express our appreciation to the
friendly countries that supported that mediation.

We stress that we will continue our efforts to defuse
the crises and achieve a lasting and comprehensive
peace in the region.

