Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish, Mr. Minister, to welcome you and to thank you for

 

presiding over this important meeting. My delegation and
I myself are grateful for Argentina's initiative in convening
this timely meeting, which is graced by your presence in
the Chamber.

(spoke in English)

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The Central and Eastern European countries
associated with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated
countries Cyprus and Malta, as well as the European Free
Trade Association countries members of the European
Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein, align themselves
with this statement.

The protection of personnel, whether United Nations,
associated or humanitarian personnel, is now a fundamental
responsibility for United Nations missions in situations of
conflict. The safety and security of these personnel have
always been of paramount importance, but the worrying
increase in attacks against United Nations and other
personnel makes this an issue of the utmost concern and
requires a firm response from the international community.
Violence directed at international and local personnel
working to bring peace and humanitarian relief to areas of
conflict is unacceptable and cannot be tolerated in any
circumstances. The efforts being undertaken by individuals
in situations of extreme danger on behalf of the
international community must be recognized. Their
impartiality must be honoured and their safety guaranteed.
The blue flag of the United Nations must be respected.
Without safety and security, missions and operations cannot
function, let alone succeed.

The increase in violent attacks has been registered
while conflicts themselves increasingly involve civilian
populations, which require greater levels of humanitarian
assistance. But it is also true - and this is of great concern
- that there is a growing lack of respect for international
humanitarian and refugee law and for human rights.

Responsibility for the safety of personnel on the
ground falls, in the first instance, to the Governments
hosting peacekeeping and humanitarian operations. We urge
all parties to conflicts to take all steps necessary to ensure
the safety and security of United Nations and associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel, including locally
recruited personnel.

The European Union stresses the importance of the
implementation of the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel and urges those
Member States that have not yet signed and ratified this
Convention to do so as soon as possible. Serious
consideration should be given to expanding the scope of
the Convention to include locally recruited personnel, who
are essential to the functioning of peacekeeping and
humanitarian missions.

The perpetrators of crimes and violence against
United Nations and associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel must be brought to justice. Under-Secretary-
General Vieira de Mello informed the Council last year
that over 90 per cent of the deaths of humanitarian
personnel have not yet been investigated by the relevant
authorities. This situation is intolerable and cannot
continue. Governments must act forcefully to prevent
violence against these personnel and to punish those
responsible for attacks and other violations of
international humanitarian law.

In this context, the Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) is also essential, and we urge all
Member States to sign and ratify the Statute as a matter
of priority. The European Union remains committed to an
early entry into force of the ICC Statute. The inclusion in
the Statute of the war crime of intentionally attacking, in
violation of international humanitarian law, personnel
involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping
mission will help to bring perpetrators to justice.

The European Union believes that the safety and
security of personnel begin with adequate planning by the
United Nations and with giving missions and operations
the necessary training and resources, including protection
elements, to achieve realistic mandates in safety and with
security. For its part, the Secretariat must ensure that
United Nations and associated personnel are adequately
protected, and we welcome the Secretary-General's efforts
to enhance the security of United Nations peacekeeping
personnel. Important in this context is the draft resolution
that the European Union sponsors every year in the
General Assembly on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations
personnel. We look forward to the general and
comprehensive review of security in peacekeeping
operations currently under way.

The European Union stresses the importance of
each peacekeeping operation having a comprehensive
security plan, including standard operating procedures and

 

a risk assessment for force commanders. The European
Union supports the measures already highlighted and
implemented where possible, including the deployment of
the appropriate number of security officers, pre-deployment
training for security officers and other staff and the
provision of the necessary logistical support. The European
Union also supports the Secretary-Generals continued
strengthening of the Office of the United Nations Security
Coordinator with personnel dedicated to security in
peacekeeping operations and looks forward to the
appointment of a full-time security coordinator, as requested
by the General Assembly for the security of humanitarian
missions.

The complete review of air safety as it pertains to
peacekeeping is also most welcome. Careful and
comprehensive training of personnel, including
humanitarian personnel, is also crucial in this regard. We
look forward to the Secretary-Generals forthcoming
comprehensive report to the General Assembly at its fifty-
fifth session on the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel.

The protection of United Nations and associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel is, as I said, of the
utmost concern to us all. The Security Council has made
clear its preoccupation with this problem, and the
European Union fully supports the measures the Council
may take to enhance the safety and security of personnel
in situations of conflict. With its clear condemnation and
intolerance of attacks on international personnel, the
Council should also consider how best to enable
peacekeeping operations to protect their personnel, those
associated with them and those of humanitarian missions.

The European Union pays tribute to those who
have given their lives in the service of peace and is
committed to bringing a safer environment to the work of
United Nations and associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel.

