Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to express my
gratitude for the convening of this meeting and to
once again thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
his comprehensive assessment of the latest political
developments with regard to the conflict and, in
particular, the contentious issue of the establishment
of the constitutional committee. The Government of
Equatorial Guinea reiterates its gratitude to the Special
Envoy for his firm commitment and hard work over the
past four years on this situation.

As some delegations before me have stressed,
we are at a critical juncture. It is critical because two
months ago we hailed the agreement between Russia
and Turkey as a diplomatic success that could enable a
ceasefire in the province of Idlib and subsequently pave
the way for a possible definitive solution to the conflict.
The recent quadripartite summit in Istanbul and the
meeting of the small group in London even allowed for
an opportunity to not only endorse the ceasefire agreed
on by Ankara and Moscow, but above all to insist on
the need for the establishment of the constitutional
committee, in accordance with the Sochi declaration
and resolution 2254 (2015).

Let us not deceive ourselves. Terrorists will
continue to take advantage of our discord. The existing
difficulties surrounding the establishment of the
constitutional committee do not benefit those that, like
Equatorial Guinea, want to find a definitive solution to
the conflict; rather, they primarily benefit the illegal
armed groups - the terrorists who in that situation
may see an additional opportunity to not lay down
their arms and instead continue to perpetrate acts of
violence. In that context, we stress that it is necessary
to make significant progress. In order to establish a
committee that is representative, inclusive and credible,
all ofthe parties concerned must fulfil their obligations.
Furthermore, all parties have reiterated in various
contexts that the political process in Syria should
continue to be led by the United Nations. Therefore,
we believe that the United Nations should continue
its facilitator role, working with unquestionable
transparency with regard to building a sound structure
for the committee.

We reiterate that, in order to ensure the successful
work of the constitutional committee, its participants
must be willing to renounce partisan interests. As in
any successful negotiations, the parties must have the
ability to yield, even on certain issues, ifnecessary. On
the other hand, the facilitator role of the United Nations
is in no way a substitute for the will or sovereignty
of the Syrian people. If we succeed in launching the
work of the committee, it is essential that no external
force interfere or attempt, by whatever means, to
influence its decisions, which must be fully sovereign.
Along those lines, my Government hopes that the
forthcoming international consultations on Syria in
Astana, scheduled at the end of the month, will provide
an opportunity to reaffirm the need to achieve a lasting
solution for Syria in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
and, most important, initiate a discussion on the launch
of the work of the constitutional committee.

In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea is a peace-loving
country that has historically enjoyed substantial
peace and stability, and that has been made possible
by the policies undertaken by the Government led by
His Excellency President Teodoro Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo. We want every country to have what we
have. Equatorial Guinea does not have any economic or
strategic interest in Syria. Our only interest is in ending
once and for all the suffering of millions of innocent
people. The conflict is entering its eighth year. Over
those eight years, massive economic and human
resources have been mobilized that unfortunately
have not allowed for an end to the violence. The
reconstruction of the country will be very costly. We
must always bear this in mind - the longer we prolong
the conflict, the heavier the moral and financial burden
will be for the Syrian people.

