Mr. Amorim (Brazil): Let me express to you,
Mr. President, and to your Government our appreciation for
organizing this open debate in a formal meeting of the
Security Council. In a matter of such importance it is
appropriate that we work in an open and a transparent way.
Moreover, it is important that the party to a dispute, in this
case Libya, may present its case to the Security Council.
That is what is called for in Articles 31 and 32 of the
Charter. So, by having this open debate, we are just doing
the right thing.

The circumstances which bring us here today involve
a complex blend of political and judicial elements which
have been the object of controversial debate within and
outside this Council. But we must not forget that at the
origin of the situations considered by the Council, as in the
present case, often lies human tragedy. This is why we
would like to start by extending our sympathy to the
bereaved families of the victims of the terrorist attacks
against Pan Am flight 103 and UTA flight 772. The
Brazilian Government has repeatedly stressed its
condemnation of any kind of terrorist act for whatever
reason, as well as its commitment to international
cooperation to eradicate this scourge, and wishes to take
this opportunity to underscore this position of principle.

The direct association between collective security and
terrorism is relatively recent. Terrorism appeared explicitly
in the context of the Security Council's responsibilities with
regard to the maintenance of international peace and
security in January 1992, in the presidential statement
issued at the meeting of Heads of State or Government of
Council members.

Two months later, resolution 748 (1992) determined
that the Libyan refusal in cooperating with the Security
Council in the establishment of responsibilities with
regard to those acts constituted a threat to international
peace and security. On that occasion, some members of
the Council mentioned that since the issue at stake was
one of a legal nature, the main judicial body of the
Organization, the International Court of Justice, should
have a role to play in order to decide what the applicable
law would be. Some maintained that resort to Chapter VII
at that stage was premature, since the means provided for
in Chapter VI had not been exhausted. Others still
considered that the imposition of sanctions would not help
settle the question and, at the same time, would aggravate
regional tension and have serious economic consequences
for the countries in the area.

By bringing the issue to the Security Council,
however, the Governments of the United Kingdom, the
United States and France have demonstrated their faith in
the multilateral system and, in particular, in this
international Organization as a promoter of values which
are essential to the cohesion of international society. They
have also entrusted this political body with finding a
generally acceptable solution to the matter.

A case has been brought by Libya to the
International Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ
of the United Nations. On 27 February the International
Court of Justice decided that it had jurisdiction to
entertain the claim as submitted by Libya and that that
claim was admissible. That decision, whose preliminary
character we stress, has nevertheless the non-negligible
consequence that the merits of the Libyan application will
be considered at the next stage of the process. On that
occasion, the question of the applicability of the Montreal
Convention to this specific case will be addressed. A
ruling of the Court on this matter will inevitably have a
bearing on how the Council assesses the conditions for
Libya's compliance with the relevant resolutions.

In this connection, we find that some elements of
Judge Kooijman's opinion to the International Court of
Justice in the present case are worth mentioning:

"Resolutions of the Security Council taken under
Chapter VII of the Charter may have far-reaching
legal effects, but they are not irrevocable or
unalterable [T]he Security Council is free to
confirm, revoke or amend them and consequently
they cannot be called 'final' even if during their
lifetime they may be dispositive of the rights and

 

obligations of Member States, overriding rights and
obligations these States may have under other
treaties." [S/I 998/1 9], annex, p. 23, para. I 7]

It is also worth bearing in mind what Judge Rezek

stated in his individual opinion:

(spoke in French)

"Article 103 of the Charter is a rule for resolving
conflict between treaties It resolves the conflict in
favour of the Charter It is indeed the United
Nations Charter (not a Security Council resolution, a General Assembly recommendation or a ruling of the International Court of Justice) which benefits from the
pre-eminence established in this standard; it is the
Charter, with all the weight of its principles, its
system and its distribution of authority." [ibid., p. 25,
para. 2]

(spoke in English)

It would be unwise at this stage to try to speculate on
what the decision of the International Court of Justice will
be. We would be prejudging and bringing political
considerations to a matter that we want to see solved in the
fairest and most legitimate way. In any case, the future
judgment of the International Court of Justice will be a
significant element to be considered by the Security Council
in any decision referring to the present case.

The letters dated 20 and 23 December 1991, from
France, the United Kingdom and the United States, request,
among other things, that the Government of Libya surrender
for trial all those charged with the crime. Resolution 731
(1992) urges the Libyan Government immediately to
provide a full and effective response to those requests so as
to contribute to the elimination of international terrorism.

Recently a report submitted to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations by Mr. Dumbutshena and
Mr. Schermers on the Scottish judicial system concluded
that the accused would receive a fair trial under the Scottish
judicial system. The distinguished experts also pointed out
that the idea of dispensing with the jury could be pursued
in case the accused could reasonably establish that their
right to a free trial would be prejudiced by a jury trial. We
also took note of other alternatives which have been put on
the table, and they have been mentioned here today.

Brazil hopes that the international community, with the
cooperation of the Government of Libya, will be able to
ensure that, in a fair and transparent way, the
responsibility for those heinous acts will be finally
established by means of a fair trial. If and once this
responsibility is decided, the punishment of the culprits
and the payment of adequate compensation to the families
of the victims will allow this case to come to a closure.

Humanitarian aspects are specially important to any
issue involving sanctions and, in this regard, we have
welcomed the report of the fact-finding mission
coordinated by Director-General Vladimir Petrovsky. The
report touches on various relevant issues which are now
part of the discussions, within the sanctions Committee,
on the best way to cope with the humanitarian situation
in Libya.

We believe that these discussions would greatly
benefit from statistical data and verifiable information on
the possible links between humanitarian difficulties in
Libya and United Nations-imposed sanctions. This
perception seems to find echo in the conclusion reached
by the Inter-Agency Standing Committee which, in a
statement dated 29 December 1997 on the humanitarian
impact of sanctions, considered that

"the Security Council would benefit from
comprehensive information and objective analysis of
the potential humanitarian impact of sanctions when
deciding on the imposition of sanctions and from
information on the evolution of the humanitarian
requirements under a sanctions regime on a regular
basis." [S/1998/147, para. 2]

We deem these reflections timely and positive and believe
that the Security Council should follow this matter on a
regular basis.

We have just proceeded to the eighteenth
consecutive review of the sanctions against Libya. This is
always a painful and complex exercise which demands
careful attention from all Security Council members.

Brazil cast its vote in favour of resolution 883
(1993) five years ago. On that occasion we indicated our
conviction that the imposition of sanctions must always
be linked to the performance of limited, concrete and very
specific acts that are essentially required by the decisions
of the Security Council. Such acts must be specifically set
out by the Council so that the State on which sanctions
are imposed may be able to know in advance, and beyond
all doubt, that the sanctions will be lifted as soon as those

 

specific requirements are met. We reaffirm that conviction
today.

