Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Djinnit, for
his briefing to the Council. Italy welcomes his efforts,
which have opened the door to positive results in
terms of a reform process and the revitalization of
the follow-up mechanism to the Partnership Africa
Canada framework.

The active engagement of the Governments has
proved the effectiveness of that mechanism. Of course,
there is still a need to act, since we still have reason
for concern. The Special Envoy has given us a clear
depiction of the challenges that lie before us today. The
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
critical. The bishops of the Congolese Catholic Church
have decided to put an end to their mediation efforts. We
supported their mediation efforts from the beginning,
and we thank them for all that they have done.

President Kabila has appointed a new Prime
Minister, who does not enjoy consensus support. That
has led to a swift reaction by the opposition, which
considers that appointment to be a non-event. Moreover,
the Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales
de la Republique democratique du Congo acquises
au changement has called for mass demonstrations
to protest that appointment. That shows us that the
31 December agreement provides the only possible
road map for a political transition that is peaceful,
credible and inclusive. The United Nations has already
demonstrated its willingness to stand with the people
of that country. It has already been recalled that the
Council unanimously voted in favour of resolution
2348 (2017), which renewed the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
enabling the implementation of the 31 December 2016
agreement and the electoral process.

This year could mark a turning point in the history
of the country. We would like to launch an appeal to
the political leaders in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Political leaders, both those in the Government
and those in the opposition, have to demonstrate their
sense of responsibility by renewing dialogue, and must
allow themselves to be guided by the interests of the
country and the aspirations of the people.

The security situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is also of concern. Italy is watching with
grave concern the increase in the theatres ofinstability in
the country, and calls for an end to the violence targeting
civilians. The serious situation in Kasai province in
particular was condemned by the United Nations, the
African Union, and the International Organization of la
Francophonie. We are deeply concerned by the recent
discovery of mass graves in that region. We encourage
the relevant authorities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to undertake all the necessary measures to
ensure that in-depth investigations are carried out in
order to shed light on that episode.

We also recall that, as the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court stated, the aforementioned
violence could constitute crimes that fall within the
purview of the Court. In that regard, it is our wish that
those responsible for the despicable murder of the two
United Nations experts be brought to justice. Allow me
to once again express our grief at the loss of Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalan, who contributed enormously
to the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Continuing our examination of the security aspect,
we must, of course, consider the regional dimension.
The reappearance of the Mouvement du 23 mars and
the persistence in the east of such negative forces as
the Alliance of Democratic Forces and the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda require
strengthened regional cooperation so as to ensure that
the progress achieved in the fight against those groups
is not lost.

With regard to the presence of the Sudanese
People's Liberation Movement in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - a situation
that must be resolved quickly - we encourage all
stakeholders to pursue dialogue in coordination with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. The
fragility of the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is reflected in other countries in the region.
Chronic instability enables the illegal exploitation of
and illicit trafficking in natural resources, feeding a
vicious circle that also fuels armed groups.

In addition, instability continues to grow in terms
of the number of refugees in the region. Beyond the
traditional eastern border of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Uganda has become the main host of
refugees. There are now new inflows of refugees. In
order to offer its assistance to the population in need in
the Great Lakes region, the European Union yesterday
announced funding amounting to €32 million. However,
international assistance is not enough. In our view, we
must encourage the countries of the region to adopt
coordinated strategies aimed at promoting long-term
solutions, while recalling the importance of obligations
under the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
and the protocols thereto.

Although the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
the cornerstone of stability in the region, there are other
situations that require the attention of the Council.
Here I would briefly turn to the subject of Burundi
and reiterate our call to the countries of the region,
which play an indispensable role in the inter-Burundian
dialogue. The mediation process led by the East
African Community (EAC) is significant in that regard,
but requires the support of regional Powers in order to
make progress. We have just received discouraging
news. The summit of the Heads of State of the EAC,
which was scheduled to take place on 28 April, has
been postponed once again for unforeseen reasons.
We hope that that was not due to the serious crisis in
Burundi and that a specific date for that meeting will
be set this week.

In conclusion, the complexity of the problem in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
requires a multidimensional response, which is provided
by the African Union Peace and Security Council's
Framework agreement for peace. It is a vital mechanism
for stability in that corner of the African continent.
While ensuring our support for the Special Envoy in
his efforts to uphold that framework agreement, we
encourage the countries of the region to continue to
work to ensure its effectiveness. In particular, as stated
by the representative of the African Union, we invite
them to reactivate those various mechanisms in order to
deal with the recent security developments.

