The President (interpretation from Chinese): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of November, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr.
Juan Somavia, Permanent Representative of Chile to the
United Nations, for his service as the President of the
Security Council for the month of October 1997. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Security Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Somavia for
the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic

Letter dated 27 October 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Gabon to the United Nations

addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1997/821)

Letter dated 4 November 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of the Central African Republic to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General (S/1997/840)

The President (interpretation from Chinese): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic to the
United Nations, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Deinde
Fernandez (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.


The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 27 October 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Gabon to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
letter dated 23 October 1997 from the President of the
Gabonese Republic addressed to the President of the
Security Council, document S/ 1997/821, and the letter
dated 4 November 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of the Central African Republic to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting the letter dated 17 October 1997 from the
President of the Central African Republic addressed to the
Secretary-General, document S/ 1997/840.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1997/849, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1997/828, which contains the
text of a letter dated 28 October 1997 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the sixth and final periodic report of
the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB).

The first speaker inscribed on my list in the
representative of the Central African Republic, on whom
I now call.


