Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I should like to express my gratitude for the
comprehensive briefing given us by Ambassador
Alexander Konuzin, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
concerning the activities of the Committee, and also for
his presentation of the twelfth work programme from
the period from July to September, which we fully
support.

The CTC has this year, through its revitalization,
entered into a new and special phase, aimed at
enhancing its working capacity and at tackling the
challenges relating to the full implementation by
Member States of resolution 1373 (2001). Last March
we supported the proposals to revitalize the Committee
and voted in favour of resolution 1535 (2004). In the
light of the information we have received today, we are
pleased to see that the consensus will of the members
of the Council has gradually been translated into
reality. Proof of this is our welcoming today of
Ambassador Javier Ruperez, who has been appointed
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. We wish him every
success in his work, and we assure him of the fullest
support of the Chilean delegation as he carries out his
important functions.

As regards the achievement of the objectives set
out in the most recent three-month work programme,
we welcome the Committee's capacity for self-
criticism, as reflected in the report, and also the plainly
stated intention and resolve to modify certain
procedures that will in future make possible the full
achievement of the goals that have been set in the area
of the verification and monitoring of the
implementation by States of the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001). In that vein, we deem very
important the work done so far with respect to the
scheduling and organization of the work of the CTED.

Along those lines, and in keeping with the
mandate of the sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al Qaeda and the Taliban, which I am chairing, and
determined to enhance the cooperation between that
Committee and the CTC, we have, in recent days, held
an informal meeting between the Chairmen of both
Committees to discuss and examine ways and means of
exploring and establishing new areas of cooperation
and coordination between them.

As Ambassador Konuzin has said, these include
in particular the intention of holding regular meetings,
as part of our usual programme of work, among the
two Chairmen and among the experts charged with
dealing with those issues. We have also considered the
possibility of the Chairmen of the Committees'
participating in one another's meetings. We have also
looked at ways of promoting and fostering contacts
between the Monitoring Group of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the
Panel of Experts of the CTC, so as to exchange
information and share experiences, in accordance with
the rules of procedures of both Committees and the
agreements adopted therein.

We have also looked at ways of passing on the
information that the Al Qaeda Committee regularly
receives with respect to the need for technical
assistance, which is gathered during contact Visits by
the States holding the chairmanship and the members
of the 1267 Committee. In short, we have looked at
ways of enhancing cooperation between the two
bodies, and we will continue to do so in future.

I should also like to say that combating terrorism
involves constancy, dedication and perseverance in our
cooperation efforts in order to achieve our objectives,
as well as integration of efforts and actions - all of
this in the context of the work of the Security Council
committees on this issue, in particular in the CTC. All
of this has led to some important achievements.

However, as was recently stated in the Council,
terrorism still poses a major threat to international
peace and security. This is clear, as we learn daily of
new terrorist acts being perpetrated in various parts of
the world, in both developed and developing countries.
Therefore we need to uphold the Council's goal of
continuing to combat this grave threat. This can be

achieved only through the necessary and fundamental
cooperation of States and of the competent
organizations.

For that reason, it is necessary and timely to
reiterate our appeal to those States that are not yet
parties to international conventions relating to counter-
terrorism to do so, and to enact the necessary
legislation to implement them, and also, as regards the
Committee that I have the honour to chair, they must
comply with the sanctions imposed by the Security
Council.

Lastly, bearing in mind the renewed efforts made
by the Security Council this year to combat
terrorism - as evidenced by the adoption of resolution
1526 (2004) aimed at strengthening the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban;
resolution 1535 (2004), which set up the Executive
Directorate of the CTC; and resolution 1540 (2004) on
non-State actors and weapons of mass destruction -
we, as the international community, must remain
committed to this effort and take this opportunity to
move forward in the combat against terrorism. In that
way we will help ensure that the people of all States
can live in peace, in adequate security, with respect for
human, individual and collective rights, and in full
adherence to the rule of law.

