The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.

Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting ofthe Council for the month of May,
I would like to express the sincere appreciation of the
delegation of Indonesia to the members of the Council
not only for their kind words but also for their support
and to the secretariat of the Council for all the support
it has given us. Indeed, it has been a busy month, one
in which we rallied to consensus on several important
issues within our purview. We started the first day
of our presidency with a consensus press element on
Cyprus, and I am glad that we ended this morning on a
consensus resolution on Somalia. It clearly shows that
when the Council wishes to be united, it can do so. I
hope that this will continue.

We certainly could not have done it alone or without
the support of all colleagues in this Chamber, the
Permanent Representatives and the Deputy Permanent
Representatives. I would like pay strong tribute to the
political coordinators, because they are the ones that
ensure smooth sailing for all of us who are sitting here
at this U-shaped table.

I would also like to express our sincere appreciation
to the secretariat, Ms. Hasmik and her team; the
conference service officers on that side of the Chamber;
the interpreters up high on the mountain over there; the
verbatim reporters; the security officers; the secretary
to the President - the one who has never been seen
but has always been productive - the United Nations
media andjournalists and, of course, others.

I would like also to sincerely thank my own staff
from the Indonesian Mission for their hard work. I think
that they are very happy to see our presidency end.
Although today marks the end of our term as President
for this month, rest assured that we will continue to
make a contribution for the remaining 580 days of our
term. I am counting the days, which shows how very
diligent I am.

In conclusion, I must say that I am now the happiest
person in this Chamber, because I will be handing over
the wooden gavel to my brother Mansour, the Permanent
Representative of Kuwait, who, I am confident, will do
an excellent job as President. As the saying goes, with
the strength and wisdom of Thor from Marvel Comics,
I hand this wooden gavel to him, with the wisdom and
strength to continue the presidency.

The meeting rose at 12.05 pm.
