Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Thank you for
organizing this important debate, Mr. President. I also
wish to thank Ambassador Wittig for presenting his
report and for his commitment and leadership while he
was in charge of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
I also thank Ambassador Gasana for his statement and
assure him of our constant support in his important
task. I would also like to warmly greet Ambassador
Viotti and the other Chairs of the country-specific
configurations present here during our debate.

We welcome the progress of the PBC as reflected
in its report (S/2011/4l). Over the past five years, the
Commission has established itself as a relevant
platform for international assistance in the transition of
post-conflict societies towards durable peace. We now
have a more focused, thematic approach and a better
understanding of priorities and of how the PBC fits
into the larger set of international actors. We have, as
well, the lessons learned from five country-specific
configurations, which, we believe, is experience that
will certainly be valuable for the recently created
configuration for the Republic of Guinea.

Portugal takes pride in its active participation in
four PBC configurations, as we are strong supporters
of an approach that takes into account the relationship
between security and development and its implications
for integrated action by the international community in
post-conflict societies, which are particularly fragile
ones. The PBC is in a unique position to ensure that
socio-economic progress effectively functions as a
promoter of stability. In the case of Guinea-Bissau, as
already mentioned by Ambassador Maria Luiza Viotti,
I would also like to underline the role of the PBC
configuration in the process that led to the debt relief,
resulting from Guinea-Bissau reaching the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries completion point of the
International Monetary Fund. The debt relief, together
with a recently approved new tranche of Peacebuilding
Fund financial support, will create the conditions for
the Government of Guinea-Bissau to press forward
with social and economic programmes and enhance the
strengthening of national institutions. In the context of
political fragility, the PBC's role is certainly an
important contribution to stability in that particular
country, which faces, as we all know, a number of
serious challenges.

Allow me now to focus on a number of
challenges that in our view merit particular attention.
First, there is a challenge for the visibility of the PBC
in its capacity to coordinate with other actors present in
the countries where it intervenes. There is no denying
that the PBC is a catalyst for mobilizing donors'
resources, identifying financing gaps and priorities for
international assistance. But this should translate into
actual work being carried out on the ground. Besides
dealing with the regular planning and articulation of
the national authorities, the PBC should be more
systematically involved early on with other actors, first
and foremost with the other United Nations agencies
but also with bilateral partners, international financial
institutions and regional organizations. We note with
satisfaction that this issue is one of the main aspects of
the PBC road map for actions in 2011.

Secondly, there is the challenge of greater
engagement of the PBC in development issues. The
report indicates a growing trend to include
development aspects in priority plans, especially
concerning the problem of youth unemployment, an
issue with serious destabilizing potential, especially in
Africa. PBC engagement in this field, however,
requires a more consistent dialogue with development
agencies to promote a peacebuilding approach in their
assistance efforts. There are also a number of other
issues besides youth employment with great potential
in terms of peace dividends and long-term stability.
These include promoting economic activities, health
and education, and gender equality, as well as the
mitigation of the effects of climate change.

Finally, we should work towards strengthening
relations between the PBC and other United Nations
organs. On Monday the General Assembly held a very
rich debate on this same report (see A/65/PV.79). I
think we should value the Assembly's contribution in
our reflections and efforts to strengthen peacebuilding.

In what concerns the Security Council, the report,
as well as other reports and documents produced in
each of the country-specific configurations, contains
much valuable information on how the work of the
PBC can feed into Security Council discussions,
namely, those on the establishment, renewal and
conclusion of mission mandates. We should work
collectively to improve our working methods in order
to allow us to draw regularly on the advice of Chairs of
country-specific configurations. The interactive
dialogue on Burundi, with the participation of the
Chair of the PBC country-specific configuration,
promoted by the Brazilian presidency of the Security
Council last month, was an excellent practice. We
should be able to develop other formats that would
serve the same purpose of further engagement of the
PBC with the Council.

In conclusion, the success ofthe PBC in fulfilling
its task represents our collective success in our efforts
towards achieving sustainable peace. We are aware of
the challenges before us in improving our capacity to
deal with peacebuilding tasks. Let us also be creative
in reaching out and devising appropriate ways to
address those challenges.

