Mr. Cisse (spoke in French): I have the great
honour today of presenting to the Security Council the
report of the Secretary-General, document 8/2001/886,
of 18 September 2001. This report was submitted
pursuant to the request from the Security Council,
following the presidential statement of 2 July
requesting that by 30 September 2001, proposals be
submitted on what the Council should do to help the
Central African Republic and to strengthen the Peace-
building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA).

I shall relate the main elements of the report on
the situation in the Central African Republic, including
a number of recommendations on assistance for
recovery in the Central African Republic and for
strengthening the role ofBONUCA.

Let me first describe the current situation in the
Central African Republic: the political, economic,
security issues. Then I shall speak about assistance for
economic recovery in the Central African Republic and
about strengthening of the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in the Central African
Republic.

Since the attempted coup of 28 May 2001, the
Central African Republic authorities have sought, with
the help of various partners, to normalize the serious
situation that arose as a result of that attempt to
destabilize institutions. In the political arena, the
casing of the tension caused by the attempted coup is
noticeable but can only become final once legal action
has been completed against the instigators of the coup
attempt. The investigation commission created for this
purpose will be soon be completing its work, and the
trial of the instigators will begin soon.

BONUCA has undertaken facilitation and
mediation efforts aimed at bringing together the
various political forces in the country. The authorities
have also, at BONUCA's urging, sought to create an
atmosphere of greater trust, calm and reconciliation.
BONUCA will continue to work on creating an
atmosphere of tolerance among all those involved in
politics there.

In the social sphere, the dialogue between the
Government and the trade unions, broken off in mid-
May 2001, has now resumed within the context of the
follow-up and arbitration committee.

In the area of economics, the economic impact of
the attempted coup has been devastating. The
authorities have not been able to pay their exterior
debt, including payments to the World Bank, which
suspended disbursements on 14 August 2001. The
Government has prepared various plans to obtain
emergency assistance from the international
community. In its efforts to achieve economic recovery,
it convened from 10 to 12 September the first national
meetings on the economy and finances of the Central
African Republic.

Insecurity still prevails in Bangui and within the
country. The authorities have made significant efforts,
however, to restore security, particularly in the capital.
In this context, most Central Africans who had sought
refuge in the French and United States embassies after
the attempted coup have been able to leave and resume
their lives. The Government remains concerned,
however, by the presence in Zongo, a village across the
river from Bangui in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, of approximately 23,000 civilian and military
refugees. Removing those people from the common
border is the only way of easing the concerns of
Central African authorities. Consideration is now being
given by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to transferring them to
another site.

With respect to assistance in the recovery of the
Central African Republic, the report before the Council
stresses the poverty of the country, which has been
exacerbated by the frequent unrest experienced by the
country in recent years. That is why the Secretary-
General recommends that the international community
provide the Central African Republic with prompt and
massive assistance in many areas: the economy, human
resources, training, security and institutional support.

In his recommendations, the Secretary-General
stresses in particular the specific nature of the case of
the Central African Republic and encourages the
Bretton Woods institutions to demonstrate exceptional
solicitude in the implementation of economic
programmes agreed upon with the Government. He
also urges partners to make available economic and
financial experts to the Central African Republic and to
help the authorities in the priority computerization of
financial records. I would recall in this connection the
World Bank's support programme for economic
policies and the African Development Bank's
institutional support project, which is in the course of
being drafted. This assistance will enable the
Government to carry out the stringent management
policy that it is committed to implementing, as was
affirmed by the Prime Minister in his general policy
statement. Measures to mobilize income and structural
reform will allow growth to resume.

The Secretary-General's report also stresses that
security assistance is expected from the outside world.
The restructuring of the defence and security forces,
the collection of weapons, support for infrastructural
matters and redeployment, and the recruitment, training
and equipping of new contingents are all areas in which
the active cooperation of partners is required. That is
why, while thanking those States that have honoured
the commitments they undertook at the special meeting
in New York in May 2000, the Secretary-General calls
upon the other partners who had made similar
commitments to honour them.

Since the attempted coup led to the proliferation
of weapons in Bangui and elsewhere in the country, the
Government - which recently created a Ministry
entrusted specifically with restructuring - should be
encouraged in its efforts to restructure and train the
defence and security forces and to disarm civilians.

Given the new context created by the coup in the
Central African Republic, the current report
recommends the strengthening of the mandate of the
United Nations Peace-building Support Office in the
Central African Republic (BONUCA), as laid out in
the Secretary-General's letter to the President of the
Security Council dated 3 December 1999 and the
presidential statement of the Security Council of 10
February 2000.

The Secretary-General therefore recommends to
the members of the Security Council a strengthening of
the Office's role in its various activities to support
peace-building. He suggests that the Council use its
good offices, offer its services as a mediator, monitor
the security situation, promote human rights and
provide political support for the mobilization of
resources. He particularly recommends strengthening
the human rights unit and the establishment of an
early-warning system.

The mandate review that the Secretary-General
proposes to the Council contains the following
innovations. At the political level, emphasis is placed
on assistance to the Monitoring and Arbitration
Committee for the effective implementation of the
provisions of the 1998 National Reconciliation Pact.
Similarly, the Office is called on to play a more active
role in the political and social dialogue with a view to
creating an atmosphere of tolerance among the players
on the political scene.

In the area of security, it is proposed that
BONUCA, with the assistance of other agencies of the
United Nations system, promote the implementation of
an effective arms-collection programme with the
support of its partners. The mandate would also include
the implementation, for the benefit of the armed forces,
a programme of education for a culture of peace and
respect for the institutions of the Republic.

In the area of civilian police, the new elements
include support for the police and gendarmerie,
training for new recruits and technical assistance to
authorities in the area of public order and crime
control.

In the area of human rights, the report calls for
judicial assistance to victims of human rights
violations; strengthening human rights education for all
sectors of society; extending these activities to the
interior of the country; and support for the efforts of
other partners aimed at strengthening the judicial
system and the rule of law.

The Secretary-General also recommends that the
Council extend BONUCA's mandate, which will expire
on 31 December 2001, for another year.
In conclusion, I wish to stress the following
points. The implementation of the revised BONUCA
mandate will naturally require a significant increase in
its resources to cover the costs of the proposed new
activities. The strengthening of the human rights unit
will allow it to undertake the extra tasks of monitoring,
investigation, training and judicial assistance made
necessary by the situation arising out of the attempted
coup. The establishment of an early-warning system
would also seem to be crucial in light of the lessons
learned from that attempt.

In his most recent report to the Council, the
Secretary-General stressed that, in the final analysis, it
is poverty that gives rise to instability in the Central
African Republic and that, to a large extent, it is the
State's financial problems that have made the economic
and political situation so precarious. The attempted
coup of 28 May exacerbated the situation to such an
extent that the Central African Republic is now almost
completely devastated. The Secretary-General calls on
all the country's partners to provide emergency
assistance commensurate with the emergency situation
in the country. He also expresses the hope that the
forthcoming meeting between the Bretton Woods
institutions and the Central African Government and
the donor meeting to follow will solidify the solidarity
of the international community with the Central
African Republic. In this connection the Security
Council might encourage bilateral and multilateral
partners to be very active at the donors meeting. Broad
participation there is all the more necessary in that the
Central African Republic will benefit from the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative in 2002, at
the earliest.

