Mr. Marzooq (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I am
honoured to join you, Mr. President, in participating
in this open debate of the Council on addressing the
impacts of climate-related disasters on international
peace and security. This vital issue is at the heart of the
international community's concerns, and I commend the
Dominican Republic for having convened this debate.

We believe that the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change is the optimal United
Nations forum for discussion of such issues. However,
we are concerned at the threats posed by climate
change and believe that as this is a shared international
responsibility, we must take the preventive measures
necessary to avert such disasters and threats at all
levels, which pose a challenge for the United Nations.

We believe that climate change can adversely affect
the three pillars of the United Nations. The increasing
temperatures at the Earth's surface pose a direct and
concrete threat to our survival and would exacerbate
other threats and potential disasters. These threats
are more complicated in certain regions of the world,
including in the Middle East, as they stand in the way
of the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals
in our countries.

Lack of rainfall and the unsustainable use of
water sources lead to water scarcity and to further
unsustainable use of resources, thus increasing the
chances of migration and displacement. Everyone
knows the causes of migration that ends in death.

The great rivers in my country are subject to
pressure as a result of the excessive use of and control
over common water resources, in the absence of
effective conventions or regional frameworks for using
water in a fair and reasonable way. There is a lack of
respect for the provisions of international law that
would preserve the rights of the countries that share
such water resources.

The environmental deterioration of the Iraqi
delta on the Arabian Sea is a clear example of the
transformation of an ecological freshwater system
rich in biodiversity and abundant in palm trees into a
seawater system as a result of the shrinking of other
water resources, especially freshwater resources. We
would also note the destructive effects of terrorism on
civilian and water infrastructure. In addition, instability
and fragile socioeconomic factors have led to the spread
of extremism and radicalism. That is why we need to
establish adaptation measures as part of our approach
to addressing economic, political and social problems.
We commend the support provided by the
international community to Iraq, which has helped us
eliminate terrorism from our country. At the same time,
we call for respect for our water rights, especially on the
Tigris and the Euphrates rivers, in order to contribute to
the maintenance of peace, security and stability.

In closing, I would note that climate change is a
global phenomenon that transcends political borders.
We therefore need regional and inclusive approaches
that are based on international law and diplomatic
initiatives to address problems between countries that
share water resources. Such approaches would help
us defuse any climate-related tensions and threats,
eliminate terrorism and expedite reconstruction of
the infrastructure, as well as promote adaptation
capacity and contribute to the sustainable use of natural
resources as a prelude to achieving the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

