Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Thank you very
much, Sir, for convening this meeting and for
organizing the side event of 30 June as a very good
preparation for this open debate.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends on
Children and Armed Conflict and would like to add a
number of comments in our national capacity.

At the outset, we commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and
her dedicated staff for their excellent work on this
topic.

We are alarmed by UNESCO's report entitled
"Education under Attack", which reports recurrent
attacks on students, teaching staff and institutions in
situations of armed conflict around the world. The
Secretary-General's report (S/2011/250) also
documents increasing attacks on schools, which are
highlighted in 14 out of the 22 country situations
covered by the report and perpetrated by State and
non-State actors. In almost all circumstances, attacks
on schools violate international humanitarian law, and
they may constitute war crimes or crimes against
humanity as defined in customary international law.

According to the Rome Statute, intentionally
directing attacks against buildings dedicated to
education - provided they are not military
objectives - is a war crime. We are therefore deeply
concerned by reports of the widespread dual use of
school buildings as both teaching facilities and military
sites and urge all parties to conflicts to refrain from
such use of these institutions.

Using school buildings for military purposes may
also violate children's fundamental right to education,
a right that is enshrined in key international human
rights treaties and is non-derogable during times of
armed conflict. We commend the Council for taking
concrete action on this important issue through the
adoption of resolution 1998 (2011) today.

Parties to conflict that attack schools and
hospitals in contravention of applicable international
law will now also trigger the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. This is an important step in the right
direction. We also believe, however, that equal weight
must be given to all six grave violations of children's
rights in various conflicts. Only with difficulty can
differential treatment be squared with the universality
and interdependence of human rights and the principles
of international humanitarian law.

We are deeply worried about reports of increased
recruitment and use of children in various armed
conflicts. To respond to such incidents in due time, the
Working Group should make better use of all its
available tools, including emergency meetings and
field visits. We welcome the initiative of your
delegation, Sir, as Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, to conduct more frequent
field visits, and we are disappointed that other Council
members have shown little enthusiasm for this
approach. Field visits can send important signals to
affected populations and to political and military
leaders, and we hope that in the future the Working
Group will make more effective use of this important
tool.

Sixteen parties to conflicts have been listed in the
annexes of the reports of the Secretary-General for
more than five years for having committed serious
violations of the rights of children in armed conflict.
Those persistent violators must be subject to the
Council's strong and urgent attention and action.
Measures taken by the Working Group should be
complemented by effective enforcement measures such
as sanctions, including arms embargos, bans on
military assistance and the imposition of travel
restrictions.

We thus call on the Security Council to consider
taking such measures when establishing or renewing
the mandate of relevant sanctions committees, as
agreed in the Council's presidential statement of June
2010 (S/PRST/2010/10). Where no designated
sanctions committee is in place, the Council should
consider the use of a thematic sanctions committee.
Furthermore, it should bear in mind the option of
referring situations to relevant national and
international justice mechanisms, such as the
International Criminal Court, while considering the
option of having the financing of such decisions borne
by the United Nations budget.

Ultimately, the responsibility to respect the rights
of children in armed conflict rests with the parties
themselves. We call on all persistent violators to
develop and implement an action plan that may
eventually lead to their de-listing. To that end, the
States concerned should allow direct contacts between
the office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and relevant non-State actors.

