Mr. Vale de Almeida (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its 28 member States. The candidate countries of
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; countries; Bosnia
and Herzegovina, country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate; as well
as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

At the outset, let me first thank you, Mr. President,
for having taken the initiative to organize this debate on
such an important topic and for the very good concept
note (S/2016/966, annex). I would also like to thank the
representatives of the United Nations and of the African
Union (AU) who are present and who have provided
very helpful briefings.

The European Union encourages and supports
intensified cooperation in the area of security and
peacekeeping between the United Nations and the
African Union, as it has developed over the course
of the past 10 years, since the launch in 2006 of the
United Nations 10-year capacity-building programme
for the African Union. For its part, the European
Union has always defended effective multilateralism
and has focused on strengthening its cooperation with
the United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union. We have also invested
in strong triangular cooperation in order to meet the
immediate challenges as well as to develop capacities
in a global and long-term perspective. The added value
of that cooperation is clearly illustrated by the results
of our joint efforts in Somalia, Mali and the Central
African Republic, as in other parts of Africa.

Secondly, we would like to express our deep
gratitude for Africa's contribution to the difficult task
of maintaining peace, whether under Blue Helmets or
as part of a regional force. As all troop-contributing
countries know, this contribution sometimes goes hand
in hand with a tragic human cost.

We welcome the reviews conducted in 2015
on peacekeeping operations, the peacebuilding
architecture and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). We hope that the follow-up work will include
concrete measures to improve the global security
architecture, with full respect for the role of regional
organizations and the United Nations partnership with
the African Union. The European Union also promotes
the engagement of the United Nations and regional
organizations with civil society in peacebuilding,
conflict prevention and mediation.

The European Union and the African Union have
a long-standing and solid partnership in the area of
peace and security. Among the five priorities identified
at the fourth European Union-Africa Summit, held in
2014, cooperation on matters of peace and security is
by far the most important of the five identified, notably
from a financial point of view. Our ongoing political
and financial commitment to support African-led
peace operations on the continent will be reaffirmed
at the highest level at the upcoming fifth European
Union-Africa Summit, to be held in Cote d'Ivoire in
November 2017. Our continuing financial commitment
was recently illustrated by the release in August of
€50 million for the Multinational Joint Task Force
against Boko Haram, and in the €178 million for
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
Consultations are under way in Brussels on the
next - the sixteenth * package for AMISOM, which
will be used to finance its troops' salaries through
March 2017.

The European Union has contributed more than
€2 billion to the African Union through the the African
Peace Facility (APF) since it was established, in
2004. Most of those resources support African peace
operations, which have played a fundamental role in
maintaining peace and stability in the continent. The
European Union's broad, sustainable financial support
for peace and security in Africa goes far beyond
that instrument, to include national and regional
cooperation by our member States. However, financial
resources for the APF are strongly solicited. For the
African Union Mission in Somalia alone, by the end
of 2015 the European Union had contributed more than
€l billion. At this rate, the APF will soon be unable to
continue to support AMISOM. and to respond to any
emerging priorities.

(spoke in English)

Increasingly, there is widespread recognition that
Africa and the European Union need to work together
against the menace ofterrorism, which is not constrained
by borders. Terrorism is an existential threat for several
African countries, and it needs to be opposed through
increased international cooperation. This asymmetrical
danger requires improved approaches, necessitating
a long-term security response and long-term troop
deployments, which increasingly need sustainable

financing - something that is difficult to achieve
solely through the African Peace Facility
The European Union welcomed the important
decision taken by the African Union Summit in Kigali,
held in July, to finance the African Union Peace Fund
by introducing a levy of 0.2 per cent on eligible imports
that would automatically flow to the African Union.
The mobilization of additional African resources is a
sign of strong ambition and ownership by the continent.
The African Union Finance Ministers meeting in Addis
Ababa in September took some important steps towards
the implementation of the groundbreaking decision at
the AU Summit in Kigali. We look forward to the official
launch of the fund, expected during the forthcoming
AU Summit in January 2017. In that context, I would
like to salute Mr. Kaberuka's chairmanship and the
good work we are developing with him.

The EU is also following with interest the
outcome of the the African Union Political and
Security Committee retreat held in Lusaka from 7 to
10 November, which was presented with an ambitious
yet practicable master road map as a milestone towards
achieving the aspirations of Africans for the continent
they want, as elaborated in Agenda 2063, in particular
aspiration 4, for a peaceful and secure Africa.

There is recognition within the European Union
of the need to reorient our financial support towards
more practical, physical capacities such as logistics and
deployment. The bulk of APF funding to date has gone
to stipends for African troops serving in peace support
operations, paid to their Governments Via the African
Union. While that funding remains necessary, and
important in some cases, better complementarity and
synergy between APF support and African Peace and
Security Architecture is needed. For that reason, future
APF support will be geared more towards prevention
and mediation, and its support to peace operations will
move partially away from stipend-oriented funding - in
favour of the strengthening of operational capacities
such as logistics, medical support, strategic lift and
communication and information systems - with the
objective of creating sustainable African capabilities to
address present and future peace challenges.

Following a request from the African Union, we
have agreed to mobilize funding for the third phase of
the African Peace and Security Architecture support
programme for the period 1 January 2016 to 31 December
2018, in an amount of nearly €30 million. The third
phase of the support programme will follow the road
map structure of the Peace and Security Architecture,
while building on the support provided since 2011, and
will contribute to further strengthening the capacities of
the African Union Commission, the regional economic
communities - the Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa, the East African Community, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Southern African Development Community - and two
regional mechanisms - the North African Regional
Capacity and the Eastern Africa Standby Force - to
fulfil their respective mandates under the African Peace
and Security Architecture.

The road map also maps out a shared way forward
on the results to be achieved by all stakeholders under
the African Peace and Security Architecture to reduce
existing capacity gaps in the operationalization of
the Architecture. It clearly identifies measurable,
specific objectives and outputs to be achieved to that
end in each of its priority areas. In the same vein, the
strategic headquarters in Addis Ababa need to be fully
operationalized, which is one of the goals of the current
support programme for the African Peace and Security
Architecture. The EU stands ready to provide technical
expertise, technologies and training to achieve that
very important goal.

In conclusion, we remain strongly committed
to an ever-stronger partnership with the AU, as
well as increased triangular EU-United Nations-AU
cooperation, in order to fully achieve the establishment
of lasting African peace and security capacities, in full
respect of African ownership.

