Mr. Ly (Mauritania) (spoke in French): I should
like, before dealing with the item on the agenda
today 4 the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question - to congratulate you, Sir, on
behalf of my delegation, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. I am sure that your experience and personal
qualities will help to enhance and enlighten our debate.

I should also like to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of China, Ambassador Wang Yingfan,
for his work as President of the Security Council in the
month of July.

My delegation believes that no just and lasting
peace can be achieved in the Middle East region,
including occupied Palestine, as long as violence
persists and remains a daily fact of life. My delegation
deplores and condemns the recent serious
developments in the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, which have led to the illegal and
unacceptable occupation of Orient House, as well as
other buildings, in which several headquarters of
Palestinian institutions are located, in East Jerusalem,
Jenin and, more recently, Khan Younis. This deplorable
situation has, of course, led to a considerable loss of
life, and contravenes the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War of 1949.

In the light of this continuing escalation of
violence, the international community is required, now
more than ever, to play a more positive role in order to
restore peace and security to this region, which has
suffered so much. This Council bears the principal
responsibility for ensuring international peace and
security under the Charter. That is why the dispatch, as
soon as possible, of international observers to provide
protection and security to the Palestinian civilian
population has became an absolute necessity. Only the
Security Council, which you represent here, bears
responsibility for taking this step.

We welcome the recommendations contained in
the Mitchell report, which the international community
broadly supports. The implementation of those
recommendations could help to restore an appropriate
framework for a return to the negotiating table in order
to complete work on agreements already concluded
between the parties in Madrid, Oslo and Sharm el-
Sheikh.

Despite the setbacks and obstacles on the path
towards the settlement of the Palestinian question, my
delegation remains convinced that peace is still
attainable. That is why we reaffirm our commitment to
the peace process that began in Madrid.

In conclusion, I should like to say that only
international legality and legitimacy can ultimately
prevail. We believe that relevant Security Council
resolutions - 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) - as well as
the principle of land for peace, remain the only basis
for a final resolution of the Palestinian question. This
should lead to the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

