Mr. Oshima (Japan): It is almost a month since
the hostilities started in the Middle East, engulfing
Lebanon and Israel. The fighting has caused an
enormous loss of civilian life, heartrending bloodshed
and the destruction of infrastructure on both sides. The
suffering of people in Lebanon and Israel increases
every day that the hostilities continue, and the threat to
peace and security in that vital region becomes even
greater as the fighting threatens to escalate. Japan
therefore strongly welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 1701 (2006) calling for a full and
immediate cessation of hostilities by the parties in
conflict and for Israel and Lebanon to support a
permanent ceasefire and a long-term solution, based on
a set of negotiated principles and elements.

We wish to thank the sponsors, in particular
France and the United States, for their great efforts in
producing this outcome over weeks of hard
negotiations involving all the relevant parties under
extremely difficult circumstances - especially, in the
Council, Ambassador John Bolton of the United States
and Ambassador de La Sabliere of France.

The package solution contained in the resolution,
being a child of political compromise reached through
arduous diplomatic exchanges, can satisfy no party
100 per cent. But it does represent a significant step
forward, providing a viable framework for an
immediate ceasefire and the avoidance of further
civilian casualties and destruction, which the
international community has been calling for since the
onset of the crisis, and for a sustainable solution to the
complex problems that have beset the region of
southern Lebanon for a long time - if it is backed up
with the necessary political will and commitment of all
the parties concerned and supported by the
international community. In other words, the faithful
and complete implementation of the resolution is now
of vital importance, and we call on the Governments of
Lebanon and Israel and all the concerned parties, based
on the resolution, to bring about an immediate
ceasefire, to use the utmost restraint, to start
implementing the agreed political framework and to
exert the maximum effort to restore calm and stability
in the region.

We are also deeply concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation, particularly in Lebanon. It is
imperative to create the necessary environment for
Lebanon, with support from the international
community, to address the problems of internally
displaced persons in their hundreds and thousands, and
of refugees in the neighbouring countries, as well as
the rehabilitation of the country at the earliest possible
date. Here, I pay tribute to all the humanitarian
organizations and workers and all observers and troops
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon for
their perseverance and dedication.

We regret that it took such a long time for the
Council to act in the discharge of its responsibility on
this matter. Noting the delay in action, however, does
not diminish our appreciation of the sponsors. The
delay was not due to any lack of will or effort on their
part, or on the part of any member of the Council.

Be that as it may, having come all the way to this
critical juncture in dealing with the issue at hand, and
recognizing the need for the Security Council to
continue to act actively and in unity, Japan will
continue to work and cooperate closely with the other
members of the Council and the concerned countries to
ensure the effective implementation of the resolution.

Finally, while we need to deal with the Israel-
Lebanon conflict with all due attention and speed, we
must not forget to deal with the other situations in the
Middle East, in particular the Palestinian problem and
the increasingly dire humanitarian plight of the
Palestinian people.

In conclusion, Japan calls for a broad-based,
prompt international contribution and cooperation to
achieve the full implementation of the resolution. I
wish to state that Japan, for its part, will continue to
contribute actively to the efforts to restore peace and to
promote medium- and long-term stability and
reconstruction in Lebanon and the region as a whole.

