Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing and for his recent
work with Egypt to secure a renewed ceasefire between
Israel and Hamas. It is essential that the ceasefire be
respected and maintained by all sides. The people of
Israel and Gaza deserve peace and security.

The escalation seen at the Gaza perimeter last
Friday, including the killing of an Israel Defence
Forces soldier, is deeply concerning. Hamas must cease
all acts of violence and terror and decide whether it is
prepared to demonstrate its commitment to achieving
peace and ending this conflict. The most recent
escalation and exchange of rockets into southern Israel
and the economic and kinetic response by the Israelis
are also both concerning. We urge the parties to take
immediate steps to reverse the current negative trends
on the ground and commence renewed and meaningful
peace negotiations.

Now more than ever, we urgently need a political
process that delivers a two-State solution. As Council
members, we must seize the opportunity presented
by the prospect of a United States plan. The United
Kingdom stands ready to support and contribute to all
credible efforts to restart the peace process. We urge
others to do the same. The United Kingdom position
on the peace process is unchanged. We support a
negotiated settlement leading to a safe and secure Israel
living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian
Statem, with Jerusalem as a shared capital.

Every Israeli and Palestinian has the right to live
in peace and security. No one wants to see a return
to conflict, which will inevitably have devastating
consequences. We call on the parties to take the
following urgent actions to avoid escalating the conflict.
First, Hamas must bring an immediate and permanent
end to rocket fire and the sending of incendiary devices
into Israel. Secondly, Israel must reverse its punitive
measures and work with the international community to
ease conditions in Gaza, including opening movement
and access and reducing economic restrictions. Thirdly,
the Palestinian Authority must resume salary payments
and work to restore its presence in Gaza.

The international community also has responsibilities,
including the need to rally around Special Coordinator
Mladenov's plans to improve the situation in Gaza and in
supporting Egyptian efforts on political reconciliation
and longer-term arrangements for calm in Gaza.

The risk of tensions boiling over into a full-blown
conflict are very real and very dangerous. Every effort
must be made to avoid civilian casualties. Nobody
around this table wants to see another Gaza conflict. At
such a highly sensitive time, we urge calm and restraint.
We appreciate Egyptian efforts in calming tensions,
and we urge Egypt to do more by improving movement
and access through the Rafah crossing.

We are also deeply concerned by continued
demolition of Palestinian property by the Israeli
authorities. Due to severe planning restrictions, many
Palestinians have no option but to build without
permission. That needs to change. Demolitions and
evictions of Palestinians from their homes cause
unnecessary suffering to ordinary Palestinians and in
all but the most exceptional of cases are contrary to
international humanitarian law.

The village of Khan Al-Ahmar is a case in point,
an example that has also been raised this morning by
the French and Dutch ambassadors. We continue to
urge Israel to abandon demolition plans entirely and
instead provide a transparent route to construction
for Palestinians in Area C. Not only could demolition
constitute forcible transfer, it will also pave the way
for settlement building in E-l. In accordance with our
long-standing policy, we would have to condemn such
a move. Such action would strike a major blow to the
prospects for a two-State solution and make it difficult
to believe that Israel wants progress towards peace.

Finally, I want to reiterate that the United Kingdom
remains firmly committed to supporting the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and Palestinian
refugees across the Middle East. The United Kingdom
welcomes the important contributions that Member
States are providing to UNRWA. However, the Agency's
deficit remains at $217 million, meaning it will shortly
have to make a decision about whether to open schools
in September. The increased demand for UNRWA's
services and growing instability across the region
make support for UNRWA even more important. It is
clear that UNRWA needs a broader pool of financial
support from donors to achieve sufficient, assured and
predictable financing. It is also clear that UNRWA
needs to continue to promote realistic and technical
cost-saving reforms.

The United Kingdom continues to support UNRWA
and remains one of the top five donors. We have
delivered our pledge of $37.5 million and have brought
forward $13.5 million to help meet the urgent needs of
Palestinian refugees. We encourage members of the
Council to consider what more they can do to support
Palestinian refugees and alleviate the current financial
pressure facing UNRWA.

