Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I want to
thank Special Representative Arnault for his briefing
and welcome the participation of Vice-President Naranjo
Trujillo. With regard to our Colombian friends, I want
to take a moment to reflect on the hard-won opportunity
for a lasting peace that they have achieved, which
seemed like an impossible dream at times, as President
Santos Calderon has said. Through their tireless efforts
to address justice and reparations issues in their peace
agreement with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP), Colombia
is truly an example to the world. They should be proud
of what they have done, and we look forward to what
they will continue to achieve.

The Colombian Government is beginning to
extend its presence and provide services in areas that
have known conflict for decades. The United States
applauds the Colombian Government's efforts to
build roads, hospitals, police stations and schools in
underserved rural and former conflict areas. Providing
security, infrastructure and public services is critical
to sustaining peace in Colombia. That has never been
more important than it is now, especially during this
time of transition and in the light of the recent killings
of human rights defenders and community leaders. We
commend the decision of President Santos Calderon and
President-elect Duque, as well as key State institutions
and political parties, to sign a national pact against
the violence. Protecting the fundamental freedoms
of all Colombian citizens, including social leaders,
depends on strengthening the rule of law. Particularly
important are successful prosecutions of those who
seek to silence the voices of human rights advocates
and community leaders.

The United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia has been vital to this process, and we
encourage Colombia to continue its important
partnership with the Mission to support security as
well as reintegration efforts for ex-combatants. We
trust that the Government will continue the momentum
established by the historic Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
and consolidate security gains that will bring about
a just and lasting peace for all Colombians. Ensuring
meaningful justice and accountability for perpetrators
of serious crimes committed during many years of
armed conflict is vital to reconciliation, and we believe
that the transitional justice processes outlined in the
agreement provide the opportunity to deliver justice
for victims.

At the same time, the successful implementation
of the peace accord is inextricably linked to our joint
efforts to dismantle criminal organizations and curtail
narcotrafficking. In our own country, President Trump
has made substance abuse prevention a priority, and
we are devoting resources to reducing the demand
for cocaine. In Colombia, the United States continues
to work with authorities to cut coca cultivation and
cocaine production by half by the end of 2023. Together
we need to accelerate our counter-narcotics efforts
and deliver sustainable results to the people of both
countries through increased resources, the effective
use of all available tools and an integrated whole-of-
Government approach.

Colombians are not alone in the fight. The United
States will continue to support them, including through
a unique, comprehensive strategy to reduce coca
cultivation, known as Antioquia libre de coca. Through
coordinated efforts of the Colombian police and
army, local and national Governments and the private
sector, the plan is already delivering infrastructure
and providing licit economic opportunities for local
communities, while pushing coca growers to transition
to licit crops. Importantly, owing in part to those efforts,
the United States Government's 2017 coca cultivation
estimates showed a 20 per cent decrease in the region
being addressed for the first time in five years, thereby
bucking a national trend. Colombia continues to
establish the conditions for extended peace, and while
challenges remain, the Government has shown its
strength as a regional leader, especially by providing
shelter and services to nearly 1 million Venezuelans
fleeing crisis in their own country.

We are proud to have worked to support Colombia's
response to the crisis, and we remain committed to
continuing our engagement with Colombia to provide
additional humanitarian support as needed. The people
of Colombia know better than most that peace is
precious but fragile. We stand with them in working to
preserve that peace and build a strong and prosperous
future for generations to come.

