Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
think the Under-Secretary-General's briefing and the
discussion are interesting because they show that,
while there are some differences and some new
nuances in approach, the fundamental question that is
still before us is whether unresolved issues in Kosovo
and in the region will be solved or attempted to be
solved through the use of violence or through the use
of a political process in implementation of resolution
1244 (1999). I think that the briefing we had today
shows that real progress is being made in the latter,
political direction. We are encouraged by that and think
that this Council and everybody else who can needs to
encourage and support the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force (KF OR) in this very difficult effort.

Violence remains the single greatest threat to
progress in the region. There is a political path laid out,
but it is a difficult one. We all know that and we should
be under no illusions about it. We strongly support new
measures that UNMIK is in the process of developing
against extremist activities and organized crime, and
hope that they will be brought into being in the near
future.

We have been pressing key Albanian leaders, in
Kosovo and outside Kosovo, to join the international
community in urging restraint. We believe strongly that
this is the only way forward. It is essential for KFOR
and UNMIK to have that kind of political support from
the Albanian communities if they are to have any hope
of maintaining stability and security in the region.
They must move beyond words to deeds, to help halt
extremism inside and outside Kosovo.

In our view, the question of elections is central to
that effort. I think the discussion has been interesting
on that point, and Ambassador Shen asked some
interesting questions that I am anxious to hear the
answers to. But, again, from our point of view,
elections serve a key function in that process. That is
why we support holding elections as soon as possible.
Elections will help to set a foundation, answer the
questions and solidify the discussion over whether the
future of the region lies in a political process or though
continued violence. In our view, not holding elections
leaves open the perspectives for violence.

We are very gratified to hear that UNMIK is
making real progress towards establishing the legal
framework, and we encourage them to press ahead. I
noted with gratification the Under-Secretary-General's
observation that he believes elections will be held this
year. We have indications that that is also becoming
more accepted in the region. We welcome that. We note
that significant progress is being made in encouraging
all the peoples of Kosovo to participate in the
development of the framework. That is another
significant element of progress. We welcome that
Belgrade appears ready to encourage Kosovo's Serbs to
participate. That is also a significant step forward.

It has not been part of the discussion but, as the
Council has previously discussed the issue, I did want
to make mention of the matter of depleted uranium in
the area. We would like to note that recent studies in
Kosovo by the World Health Organization and the
United Nations Environment Programme have found
that there is no demonstrable link between exposure to
depleted uranium and leukaemia or other kinds of
cancers in humans. Those findings coincide with those
of similar studies conducted by the United States.
