Mr. McNee (Canada): I have the honour today to
speak on behalf of Canada, Australia and New Zealand
(CANZ). The CANZ delegations welcome this open
debate on natural resources and conflict. We
congratulate Belgium on taking this valuable initiative
and look forward to continued Belgian leadership on
this issue in the Council.
After years of case-by-case, resource-by-resource
activity by the Council, today's debate provides a
timely opportunity for the Council to consider a more
comprehensive approach to its work in this area. While
the challenges are complex and multidimensional,
there is no doubt that the Security Council has an
important role to play both in breaking the link
between natural resource exploitation and the fuelling
of armed conflicts and in promoting effective natural
resource management in fragile States and post-conflict
peacebuilding situations.

Today's debate is also an opportunity to highlight
the potential for effective management of natural
resources to contribute to conflict prevention and to
international peace and security. Natural resource
revenues can be a force for sustained economic growth,
social development, and stability.

Sadly, though, recent history has demonstrated
that the often illicit extraction of natural resources has
too frequently led to, deepened and prolonged conflicts
by providing belligerents with both the incentive and
the means to perpetuate campaigns of violence.
Facilitated by economic globalization and access to
international markets, many warring parties have
turned to the predatory exploitation of lucrative natural
resources such as timber, precious minerals and
gemstones. Conflicts can develop a self-financing
nature, with the revenues generated from the trade in
conflict resources helping to procure weapons and
military materiel, hire mercenaries, line the pockets of
corrupt warlords and Government officials and buy the
support of neighbouring regimes.

Action by the Council on the often illicit
exploitation of resources has focused largely on the
role of diamonds, with sanctions being imposed in four
separate cases: Angola, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Cote
d'Ivoire. But we should not forget the other resources
that have been the subject of the Council's attention,
from support for a moratorium on log exports during
the Cambodian civil war to the ban imposed on timber
exports on Liberia during Charles Taylor's rule. And
reports from the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of Congo have
identified a series of other resources, such as gold and
coltan, as resources directly linked to instability in that
volatile region.
Effective action to address the peace and security
challenges that can arise from the exploitation of
natural resources must necessarily be well coordinated
with broader efforts related to conflict prevention,
peacebuilding, resources governance and economic
development. Building on the Council's successful
cooperation with the Kimberley Process, stronger links
could be forged within the United Nations system -
including, as others have argued today, with the
Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations
Development Programme - the international financial
institutions and international initiatives such as the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
There is a clear role here as well for the private sector,
particularly through engagement with initiatives such
as the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human
Rights, the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development Risk Awareness Tool for
Multinational Enterprises in Weak Governance Zones,
the Equator Principles and the International Financial
Corporation Performance Standards.

While coordination with broader international
efforts is indispensable, much of what needs to be done
lies squarely within the mandate of the Security
Council, including the imposition and monitoring of
targeted sanctions regimes and the integration of
natural resource issues into peacekeeping mandates and
post-conflict peacebuilding strategies.

(spoke in French)

Targeted sanctions have been used in multiple
contexts to address the link between resources and
conflict. These mechanisms have been used to prevent
the trade in a specific conflict resource, block the
exchange of these resources for weapons, and disrupt
the trade in conflict resources through asset freezes and
travel bans. Experience has shown however that the
effectiveness of sanctions depends both on systematic
monitoring by panels of experts and thorough
implementation within national jurisdictions.

United Nations missions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire have
been directly involved in monitoring and securing
sources of resources that have been linked to conflict
and instability. Building on these experiences, future
operations should be planned and deployed with an
understanding of the nature and implications of the
distribution of natural resources in their areas of
operation.

The CANZ delegations strongly encourage the
members of the Security Council to undertake an
in-depth examination of the intersection between the
exploitation of natural resources and the persistence,
and in some cases intensification, of armed conflicts.
We know that natural resources play a complex role in
a number of contemporary civil wars. These issues
have recurred in Council deliberations and will
continue to do so.

In order to guarantee the maintenance of
international peace and security, it remains essential
that we take duly into account the unique role that the
Security Council is called upon to play and the
possibility of collaboration with other organizations
and initiatives. Today's discussion is an important first
step in that direction.

