Mr. Petersen (Denmark): Denmark associates
itself with the statement made on behalf of the European
Union.

Denmark strongly welcome's today's debate. The
presidency's initiative to celebrate the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of the resolution 1540 (20040) and to
hold an open debate on the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) is most pertinent. The
Proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery is one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security in
the twenty-first century.

Since its adoption, in 2004, the resolution has
been a vital instrument in our efforts to prevent WMD
proliferation, blackmail and terrorism. The catastrophic
consequences that would ensue if we were to fail in
those efforts would be of a global and cross-sectorial
scale, with damage to the environment, socioeconomic
development and health for generations to come.

We must continue to work for the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons within the framework of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

We are deeply concerned that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea has withdrawn from
the Treaty and continues down its dangerous and
irrational path of ballistic missile launches, nuclear
tests and nuclear-weapon material production, in
flagrant violation of its international obligations. The
international community must continue to make clear
that this behaviour is not acceptable and will have
consequences.

With regard to Iran's nuclear programme we share
the hope and optimism brought about by the joint plan of
action agreed between the E3+3 and Iran in November.
That is an important first step, but the focus must
continue to be on achieving a comprehensive, long-
term settlement that restores international confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of the programme
and the absence of any military dimensions. Denmark
continues to support the international community's
efforts in that regard and has this year donated €270.000
in support of the IAEA's work to monitor and verify the
implementation of the joint plan of action.

The risk that nuclear materials could fall into the
hands of terrorists or other none-State actors should be
taken most seriously. In the Nuclear Security Summit,
process we have committed ourselves to securing
nuclear installations and materials to ensure that nuclear
terrorism never happens. We believe that the IAEA
plays a central role that should be enhanced, and we
have this year pledged an additional €1.1 million to the
Agency's Nuclear Security Fund to further strengthen
efforts in developing countries.

There are other WMD threats than nuclear
proliferation. The identification and destruction of
Syria's chemical weapons remain a vital task for the
international community. Denmark is leading the task
group in charge of the maritime transportation of the
declared chemical substances out of Syria for their
destruction. Less than 10 per cent of the declared
substances now remain inside Syria. However, in order
to finish thejob, it is vital that the remaining substances
be transported out of Syria without further delay. We
call for full cooperation from all parties, not least the
Syrian regime.

As the world's attention focuses on nuclear and
chemical weapons, we should not forget the threat
from the proliferation of biological weapons either - a
weapon much easier to acquire than, for example, nuclear
weapons. In the hands of actors with malicious intent,
such weapons could cause unimaginable devastation.
They are rightfully referred to as weapons of mass
destruction on a par with the two other categories. We
have a joint obligation to ensure that such a situation
never arises. The Secretary General's mechanism to
investigate allegations of the use of biological weapons
should be strengthened, and biosecurity awareness
should be raised around the world. With that in mind,
Denmark will increase its efforts to contribute to
international biosecurity. A pilot project is about to start
that will aim to transfer Danish biosecurity experiences
and best practices to partners in East Africa.

Non-proliferation is an ongoing effort on all levels,
from a rural veterinary laboratory in a developing
country to the NPT Review Conference in New York
next year. Resolution 1540 (2004) has helped us to
focus our attention and pool our commitments. It is
appropriate to celebrate its tenth anniversary while
underlining that the work today is just as relevant as
in 2004.

