Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Let me welcome and
thank the High Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for
his update on developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina
since his last briefing (see S/PV.6421).

We are pleased that the security situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has remained calm. We note
with satisfaction the positive developments, including
the implementation of the decision to abolish short-
term visa requirements for Bosnia and Herzegovina
citizens holding biometric passports and the improved
cooperation among the members of the Presidency. We
welcome the further progress on rule of law issues, as
well as improved relations with the country's
neighbours.

In spite of such improvements, we note that
several difficult challenges remain, including the
persisting climate of distrust among the political
leaders and the lack of political will in implementing
the Dayton Peace Agreement. Those misgivings are
responsible for the limited progress on key reforms
required for Euro-Atlantic integration and the
completion of the five objectives and two conditions
for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. We encourage political leaders to
commit to the necessary reforms and the entire
international community to support the country's
efforts in that regard.

There is an urgent need for political leaders to
refrain from nationalistic and anti-Dayton rhetoric,
surmount their differences and demonstrate their
resolve to address those differences through dialogue.
It is also essential to promote national reconciliation
and engender political trust, and for political leaders to
be doggedly determined to remain united as a single
entity, despite all odds.

We appreciate the valuable work of the High
Representative and support his efforts to promote the
entry of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the European
Union and to facilitate the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement.

We commend the role of the European Union
Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in collaboration with
the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
ensuring a safe and secure environment in the country.
We welcome the contribution of regional and
international partners in support of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's efforts to sustain peace, stability and
economic progress in the country. We are convinced
that, with diligence and the necessary support of the
international community, including this Council,
Bosnia and Herzegovina will realize the vision of a
stable, peaceful and prosperous country.

Finally, only political will to make concerted
efforts at flexibility, consultative dialogue and respect
for the various commitments made will ensure the
sustainability of the progress built over the past few
years.

