Mr. Mantovani (Italy): First of all, let me
express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, as well as
to the other Chairs of the Security Council subsidiary
bodies, Ambassador Grauls and Ambassador Jurica, for
today's briefings and for their ongoing contribution to
common action against international terrorism.

Italy aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of France on behalf of the European
Union and will confine its remarks to the following
points.
With regard to the 1267 Committee, limited
sanctions which we should design as temporary
measures supplied by the Security Council are still
effective and politically important. In our view, the
consolidated list is a living document that should be
constantly updated to address the ever-present threat of
Al-Qaida and the Taliban. Resolution 1822 (2008) is an
important step in the evolution of targeted sanctions
into a more transparent system based on clear and fair
procedures. The Committee is now working on
implementation guidelines that should reflect those
principles and better reconcile the demands for security
with respect for human rights. Otherwise, the long-
term credibility and sustainability of the entire system
will be jeopardized.

Bearing that in mind, in the upcoming weeks, the
1267 Committee will be called upon to confirm the
commitment to openness, effectiveness and speed it
has demonstrated so far. In that endeavour, the
Committee can rely on the professionalism of the
Monitoring Team, to which we should express our
utmost gratitude for its significant contribution to our
work.

Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee's
activities, the Security Council's renewal of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) mandate, confirming its main tasks and
responsibilities while endorsing an organizational plan,
lays the groundwork for more efficient action. To that
end, Italy appreciates the efforts made by Executive
Director Smith to improve dialogue with Member
States. The preliminary implementation assessments
and the global survey of implementation are new tools
to enhance that dialogue and to make it more consistent
and productive. We encourage the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the CTED to continue working with
regional and external organizations, such as the
Counter-Terrorism Action Group of the Group of Eight
(G8). Italy confirms its commitment to strengthening
that cooperation during its G8 presidency next year.

The recent biannual report on the Committee's
activities clearly show that, while important progress
has been made, further efforts are required to fully
implement resolution 1540 (2004), in particular in the
areas of biotechnology, illicit brokering and the
financing of proliferation. Consistent with the new
approach envisaged in resolution 1810 (2008), we
welcome the Committee's recent work in outreach and
international assistance to promote compliance with
the resolution 1540 (2004). In that context, I wish to
recall the seminar organized in Rome in October by the
Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Istituto
Affari Internazionali on coordinating regional and
global efforts to combat the terrorist of weapons of
mass destruction.

Italy also supports sharing relevant experience
and lessons learned with the membership and
enhancing cooperation between the 1540, Al-Qaida and
Counter-Terrorism Committees. We look forward to the
adoption of the 1540 Committee's programme of work
and to the comprehensive review of the implementation
status of resolution 1540 (2004) due 31 January 2009.

Let me conclude with a few words about the
review of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
adopted in September. Member States have the
responsibility to continue on that track to achieve
progress in all areas of that broad plan of action. We
welcome the Task Force's efforts thus far to achieve
specific goals in many important areas, and we
appreciate the contribution that both the Monitoring
Team and the CTED have provided. Italy believes that
these joint efforts should continue in order to take
every opportunity to strengthen this cooperation.

