Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I especially want to thank
Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous; Lieutenant
General Dos Santos Cruz, Force Commander of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; Major
General Leonard Ngondi, Force Commander of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia; and Major General
Muhammad Asi, Force Commander of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire; for their very
informative briefings and their critical leadership at
Headquarters and in the field.

I think it is very helpful to continue to have
interactive discussions such as today's on a regular
basis and to share lessons learned in order to better
prepare for the challenges ahead. I have only a few
comments and observations, as well as a few questions.

On the topic developed by the Force Commander
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia, we support
the need for in-mission assessments of predeployment
training as being critical to efficiency.

Since its decision to join United Nations
peacekeeping efforts, the Rwandan Defence Forces
(RDF) have heavily invested in different training
opportunities, especially predeployment and post-
deployment training. The RDF holds training courses
for contingent personnel prior to deployment, which
focuses on enhancing their mastery of force and
civilian protection peacekeeping policies and cross-
cutting negotiation and communication skills,
among others. Apart from generally recognized
training, predeployment training needs to encompass
mission-specific scenarios, while also taking into
account and respecting specific national military
doctrine. That being said, I would appreciate hearing
details from General Ngondi on the criteria to be
considered or used when assessing the deployment of
troops.

On the point ofinter-mission cooperation presented
by the Force Commander of the UnitedNations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire, there is no doubt that such cooperation
plays a critical role in mitigating and preventing the
escalation of conflict, by timely intervention and the
use of available resources of neighbouring missions.
However, we must bear in mind that inter-mission
cooperation is just a temporary, short-term solution that
should not replace a permanent solution.

Turning to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Council has authorized the deployment of
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), which were supposed
to be operational by July, on a trial basis. As it would
be the first use of that technology in peacekeeping
operations, the lessons learned in UAV efficiency, in
terms of implementing the Mission's mandate, should
inform future decisions on the use of drones in United
Nations-mandated missions. Bearing that in mind, I
would ask Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz, from
his experience as MONUSCO Force Commander thus
far, how optimistic he is with regard to the intended
usefulness of the drones, given the dense jungle
topography of the Democratic Republic of the Congo?
In addition, what arrangement has he put in place to
ensure that the information provided by the UAVs is
properly handled for United Nations use, particularly
when we all know that the operators are non-United
Nations personnel.

Finally, there are various credible reports
confirming the collaboration of the Forces armees de
la Republique democratique du Congo with the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, a movement
that committed genocide in Rwanda and is subject
to United Nations sanctions. How does he see this
situation impacting his mission, especially when the
national army he is supporting is closely working with
a negative group that he is mandated to neutralize and
disarm?

I will end with a question for the panel as a whole.
Given that they are commanding United Nations troops
deployed in African countries, from their perspectives,
what do they think the Security Council has not done
or is not doing enough to end the cycle of conflicts

and violence in Africa? Any particular advice to the
African members of the Council would help.

