Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Jordanian delegation for
having organized such an important debate. We are
participating here today firmly convinced of the
key role that youth have to play in the attainment of
democracy and the promotion of peace.

The world continues to View with alarm the serious
threat posed by terrorism and Violent extremism to
internationalpeace and security, the enjoyment of human
rights, the social and economic development of States,
global stability and prosperity, and ofcourse the creation
of opportunities for the development of young people.
As was reiterated at the recent Ibero-American Summit
of December 2014, the young people of today are the
best educated and skilled generation in history, yet they
face many challenges in such areas as employment,
health, mobility and participation, with none as cross-
cutting as education, the development of knowledge
and innovation. We therefore have to grapple with two
realities: first, the growth of the youth population,
particularly young people of working age, which serves
as the economic and demographic engine of our region
within the current global context; and secondly, the
development of technology, particularly information
and communications technology.

Costa Rica is honoured to have organized,
together with the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU), the World Youth Summit, held in San
Jose in August 2013, which, in its outcome document,
emphasized the fact that young people are genuinely
transforming today's world and shaping themselves as
a force for progress. The Summit also shed light on the
need to improve democracy as an essential mechanism
for guaranteeing the full participation of young people
in decision-making processes and on the need to
take action that would nurture their empowerment at
regional, national and international levels. It is therefore
urgent that we focus on fostering and enabling genuine,
free and fair access to knowledge about information
and communications technology. This will ensure that
young people can simultaneously benefit from and act
as champions of social progress, a process in which
they will not simply play the role of spectator, but in
which they can also act as producers of content with
social, political and cultural depth and impact.

The President of the Republic of Costa Rica,
Mr. Luis Guillermo Solis Rivera, has upheld an ongoing
commitment to youth, involving young people directly
in the decision-making process at the highest levels and
ensuring their full participation in Government and
political posts that are key to the holistic development
of society. Given his actions, the Secretary-General
of the ITU has extended the courtesy to our President
of appointing him Patron of Youth and Information
Technology, an appointment that will be made official
in June of this year. The purpose of this designation
is to encourage the international community, the
private sector, organized civil society and the teaching
profession to deliver skills development and access
to information and communications technology to
young people, without regard to their social reality or
environment. In this regard, Costa Rica has already
been acknowledged for its tireless participation and
involvement in issues relating to cybersecurity and the
protection of childhood in the digital age, achieving
important and innovative change in our domestic
legislation with the overall aim of protecting childhood
and youth.

Despite the educational and socioeconomic
disadvantages facing many thousands of young
people around the world, they nonetheless represent
the sector of society that has made the most progress
in areas that will be fundamental to the delivery of
change, such as access to and the sophisticated use of
information communications technology in the digital
age. Nevertheless, the inclusion or exclusion of young
people cannot be attributed simply to the so-called
digital divide, given that the use of the Internet and
wireless telecommunications networks is no guarantee
of their genuine and authentic inclusion in digital
society or in the main power networks that forge our
common identities and values. In this regard, fostering
the ability to generate content for young people is key
if we are to open the way to new options for them to
engage in social, economic, environmental, political
and cultural participation.

Information and communications technology
is a key instrument in educational processes and a
fundamental part of the way education is delivered
today as a practical tool that allows young people to be
more equitably involved in the process of sustainable
development, escape poverty and contribute to
society, genuine development, and the maintenance
and promotion of peace. In that regard, education
is undoubtedly the most valuable investment in the
development and harmony of individuals and societies,
which Governments should promote, encourage and
guarantee as a right to ensure social mobility and full
access to the exercise of other rights and in building a
culture of peace.

Costa Rica remains proud of its decision to abolish
the army in 1948. That decision is fundamentally
important to our country, having freed greater resources
to be allocated to education and the social security
system. It is the basis for enhancing and pursuing, to this
day, the building of a knowledge-based society where
young people, through information and communications
technologies, have become increasingly involved in
social power networks and able to make more informed
decisions in forging of common values and identities.

The full inclusion of young people in spaces of
genuine power is crucial in generating intergenerational
agreements that will allow our societies to adopt new
attitudes and points of View and to create new avenues
for peaceful coexistence among peoples and new forms
of dialogue and understanding that will enable us to
acknowledge one another and act as citizens of the
world that we desire to build and to preserve peace.

