The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Bangladesh, Botswana,
Brazil, Cuba, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, Egypt, Estonia, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, the United Arab
Emirates and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to
participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.

Mr. Mladenov is joining the meeting via video-
teleconference from Jerusalem.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting:
His Excellency Mr. Joao Pedro Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah
Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations; and His Excellency
Mr. Fode Seck, Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.

