Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): It is with pleasure that I
deliver this statement in my capacity as Chair of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). I would like to start
by thanking Their Excellencies the President and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso for their
initiative in calling for this important debate on drug
trafficking as a threat to international security, and the
Secretary-General for his valuable contribution to
today's debate. I would also like to thank Mr. Antonio
Maria Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, for his comprehensive
report, schedules and maps. I would like also to take
this opportunity to pay tribute to all those who have
lost their lives in the ongoing combat against drug
trafficking.

The Non-Aligned Movement recognizes the
challenge posed to the international community by the
growth in illicit cross-border and cross-regional drug
trafficking. In that context, we note with appreciation
the efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crimes aimed at providing the needed financial and
technological assistance to Member countries,
especially in Africa, to support and develop their
national capabilities and to reinforce their ability to
develop their human resources and national institutions
so as to face the devastating challenges that have
plagued our international community today, namely,
drug trafficking, corruption and transnational organized
crime in all their forms.

In a globalized world characterized by
interwoven and successive economic, political and
social changes, there is a need to address our existing
challenges in a comprehensive and integrated manner,
with the aim of maximizing our benefits and mitigating
their repercussions on our societies. The phenomenon
of globalization, coupled with continuous
technological advancements, imposes serious
challenges to our ability and efforts to combat drug
trafficking.

Also, we cannot discuss efforts to combat the
cultivation, production and trafficking of drugs without
addressing other forms of transnational organized
crime, as well as the laundering of the proceeds derived
from them. Furthermore, it is no longer sufficient to
combat illicit traditional drugs, the cultivation areas of
which have decreased globally over the past year. It is
also of paramount importance that we recognize that
technological advancements have facilitated the
development of new synthetic drugs that are deadlier,
easier to transport and smuggle, and less costly to
manufacture, resulting in an increase in the number of
centres for the global production of such toxins.

Therefore, we need to intensify international
cooperation against that new challenge in close
cooperation with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.

This was reaffirmed by the most recent
Non-Aligned Movement Summit in Sharm el-Sheikh,
which reiterated that more effective measures must be
taken to prevent, combat and eradicate the world drug
problem in all its aspects. It also acknowledged that no
single Government or organization can successfully
combat this menace alone, given that criminal
organizations linked to drug trafficking operate
collectively and employ a transboundary approach, and
are increasing their traffic routes and distribution
methods. Cooperation, coordination and committed
action by all countries and regions are therefore
essential to curb this phenomenon.

The Summit also reemphasized that the fight
against the world drug problem is a common and
shared responsibility that should be tackled in a
multilateral framework. It can be effectively dealt with
only by enhancing regional and international
cooperation in full conformity with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and other
provisions of international law, particularly respect for
the national sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States; the principle of non-interference in their
internal affairs; and the principle of equality. Such
cooperation requires increased efforts to prevent and
combat all aspects of the world drug problem,
including demand reduction, and to formulate suitable
solutions, including sustainable alternative
development programmes and strategies.

Drug traffickers are systematically taking
advantage of open borders and weak security
institutions in some regions. The past few years have
highlighted the fact that this is the case in Africa,
particularly West Africa, where several Member States
are recovering from prolonged conflicts and rebuilding
their institutions and capabilities. The explosion in
illicit drug production and trade is having a negative
effect on overall sustainable development efforts in
Africa.

The proliferation of this phenomenon is also a
threat to security on the continent, as trafficking
proceeds are either laundered through national
financial systems, deeply undermining their reputation
and crippling their development, or used to acquire
small arms and light weapons. Since these are one of
the main factors fuelling conflict, instability and
terrorism in Africa, they threaten African countries
with a slide back into conflict.

09-6381]

Furthermore, recent increases in illicit drug
consumption, especially of synthetic drugs, are having
a negative effect on African efforts - conducted in
cooperation with the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, and in collaboration
with African regional and subregional organizations
and institutions, such as the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) 4 to achieve the internationally agreed
development goals set out in the outcomes of major
United Nations conferences and summits, especially
the Millennium Development Goals.

The Non-Aligned Movement Summit at Sharm
el-Sheikh reaffirmed that trafficking in persons also
continues to pose a serious challenge to humanity and
requires a concerted international response. It urged all
States to increase their efforts to combat trafficking in
persons, by actively contributing, among other things,
to shaping a global partnership against these inhumane
crimes. Such a partnership would be aimed at
improving coordination and information exchange,
especially in protecting the rights of victims of
trafficking. The United Nations therefore needs to
develop a coherent and comprehensive approach to
addressing this crime; this can be done by a process of
consultations among Member States, launched by the
President of the General Assembly, on a global plan of
action on combating trafficking in persons, to be
adopted by the Assembly. Moreover, NAM. is
appreciative of the efforts currently being undertaken
by the Assembly in this area, and commends the
leading role that UNODC is playing in countering this
serious crime.

NAM. believes that directing full attention to the
worsening illicit drug trade in West Africa is urgent. It
is high time for the international community, in full
collaboration with the United Nations, to give its
unequivocal support to the efforts of West African
States and ECOWAS to combat this crime. Political
leaders in the region have affirmed their commitment

09-638"

to this fight by adopting the ECOWAS Political
Declaration on the Prevention of Drug Abuse, Illicit
Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime in West Africa.
ECOWAS has also begun developing structures and
adopting strategies and programmes to deal with the
multifaceted aspects of illicit drug trafficking and
production. Now it is time for the international
community to reinforce these efforts by rendering full
political, financial, and technical support to the
subregion in order to effectively and efficiently deploy
every instrument and mechanism at its disposal, and to
develop those still needed to curb the drug problem in
West Africa.

In this context, NAM. emphasizes the need to
improve the existing partnership between Africa and
the United Nations, through the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and UNODC. This must
be done in a comprehensive and integrated manner,
building on accumulated experiences and lessons
learned, and in full cooperation with African regional
organizations and the African Institute for the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, as
well as other entities.

The success of peacebuilding efforts in Africa,
particularly West Africa, also remains dependent on the
level of support extended by the United Nations to
African countries and regional structures, aimed at
reinforcing national and regional institutions, in order
to promptly and effectively implement various action
plans and strategies for confronting transnational
crimes and facing challenges to sustainable
development.

