Mr. Suan (Myanmar): I would like to congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and for organizing today's important debate on upholding the Charter of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security. The debate is most timely and pertinent under the present circumstances of growing global security challenges and the increasing threat to multilateralism. Myanmar joined the United Nations in 1948 as a newly independent country, believing in the purposes and principles of the Charter, with high hopes and the determination to build a new nation of peace and security, prosperity and equality in the family of nations, out of the ravages of war. Throughout the years, Myanmar has always fulfilled its international obligations under the Charter of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security, as a responsible member of the Organization. Seventy-five years after its adoption, the Charter remains valid, as the most important and universally accepted international legal instrument to guide, promote and maintain international peace and security and to protect humankind from another catastrophic world war. Today, the world continues to face serious traditional and non-traditional security challenges that demand concerted global efforts. Present and emerging global issues, such as growing geopolitical contentions, international terrorism, transboundary crimes, localized armed conflicts associated with ethno-nationalism and the massive outflow of refugees, are the new security challenges we are encountering today at an unprecedented scale. Against that backdrop, the rise of unilateralism, nationalism and protectionism have compounded serious threats to international law and multilateralism. At this critical time more than ever before, the world needs a stronger United Nations to harmonize our collective efforts in strengthening multilateralism and maintaining international peace and security. The strict observance of the principles of international law and adherence to their obligations under the Charter of the United Nations by all Member States are essential for the maintenance of peace and security. Every State has the responsibility to abide by the principles of respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, political independence and non-interference in matters that are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of States. All disputes and conflicts must be resolved by peaceful means, through political dialogue and negotiations, in accordance with the United Nations Charter and international law. The threat or use of force and unilateral coercive measures against other States are against the principles of the United Nations Charter and international law. In that regard, it is most important that the United Nations and the international community support the chosen ways and initiatives of the countries concerned in settling their disputes or conflicts. As the Security Council has the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security, the principles of objectivity, impartiality and non-selectivity should be applied to all Member States, large or small, when carrying out the Council's mandate. The application of double standards and politicization of issues must be avoided. The confidence, trust and full cooperation of all United Nations Member States must be nurtured for the successful implementation of the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. The United Nations is at the heart of multilateralism, on which we place our hopes and aspirations. Myanmar has always abided by the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and strongly supports the role of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security. We hope that the United Nations will continue to be a beacon of fairness and justice and play a leading and exemplary role in maintaining peace and stability and promoting development and human rights for all, so that we will be able to achieve the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to build a better and safer world for all mankind.
