The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the Netherlands.

The Netherlands warmly applauds the Secretary-
General's report. It was indeed a tour de force to prepare
such an extensive and excellent report in just a few months.
The report provides us with a very comprehensive
overview of the issue on our agenda. In this connection,
we also wish to express our appreciation to the delegation
of Canada for having taken the initiative of discussing in
the Security Council the issue of the protection of
civilians. It goes without saying that the Netherlands will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.

The norm is that civilians must never be the victims
of armed conflict. Reality, however, is steadily moving
away from that norm. Most armed conflicts today are
internal conflicts. In such conflicts, civilians are often the
primary victims - not by accident, but because they are
deliberately targeted or callously exploited as pawns in
the political game. Restrictions on humanitarian access
usually have a similar background. Innocent civilians are
deliberately deprived of food and medicine as another
move in the same political game. All this seems to be
taken more and more for granted. Such practices blur the
distinction between military and civilians and make
warfare degenerate ever further into barbarity.

The Security Council can contribute to a reversal of
this trend. For one, better use could be made of existing
instruments of international humanitarian law. As we
suggested earlier this year, the Council could call upon
parties to a conflict to involve the International
Fact-Finding Commission established by article 90 of
Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1949.
In relevant cases, this Commission could investigate
breaches of international humanitarian law or facilitate,
through its good offices, the re-emergence of an attitude
of respect for international humanitarian law.

It is also important that the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the United Nations maintain close
cooperation on the issue of civilians in armed conflict.
The Netherlands proposes that the Secretary-General's
report be forwarded to the Red Cross Conference on this
subject which will take place in Geneva in the beginning
of November.

Humanitarian assistance is not a substitute for
effective political action. The Netherlands calls for a
coherent and integrated approach to conflict prevention
and conflict resolution in which the diplomatic, political,
military, economic and humanitarian aspects, as well as
development assistance, are treated as integral parts.

In conclusion, I wish to confirm that the Netherlands
subscribes to the views expressed by the representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.

 

I now resume my function as President of the Security
Council.

At the request of the Secretary-General, I call upon
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator.

