Mr. Ould Abdallah: I am grateful for this
opportunity to brief the Council.

While the situation remains fragile, there have
been positive developments in Somalia. As I have told
the Council previously, a new paradigm is being
implemented. Despite multiple constraints, the
Government is resisting and repelling multiple
attempts to overthrow it and seize power illegally by
force. It is also overcoming two decades of scepticism
over Somalia.

I believe that, today, we are at a turning point. It
is clear that the population and its traditional leaders
reject violence and those behind it. Therefore, the
support of the international community is even more
crucial at this time.

In that context, I would like to recognize once
again the extraordinary help provided by members of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the League
of Arab States, the African Union, the European Union
and Commission, the Contact Group, including the
United States, Norway and many others, especially the
subregional organization the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD). They have
mobilized quickly to provide critical assistance on the
ground, as pledged during the Brussels conference in
April, which was attended by the Secretary-General. To
facilitate this process, the Somali Government has
employed the services of an international accounting
firm to ensure transparency.

The Government has made significant progress in
training, equipping and paying its security forces.
However, more needs to be done, especially in the area
of coordination and organization. At the same time, the
political process is moving forward. The Djibouti
09-43003
agreement, signed in August last year, remains open to
those who want to address the Somali situation through
peaceful means. Recently, an important agreement was
signed between the Government and the well-respected
religious group Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a, which has
already shown results. There has also been the
inclusion of some elements from an opposition group,
and one of its leaders has become a deputy minister.
That open-door policy should be continued.

My understanding is that the Government would
welcome members of those currently in the opposition,
be they leaders or simply members of the rank and file
of their groups. Somalis should discuss peace among
themselves in their own country. Those who fail to join
the peace process will miss an opportunity to
contribute to rebuilding the country. My Office stands
ready to assist and help the continued discussion
among Somalis.

The time has come to focus on the needs and
interests of ordinary citizens in Somalia, who are
denied food to alleviate their hunger and protection
against fear. Their suffering should strike at the heart
of all Somali patriots and be the main international
concern. Their country has been taken hostage by a
small group interested only in its own immediate
profit. Insecurity is becoming a source of revenue and
power.

The Somali people have endured too much. They
have seen their loved ones killed and maimed. They
have been forced to flee their homes again and again
and suffered endless abuses of their human rights.
Their suffering must be ended if they are to live normal
lives, as people do in many other African countries.

In this context, I condemn the abduction of all
innocent Somalis and foreigners who are being held for
ransom, and call for their unconditional release. I
appeal to all those, Somalis and non-Somalis alike,
who can help, directly or indirectly, to do so by
telephone, e-mail and every other means of making
contact in order to help free the unfortunate hostages.
It is impossible to see how such inhuman actions could
help Somalis or the image of Somalia in any way.
Likewise, I condemn the looting of United Nations
offices in south-central Somalia, as well as efforts to
silence the media through intimidation, extortion and
the targeted killing of journalists.

The question of justice must be seriously
addressed. Fighting impunity and various abuses

against civilians should remain high on the agenda. In
this regard, the international community should help
the Somalis decide the way forward. This is why my
Office is organizing a meeting on that issue towards
the middle of next month. Moreover, the Monitoring
Group based in Nairobi is active in trying to identify
those who might face sanctions.

Before I conclude, allow me to stress that past
failures should not discourage us from taking future
action to promote stability. In the short and medium
term, there are concrete steps that can be taken by this
Council.

First, while the Government has made important
strides, it still requires immediate support, political and
financial, to improve the situation. The authorities in
Puntland and Somaliland also need resources to ensure
that stability endures.

Secondly, immediate and concrete support must
be extended to the African Union Mission in Somalia.
The African Union troops have shown remarkable
courage and dedication, in solidarity with the Somali
people. They deserve the backing of all Council
members.

Thirdly, support for the subregional organization
IGAD and the African Union in their decisions on
Somalia would be most helpful. Given their proximity
to, knowledge of and interest in Somalia, IGAD
member States should be recognized as having a
leading role on Somali issues.

Fourthly, the time has come for the United
Nations to show that it is serious about moving to
Somalia. Our temporary presence in Nairobi has lasted
15 years, which is far too long. We can work
effectively for peace with the Somalis and address
pressing humanitarian needs only if we are close to the
victims of famine, violence and myriad abuses. My
Office and other leading United Nations agencies,
including humanitarian ones, along with concerned
diplomats and non-governmental organizations, should
move to Mogadishu. The establishment of a green
zone, similar to those elsewhere, would facilitate this
process.

Fifthly, we must continue to provide support
against piracy. The international maritime presence has
been a remarkable show of solidarity with Somalis on
the part of a large number of nations, and has been
effective. The maritime presence should continue,
while support for the establishment of a Somali
coastguard is being provided. At the same time, the
question of addressing the problems on land,
particularly the issue of youth employment, must been
taken up as a matter of urgency.

Somalia is indeed a very difficult case, to say the
least, but challenges always arise and should not be a
reason for inaction. The international community
should never surrender its obligation towards the
people of Somalia. Effective action is needed now
because, if not now, when? If the Council does not act,
then who will? We know all too well that all that is
necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do
nothing.

People all over the world strive for peace,
security and dignity. The people of Somalia are no
exception. They have been denied this modest
aspiration for the past 20 years. Last year's Security
Council visit to Djibouti was a tremendous boost to the
region. If the Council can help to restore stability to
Somalia, that would go a long way towards elevating
further the United Nations reputation in Africa. It
seems to me that now is the time for action.

