The President (interpretation from French): The next
speaker is the Acting Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan), Acting Chairman,
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People (interpretation from French ): First of all,
I wish to congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your assumption
once more of the presidency of the Security Council, for
the month of May. I am confident that under your very able
and wise leadership, and thanks to your great experience,
the work of the Council will be carried out in a successful
manner.
I wish also to take this opportunity to convey our
congratulations to your predecessor, Ambassador Karel
Kovanda, the Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic to the United Nations, on the exemplary manner
in which he guided the work of the Council during the
month of April.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the other
members of the Security Council for having given me the
opportunity, as Acting Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, to participate in this important debate on the
decision by the Israeli Government to confiscate 53
hectares of Palestinian land within the area of illegally
annexed East Jerusalem. Of these hectares, 33 are near
Beit Hanina, and the other 20 are near Beit Safafa. This
is the biggest confiscation of Palestinian land in East
Jerusalem since Israel occupied the Palestinian territory in
1967. The Israeli Government has also declared that the
land will be used to build further illegal Israeli
settlements.

The main issue at stake is Israel's continued illegal
construction and expansion of settlements on Palestinian
land and its allowing more Israeli settlers to move there,
which is a direct and serious violation of international
law, the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
12 August 1949, and the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions.

This action by Israel also flagrantly violates the
spirit and the letter of the Declaration of Principles on
Interim Self-Government Arrangements signed on
13 September 1993 by the Government of Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization, as well as other
agreements between the Government of Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization, and threatens the
integrity of the peace process at this critical stage. It is an
attempt by Israel to consolidate its claims on East
Jerusalem ahead of the talks due to begin next year, that
are to determine the status of Jerusalem.

In the Declaration of Principles it was agreed that
negotiations on the final status of Jerusalem and on other
issues would begin not later than the third year of the
interim period. This recent decision by the Israeli
Government to confiscate Palestinian land in East
Jerusalem seriously undermines the peace process at a
time when the implementation of the second stage of the
Declaration of Principles has been deferred, as have the
redeployment of the Israeli forces to outside the populated
areas in the West Bank and the elections for the
Palestinian Council.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People considers that the
confiscation of land in East Jerusalem and the increasing
expansion and consolidation of settlements create a de
facto situation inconsistent with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which the current

 

peace process seeks to implement, and seriously
compromise the agreements between Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization.

Noting that similar concerns have been expressed by
the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, the Committee wishes to join them in
appealing to the Security Council, to the sponsors of the
peace process and to all others concerned to exert their
influence on the Israeli Government to desist from taking
any further measures that undermine the peace process and,
specifically, to rescind its decision to confiscate Palestinian
land in East Jerusalem and end its settlement policy, as
indispensable steps towards attaining the just and lasting
peace we are all striving for.

The Committee believes that only rapid and consistent
progress in the peace process leading to a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East will prevent the
current situation from deteriorating even further. The
Committee calls on all concerned to spare no effort to
overcome the current obstacles and move forward towards
the full implementation of the agreements that have been
reached thus far.

The convening of the Security Council indicates that
the continuing deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories is of major concern to the members
of the Council and to the international community as a
whole. The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People therefore hopes that this
debate will culminate in a clear demonstration of the
Council's determination to find ways and means to rescind
the declared confiscation of Palestinian land by Israel and
instead to reinvigorate the peace process. The international
community must assist the parties in proceeding rapidly on
the road to a negotiated peace, a road on which they have
embarked together, the only road which can assure a lasting
peace in the region.

The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Acting Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People for his kind
words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.


