Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I should indeed like to comment on the
remarks made by certain colleagues in their statements.

I will begin with my friend, Ambassador Heusgen.
I do not know who told him what I said, but the way
he interpreted my statement makes it clear that it was
restated in an inaccurate manner. I can repeat my
statement for him personally later, should he so wish.

However, I will not dignify my British colleague
with a response to his numerous questions. This is due
not to a lack ofrespect for my colleague, but to the simple
fact that he does not need these responses. He lives
within his own paradigm and those questions he has put
forward are, for him, rhetorical. They also contain the
responses that he wishes to hear and therefore he has no
need for other answers. Incidentally, I have proposed
that my British colleague visit Crimea personally and
take a look at the so-called suffering of Crimeans,
including Crimean Tatars, so that he can draw his own
conclusions, rather than read out the narrative that is
duly provided to him by the British Foreign Office.

Incidentally, in Crimea it would be possible to
familiarize oneself with the educational system in
three State languages: Russian, Ukrainian and Crimean
Tatar, which our American colleague was so concerned
about today. Not a word, however, was said about the
topic of today's meeting and in no way did he even
comment on the words of the High Commissioner on
National Minorities, who indeed provided a great deal
of interesting information.

We assumed that a number of Council members
would do everything possible to avoid discussion of
the topic at hand today. They raised many issues, but
not what we proposed to be put forward for discussion.
This is truly no surprise to us. We have long attempted
to convey to the Council that the picture members
are painting in their imagination, which is duly being
delivered to them by the Ukrainian authorities about
freedom-loving, democratic Ukraine engaged in an
uneven struggle with a brutal aggressor, has nothing to
do with reality.

They do not see that the reality ofthe situation is, in
fact, straight out of their imagination or rather the myth
that they have created for themselves; more accurately,
perhaps they simply do not wish to see it. They do not
wish to understand that their indulgence towards Kyiv
prompts a feeling of lawlessness, all-permissiveness
and impunity. They do not wish to hear that what is
really happening in Ukraine is the enmity and hostility
being cultivated in society vis-a-vis Russia. I will offer
three brief examples to illustrate that.

The Ukrainian television channel News One
announced a television broadcast and a link with
Russia One. Ordinary citizens, not politicians, were
tracked to an unprecedented level by nationalists with
the connivance of the authorities. Information surfaced
yesterday that the general producer of the channel
was questioned by the Ukrainian security forces as
part of "a criminal affair on encroachment upon on
a state offence or treason" - all this for an attempt
to set up a television broadcast. The building of the
Ukrainian channel 112 Ukraine was fired on with
mortars in the centre of Kyiv for its plans to screen the
documentary Revealing Ukraine, by Oliver Stone, a
well-known United States director. This mortar attack
was denounced by the National Union of Journalists of
Ukraine, who claimed that a war was being waged in
Ukraine against journalists and mass media. Dmytro
Yarosh, the former head of the Right Sector party
and a deputy from the outgoing Rada, recommended
that workers of television channels quit and that all
those concerned about violations of human rights and
freedom of speech should shut their mouth.

Kyrill Vyshinsky, head ofRIA Novosti Ukraine, has
been behind bars for a year now. He is accused of State
treason for some reports he delivered. These instances
and examples abound. I can list many, but members of
the Council - at least, many of them - simply do not
wish to hear it.

We regret the fact that some have been unable to
resist the temptation to use today's meeting in order to
capitalize on the sensitive issue of the disaster of the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 in Ukraine
in July 2014. On the eve of the fifth anniversary of
this tragedy, we once again extend our most sincere
condolences to the families of the dead. We believe that
every family deserves to know the truth about what
really occurred on that unfortunate day. For that reason,
from the very beginning we have called for a thorough
and impartial international investigation in line with
resolution 2166 (2014) and have repeatedly stressed our
willingness to join and to deliver the necessary support.

Unfortunately, we cannot trust the actions of
the Joint Investigation Team, which is comprised of
Australia, Belgium, the Netherlands, Malaysia and
Ukraine itself, to be impartial. Questions regarding
the proceedings of the work surfaced right after
four out of five States, on 7 August 2014, signed a
confidential agreement that enabled the filtering of
any information. Malaysia had long been denied an
opportunity to fully participate in the investigation.
I do not know whether the Council has heard that the
Prime Minister of Malaysia, Mahathir Mohamad, at a
meeting with journalists on 30 May, cast doubt on the
outcomes or the result of the work of the group. We
concur with his opinion that there is an impression that
the purpose of the investigation is not to shed light on
the circumstances of what took place but rather to pin
all blame on the Russian Federation.

Incidentally, I am surprised that the statement
delivered by my friend Ambassador Heusgen, who
referred to international law and demonstrated an
incredible level of legal nihilism, calling upon the
Russian Federation to pay compensation for the victims
when there have been no judicial proceedings and no
one has yet been identified as the culprit. I wish to
recall the fact that, in October 2016, we conveyed the
initial unredacted radar data and remain the only ones
to have done so.

Regarding flight MH-17, I would like to ask our
United States colleague about the whereabouts of the
satellite images from United States satellites over the
crash site that have long been spoken of and which the
United States has refused to provide. At a recent press
conference, on 19 June, the representatives of the Joint
Investigation Team were unable to answer the question
of why Russian data was not taken into account but the
data of other countries was not even provided, just as
they were unable to say why they had disregarded the
fact that the rocket that allegedly downed the Boeing
had come from the Ukrainian armed forces, when that
fact had been established by the Russian side after the
Joint Investigation Team itself displayed fragments of
that rocket. The politicization of this Group is to us
completely evident.

I will not speak in depth about the incident in
the Kerch Strait. I would simply say - I do not
know whether Council members are aware of this or
not - that Russia proposed releasing those sailors
to return to Ukraine provided that they consented to
participate in criminal proceedings to take place in
the Russian Federation. This idea was immediately
rejected by Ukraine's Foreign Minister and, by the
way, subsequently questioned and called into doubt by
President Zelenskyi.

I will not talk about that, but I will read out a single
quotation about how the day before the inauguration
of the President, the former Deputy Head of the
Presidential Administration, Andriy Portnov, filed
a complaint with the State Bureau of Investigation in
relation to actions by former President Poroshenko in
connection with that incident:

"The aforementioned instances were the result of
planned illegal actions by an individual who at
the time occupied the post of President of Ukraine
and was the senior military commander of the
country's armed forces. In other words, as part
of an organized group of individuals having full
information about the tensions in the Kerch Strait,
aware of the likelihood the Russian Federation's
armed forces would undertake aggressive action,
and fully understanding the risks to the life, health
and freedom of Ukrainian servicemen as well as
potential damages and loss of military equipment
and weapons stemming from his actions, President
Poroshenko deliberately instructed or consented to
the instruction ordering a group of naval vessels
belonging to the Ukrainian armed forces to be
transferred from the Black Sea to the Sea of Azov
through the Kerch Strait, which was fully under the
control of the Russian naval forces."

In conclusion, I wish to tell my Ukrainian colleague
the following. My Ukrainian colleague used the well-
known tactic of twisting notions that the Ukrainian
side has long favoured. It is as if he were not at the
meeting commemorating the Minsk agreements when
the question concerning the presence of Russian
troops in Donbas was answered, not by us but by the
representatives of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. We remember very well what
they said in this regard.

Nevertheless, the Ukrainian side is obstinately
using the term "Russian militants". They can of course
be Russian - there are many Russians in Ukraine -but
they are in fact representatives of the Donbas region and
not of the Russian Federation. Incidentally, he forgot to
mention how many civilians in Donbas, Luhansk and
Donetsk died as a result of the shelling by the valiant
and knightly Ukrainian forces. I wish to stress that
these were civilians. I would like to reiterate for the
Council's understanding that it was not Donbas that
marched on Kyiv, but Kyiv that came to Donbas.

I will not continue to describe the way Ukraine
has been sabotaging the Minsk agreements. Earlier,
the representative of Ukraine proposed measures that
need to be adopted to begin to resolve the conflict, but
he spoke to the Russian side, again resorting to the
tactic of twisting notions. We have said, we are saying
and we will continue to say that until the Ukrainian
side engages in direct dialogue with representatives of
Donetsk and Luhansk - not with Russia - there will
be no progress in this conflict.

I have asked this many times in this Chamber:
Why is it that when we discuss other conflicts that have
unfortunately engulfed the world - the Syrian, Yemeni
or Libyan conflicts, or indeed any other conflict - we
call on the parties to the conflict to sit down at the
negotiating table and we do not allege that external
players supplant those parties to the conflict. It is only
in the case of Ukraine that many Council members are
obstinately attempting to make Russia speak to Ukraine
rather than to those individuals in Donbas, Donetsk and
Luhansk who are the direct parties to this confrontation.

Lastly, the representative of Ukraine mentioned
that we are instructing the Ukrainians on what
language needs to be spoken in Ukraine. We are not
giving any such instructions. This is Ukraine's law,
which instructs its citizens as to what languages they
are allowed to speak and what languages they are not
allowed to speak.

