Mr. Diarra (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me,
Sir, to convey to you my delegation's congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for January, and to thank you for having
initiated a debate on this subject.

I should like also to congratulate the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for the high quality of his
report contained in document S/2003/1217, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs for
having introduced it.

This very useful document provides responses to
concerns expressed by the Council in its statement of
31 October 2002, in which the Council requested the
identification of

"initiatives undertaken to implement the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on
ways and means in which the Security Council
could contribute to dealing with the question of
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in
situations under its consideration". (S/2003/I2I7, 
p. I)

The situations under consideration by the Council
which are fuelled by the illicit trade in small arms are
basically confined to the developing countries, in
particular those in Africa. In such crisis situations, the
risk of the use of weapons of mass destruction is
practically nil. However, because of their uncontrolled
proliferation, small arms and light weapons have an
impact that is almost as devastating, leading to the
destruction of human lives, in particular those of the
most vulnerable - women and children. But the
adverse effects of such crises can also be seen on the
weak infrastructure of the affected countries.

Finally, they lead to chronic instability, which
affects the international credibility of the entire
continent.

Whatever the origins and manifestations of these
crises, they have certainly troubled the international
community. In Africa, there have been bilateral
responses to them, as was the case of Mali in the
1990s, with Algeria's mediation. There have been
subregional responses such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution, and the mediation efforts of the Inter-
Government Authority on Development (IGAD) and of
the southern African mechanism. There have also been
also continent-wide responses, through the African
Union's Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution, which has demonstrated
its value and which will soon be replaced by the Peace
and Security Council and the Africa Peace Fund.

The response has been essentially international in
the case of the Security Council, which bears the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. This awareness of its
responsibilities is the reason why it has simultaneously
authorized six peacekeeping operations in our
continent. We hope that it will soon authorize the
transformation of the United Nations Mission in C6te
d'Ivoire (MINUCI) into a United Nations peacekeeping
operation.

The efforts of the international community are
often thwarted by the persistence of certain crises. Two
factors, generally speaking, are behind this situation:
the illegal exploitation of natural resources in conflict
areas, and the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. These two phenomena are indeed linked -
one fuels the other.

The combat against these practices is being
waged at various levels. At the subregional level, for
example, there is the ECOWAS moratorium on small
arms, which was renewed in 2001; the Protocol
adopted by southern Africa, also in 2001; and the draft
Protocol for East Africa.

The continent-wide reaction to the illegal
proliferation of small arms is enshrined in the Bamako
Declaration, which was adopted following the
ministerial conference of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) held on 1 December 2000, and the
Algiers Action Plan, adopted on 14 September 2002.

But it was the entire international community that
mobilized and adopted the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
following the United Nations Conference held from 9-
20 July 2001.

The principal organs of the United Nations have
also adopted measures in this respect. In resolution
58/241, the General Assembly decided to establish an
open-ended working group to negotiate an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace, in a
timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms and light
weapons.

The Council endorsed the relevant
recommendations of the Secretary-General and, in its
declaration of 31 October 2002, asked the Secretary-
General to produce the report that is before us.

The recommendations contained in the report are
relevant. Some of them were reflected in States'
reports on the occasion of the First Biennial Meeting
on the implementation of the Programme of Action, to
which I referred earlier.

As the first recommendation suggests, my
country, Mali, participated in 2003 in the Oslo
Conference on the drafting of an international
convention on the transfer of arms, and stated its
support for the French-Swiss initiative on the
traceability of weapons and for the Group of
Governmental Experts.

However, effective participation in these
initiatives requires technical capacity that my country
does not possess. Here I wish to commend the expertise
that the Programme for Coordination and Assistance
for Security and Development is providing to the
subregion, including my country, with the assistance of
the United Nations Development Programme.

With regard to recommendation 5, Mali abides by
sanctions and embargoes on arms and is engaged in a
second reading of its national law on the circulation of
weapons, in order to strengthen control over them.

With regard to recommendation 7, agreements to
resolve the crisis in the north of Mali in the 1990s
included, at a very early stage, a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration aspect, which made it
possible to collect weapons in exchange for micro-
development projects to benefit demobilized
combatants, simultaneously with the political process
of normalization.

Mali was successful in that process thanks to the
generosity of its partners. But today's reality is that,
because of the large number of hotbeds of tension,
post-conflict reconstruction is being sidelined - hence
the relevance of recommendation 8, which seeks to
increase the budget of peacekeeping operations in this
area.

Some of the recommendations are not the
responsibility of individual States; their
implementation lies with the Organization's principal
organs - the General Assembly and the Security
Council - between which cooperation would be useful
in that regard. My delegation expresses its support for
these recommendations.

In conclusion, I should like to emphasize an
important aspect: raising awareness of the issue of
small arms. To that end, civil society, non-
governmental organizations and the media could play a
central role.

