Mr. Hyseni: I just want to pick up on a number
of points that have been raised.

The first concerns dialogue with Belgrade. We
will continue to seek direct talks with Belgrade on a
number of issues of mutual interest because the range
of such issues is very broad and Pristina would prefer
to engage in such talks at an early rather than at a later
stage. Of course, Pristina and Belgrade should and can
talk as two independent and sovereign States. We have
also welcomed the Secretary-General's initiative to
identify a number of issues for discussion, and we
welcome again the facilitation in those discussions of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zannier.

Dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade on issues
of mutual interest is indispensable because of the ties
of the past. I can assure the members of the Council
that it is in the very best interests of both Belgrade and
Pristina to talk. It is also in the very best interests of
the future of both countries as we aspire and work to
join the western community of nations as represented
in the European Union.

We do not need to wait until we have resolved all
disputes, and it does not take recognition on the part of
Belgrade to talk about practical issues. We can talk
about energy; we can talk about roads; we can talk
about all sorts of highways, road networks and
transmission lines without being recognized mutually.
We are also ready to talk with Serbia on a number of
issues that relate directly to the concerns and
grievances of the Serb community in Kosovo because
we are very committed. There should be no doubt that
the Government and institutions of Kosovo will deliver
fully on their commitment to protecting minority rights
and above all the rights of the Serb community.

That brings me to the issue of the integration of
the Serb community into and its participation in the
institutions of the Republic of Kosovo. The elections
for a number of Serbian municipalities conducted by
Belgrade are illegal. Instead, the Government of
Kosovo intends to implement in their entirety the
decentralization plans and the blueprint for establishing
additional Serb-majority municipalities, because in that
way we will enable the members of the Serb
community to duly participate in the conduct of public
affairs and to decide entirely upon their own affairs. In
addition to their own competencies, the Serb-majority
municipalities will have additional competencies in the
areas of primary, secondary and tertiary health care and
education at all levels, from primary to university.

The institutions and all members of the
Government of Kosovo will continue to reach out to
the members of the Serb community. We take this
opportunity once again to invite Belgrade to cease its
support for illegal power structures in the North and
instead to encourage the members of the Serb
community to come forward and work with us for a
better future for every single citizen of the Republic of
Kosovo. Once again, we urge Belgrade also to open up
and be more receptive to our call for the normalization
of relations and for a direct dialogue on many issues of
mutual and common interest.

The Security Council can rest assured that the
Government of the Republic of Kosovo will do
everything it takes to protect minority rights - again,
above all, those of the Serb minority. We will do
everything it takes to protect, restore and honour the
cultural and religious legacy and heritage of the Serb
08-43933

community in Kosovo. The Government of Kosovo has
allocated resources and efforts to make we sure we do
just that. We also have an excellent blueprint in the
Ahtisaari annexes for protecting cultural and religious
heritage through the establishment of so-called
protective zones around the monasteries. That work is
under way.

