Mr. President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

Ithank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Zarif, for his briefing. I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacic, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, for his presence and statement today. I also
listened attentively to the statement by Mr. Thaci.
China respects Serbia's sovereignty and territorial
integrity and understands its legitimate concerns over
the question of Kosovo.

Resolution 1244 (1999) represents an important
legal basis for the resolution of the Kosovo question.
China has always maintained that it is imperative to
follow the policies and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and within the framework of the relevant
Security Council resolutions to carry out dialogue
and negotiations to reach a proper settlement that is
acceptable to the parties concerned. China appreciates
Serbia's active effort in search of a political settlement
of the Kosovo question and welcomes and supports the
continuation of pragmatic and constructive dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina to implement the
agreements already reached by the two sides on energy
and the exchange of personnel. Thanks to the joint
efforts of the various parties, the security situation in
Kosovo is generally stable. We encourage the two sides
to continue to push ahead with the dialogue process
and to seek a lasting solution of the Kosovo question
in order to safeguard the security and stability in the
Balkans and Europe region at large.

China appreciates the work undertaken by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif,
and supports UNMIK in continuing to implement
its Security Council mandate. We hope that the
international presence, including UNMIK, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and
the Kosovo Force, will step up its coordination and
play a positive and constructive role in promoting an
appropriate settlement of the Kosovo issue.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20p.m.
