Mr. Sharma (Nepal): I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April, and commend you for convening this public
debate on the important question of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

Innocent civilians bear the brunt of the impact of
violence in armed conflict. Combatants use ordinary
people as shields, for shelter and as hostages to gain an
advantage, treat them as objects for physical
exploitation and subject them to psychological warfare
to drive their point home. Conflicts result in the
massive violation of the human rights of the civilian
population, particularly of women, children and other
vulnerable groups. In inter-State conflicts, assigning
responsibility is relatively easy. But in internal
conflicts, which are more frequent now, holding non-
State actors that are perpetrating crimes against the
civilian population accountable for their actions has
become increasingly complex.

Protecting civilians in armed conflict, therefore,
becomes an issue of monumental concern and of
cardinal importance to the United Nations. The
challenge we face is twofold: preventing conflict
through the peaceful resolution of disputes and
safeguarding the interests of civilians in armed
conflict.

Preventing conflict through the peaceful
resolution of disputes is the best way to protect
civilians from the consequences of conflict, and our
focus should concentrate on doing just that.

Empirical evidence suggests that it is mostly poor
countries that get caught up in a Vicious cycle of
poverty and conflict. Social problems, often fomented
by unscrupulous and greedy elements, find fertile
ground to flourish in situations of poverty and
deprivation. The ultimate objective of the international
community should therefore be the elimination of the
very root causes of conflict.

We live in a terribly imperfect world where
conflicts break out with unpredictable certainty. Our
response to them should therefore be predictable, and
not uncertain, so that it can work as a deterrent. As we
strive towards the long-term objective, we must also be
prepared to contain conflict and deal with its
consequences once it has broken out.

I should like to pay tribute to the Secretary-
General for his two excellent reports under the agenda
item before us. In the reports, he underlines the
imperative to build a culture of protection, and
recommends a number of measures, with varying
policy significance, to protect civilians in armed
conflict. These recommendations deserve our serious
consideration and phased implementation, as
practicable. But I should like to focus on some of the
measures that I believe will be of practical value to us.
They relate primarily to strengthening the mandates
and building the capacity of United Nations human
rights and refugee agencies, bringing the perpetrators
of crimes against civilians to justice, formulating
optimal peacekeeping mandates and fostering inter-
agency cooperation and coordination to achieve these
goals.

Human rights promotion and the implementation
mechanisms of the United Nations and its Member
States are the means to provide early warning of
conflict in the making and the first line of defence in
preventing conflict and in protecting civilians once
conflict has broken out. The United Nations needs to
foster greater cooperation among its various agencies
and with Member States and civil society so as to
strengthen these valuable mechanisms.

Once conflict has broken out at home, people
should have the opportunity to seek refuge elsewhere.
But often they are faced with a choice between the
frying pan and the fire. Conflict will not let them stay
at home, and the likely country of refuge will not
welcome them. This puts people squarely in harm's
way. If refugees have freer access to safety, their
protection will be significantly enhanced.

Buttressing the mandate and enhancing the
capacity of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees are critical for the
protection of civilian populations in conflict situations.
To that end, the Geneva Conventions should be
strengthened and universalized, and the Office should
be equipped with financial and human resources to
provide care and maintenance to refugees in need as
well as to repatriate refugees and resettle them once the
conflict back home has subsided.

Although providing protection to displaced
persons is widely recognized as a pressing issue for the
international community, its modalities pose a thorny
but genuine question of sovereignty. In a situation of
internal conflict, a State adrift in chaos will hardly be
able to take care of internally displaced persons. We
should work collectively to find a way to provide
increasing protection for internally displaced persons
with international assistance, without, however,
encroaching on the sovereignty of the country
concerned, which is a touchy issue.

There is a lot to be said about the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. At times, they are politically
motivated, sometimes unduly broad or narrow, and
sometimes unnecessarily harsh or soft. The Security
Council should evince a readiness to address the
criticism it often faces for being too secretive or
preoccupied or for acting as a loner. A little effort to
reach out is likely to work wonders to bring synergy in
promoting global peace and security, and in protecting
civilians in conflict.

The rapid deployment capability of the United
Nations needs to be strengthened so that military
personnel, civilian police, civil administrators and
humanitarian personnel can be quickly deployed to
prevent a conflict from flaring up and to provide timely
humanitarian assistance, if necessary. For a durable
peace, measures to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate
should be incorporated into peacekeeping mandates,
where appropriate.

The culture of impunity emboldens the
perpetrators of crimes against innocent civilians. It is
fundamental that such people must have the fear of
retribution and indeed that they must be brought to
justice. Again, this involves a delicate balance between
the need to dispense justice and inducing parties to a
conflict to come to the negotiating table. In that
context, we applaud the balance between the soft
option of truth and reconciliation commissions and the
work of the International Tribunals for Rwanda and for
former Yugoslavia, as well as the establishment of the
International Criminal Court, with an appropriate
mandate.

The Security Council, though entrusted with the
mandate of maintaining international peace and
security, cannot do it alone, especially at a time when
the nature of conflict has changed from inter-State to
intra-State. It is not enough to restore calm in failed or
failing States. Wider support is needed to address the
challenges of nation-building, involving a
multidisciplinary and holistic approach- something
the Security Council by itself has neither the mandate
nor the competence to do. Therefore, to achieve that
lofty goal, the United Nations ought to foster
cooperation and coordination among its relevant
organs, agencies, funds and programmes, as well as
with regional organizations, the Bretton Woods
institutions, the World Trade Organization, the private
sector and civil society.

Let me conclude by emphasizing that the Security
Council must demonstrate its willingness and
conviction to work with stakeholders to prevent
conflict and to protect civilian populations in times of
armed conflict. We should also redouble our efforts to
collectively address the root causes of conflict, which
will obviate the need to tackle recurring problems. By
doing this, everyone wins. And the biggest winners
will be those people of the world whom the United
Nations is committed to serve.

