Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like first to
congratulate the British presidency of the Security
Council for having organized this timely open debate
on a topic of such great relevance.

More than 1.5 billion people live in countries
affected by violent conflict, and few of them have
been successful in achieving any of the targets of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015.
The rule of law, human rights, peace and security,
and development are often viewed as de facto separate
concepts. The reality is that the problems we face
today in the global arena are not limited to these
predefined categories. Challenges such as poverty,
insecurity, violent conflict and terrorism transcend
those boundaries.

Terrorism threatens the core sovereignty of
a country; it constitutes a direct violation of the
United Nations Charter and a great impediment to
the implementation of the Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1).

(spoke in French)

Allow me once again to offer our sincerest and
deepest condolences to France in connection with the
appalling terrorist attacks carried out in Paris.

(spoke in English)

Killing innocent people based on ideology
represents not just an attack on Paris, Ankara or Beirut,
but an attack on all of humankind. Therefore, it is not
just Paris, Ankara or Beirut that we should pray for: it
is the world. We must stand together in hunting down
the perpetrators and bringing them to justice.

Poverty does not cause terrorism, but it can
fuel resentments that terrorists then exploit, which
is why sustainable development must be part of
efforts to counter violent extremism. Development
is, indeed, the thread that runs through the 2030
Agenda, and the rise to prominence of the strong
interconnection between the three dimensions of
sustainable development - economic, social and
environmental - is a significant change compared
with the previous MDGs.

As we have already learned, there can be no
development without peace and no peace without
development, and there can be none of the aforementioned
without respect for human rights. These are the three
pillars ofthe United Nations: if one ofthem is weak, the
whole structure will be weak. Balance is key.

As a global Agenda that all States Members of
the United Nations have signed at the highest level,
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) should be
inspiring calls to action. Although some countries were
reluctant to recognize the fact that poor governance fuels
civil conflict and hinders development, the period from
2001 to 2015 proved that fragile States, characterized
by weak governance, have had the greatest difficulty in
achieving the MDGs.

I am proud to say that Romania, together with
Mexico and the Republic of Korea, has established
the Group of Friends on Governance for Sustainable
Development, as a flexible and informal space to
discuss issues related to good governance and foster
cooperation between multiple actors.

By including SDG 16, the 2030 Agenda recognizes
that global sustainable development is not possible
without progress in the realms of good governance,
inclusion, sustainable peace and security.

The report of the Secretary-General on overall
policy matters pertaining to special political missions
(A/70/400), dated 30 September, shows that the
global peace and security landscape has continued to
deteriorate in 2015 and that the number of major wars
has tripled since 2008. It calls for an urgent global
effort not only to respond to the proliferating number
of crises, but also to prevent them from emerging.

Prevention is first and foremost the responsibility
of member States. Therefore, the Security Council's
mission of maintaining international peace and security
should be based on an integrated approach of conflict
management, preventive action and institution-building,
coordination among different actors, reinforced
partnerships with regional organizations and strong
national ownership.

As we can see from the current situation, ungoverned
spaces and post-conflict societies can generate security
threats not only for neighbouring countries, but also for
the international community as a whole. This is also
one of the main findings of Romania's national security
strategy and of the European Union (EU) common
security strategy, and we fully support the European
Union statement made earlier.

Finally, the 2030 Agenda demonstrates that where
there is a will, there is a way. Given the multitude of
challenges to the international order, we believe that a
strong and effective United Nations, placed at the heart
of the multilateral system, is the appropriate forum for
addressing those challenges.

