Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): Despite the
strong resolutions recently adopted by the Council and
the numerous efforts at mediation, the situation in the
Middle East continues to deteriorate. The international
community is a helpless witness to the dangerous
escalation of violence in the region.

The Israeli army's powerful offensive in
Palestinian cities has sown desolation among the
besieged population, leaving in its wake destruction,
arrests and violations of international humanitarian
principles. The operation is characterized by the
ongoing siege of President Arafat's headquarters,
which has deprived him of his means to act.

As we have often said, the use of force is a source
of frustration and will never resolve the problem of
violence. Indeed, the more stubbornly the Israeli
Defence Forces persist in their policy of occupation,
the more intensely they fan the flames of hatred and
violence. The logical consequence of such conduct is
an increase in the number of suicide bomb attacks
against innocent Israelis. These attacks, which are
politically and morally unjustifiable, are in themselves
detrimental to the search for a political solution to the
conflict. Worse than escalation, the current situation is
a tragedy that the international community must try to
resolve by every means available to it.

During his briefing to the Council yesterday,
Secretary-General Kofi Annan shared his
comprehensive vision for confronting the dangerous
situation developing in the Middle East and, above all,
for finding a definitive solution to the conflict. He
recommended, inter alia, that the international
community consider taking new measures that are
bolder than those attempted to date. In that connection,
my delegation supports his proposal to deploy a
multinational force within the framework of a proactive
policy to protect human life, guarantee security in the
region and preserve the opportunity to relaunch the
political process.

My delegation feels that if this deployment,
which the international community has called for so
often, had been accepted sooner, it might have
prevented the cycle of violence committed by all sides
that continues to unfold and thus the humanitarian
tragedy that has occurred in the Jenin refugee camp.
We are convinced that, if such a multinational force is
to be deployed, important prerequisites must be met, in
particular cooperation from both parties in establishing
the best possible chances for an immediate ceasefire,
thereby ensuring the success of the operation. In any
case, the Security Council, acting in accordance with
its Charter mandate, has all the powers necessary to
implement this initiative.

As the Secretary-General said recently, efforts to
calm the crisis and to achieve a ceasefire must be
accompanied by action on the political front. In
adopting resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002), the Security Council has clearly defined
the lineaments of the peace process for the Israelis and
Palestinians, in particular, and for the Middle East in
general. Our difficult task is therefore to persuade the
parties to renounce the logic of war and their present
policies, which are destructive and barren. The parties
must demonstrate the political will to return to the
negotiating table. That is the sole condition that can
ensure security for Israel and the achievement of the
legitimate political aspirations of the Palestinians.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the
efforts undertaken by the various mediators will not be
in vain and that the parties will heed the many appeals
that have been made for talks to resume with a View to
achieving a fair and definitive peace. The Israeli and
Palestinian peoples, the main victims of the conflict,
truly need that peace.

