Mr. Michaelis (Germany): Germany welcomes
the initiative taken by Poland to put today's meeting
on the agenda. We particularly appreciate United States
Secretary of State Michael Pompeo's presence among
us today.

The Middle East has always been looked at as a
volatile region, and one of the truisms was, and is, that
it can be destabilized easily. Unfortunately, that is what
we witness today. But that is not the old story. Many
trends indicate that we are looking at a new Middle
East, and that new Middle East certainly does not
match the vision of a prosperous and peaceful region,
which spread in the 1990s. It is the story of increased
tensions and mounting dangers. Allow me to distinguish
five trends.

First, we see heightened tensions among the States
of the region. That, for instance, holds true of the
situation along the Gulf. Secondly, we observe long-
term internal conflicts, which contribute to large-scale
fragmentation. Syria and Yemen are two examples.
Thirdly, we are looking at an interplay of intra- and
inter- State conflict. That is what characterizes the nature
of the conflicts in Syria and Yemen. They increasingly
involve regional and outside actors. Fourthly, powerful
regional actors are displaying increasingly aggressive
behaviour, thereby undermining regional stability. Last
but not least, we notice an increased interest by new
actors from outside the region, often pursuing a selfish
and destructive agenda.

The combination of those factors makes the situation
in the Middle East more volatile and dangerous than it
has been for a very long time. We have to change the
negative dynamics in the region and stop moving from
bad to worse in the Middle East. Long-term instability
in the Middle East will make us all suffer, and most
certainly the people in the region. But how do we move
forward in the Middle East?

It is for the nations of the regions themselves to
create political environments that allow their people to
lead lives without fear of repression, torture, hunger and
violence, and that instead provides them with safety,
dignity and liberty. Dialogue and compromise within
the region that bridge religious and ethnic divides are
the only sustainable way to reconciliation.

As much as the States of the region have to do their
share to build peace at home and in the neighbourhood,
it is not their task alone. The stability of the Middle
East has always been a question of global concern. The
involvement of the international community comes
with increased responsibility. Only if all outside actors
look beyond narrow national interests and regional
actors invest in lasting stability can we make progress
towards a secure Middle East. The international
community therefore cannot stand on the sidelines. But
which principles should guide our action? The answer
is threefold.

First, we should be guided by the principle of
fully upholding respect for international law. That
is particularly true for international humanitarian
law, which, looking at Syria in particular, is too
often ignored.

Secondly, we should take de-escalatory steps and
devise de-escalation strategies. Where international
law is disputed or brushed aside, political processes that
promote de-escalation and confidence-building need
to be put in place. I believe that this has to lie at the
heart of our Middle East policy. Today we are far from
providing solutions to the problems of the Middle East,
but we can create the foundations for the development
of those solutions.

Thirdly, we should be guided by the principle of
coordination and cooperation of all outside actors and
choosing multilateral solutions instead of unilaterally
imposed ones.

I would like to pick out three brief country files to
illustrate that approach.

Concerning Syria, the bloodshed there must end.
In this instance, we have not one but two platforms
of dialogue of the international community. We have
the small group and that of Astana, which, in theory,
can reconcile conflicting interests and foster regional
cooperation. Bridging those two formats will be key to
bringing peace to the Syrian people. Germany stands
ready to play a role in that regard.

With regard to Iran, we remain firmly committed
to maintaining the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) because, under the JCPOA, Iran is subject to
the world's most robust nuclear verification regime,
implemented by the International Atomic Energy
Agency. We believe that that is a valuable safeguard
to ensure a nuclear-weapon-free Iran, and we have not
seen any viable alternative to it.

At the same time, we are not naive, and we
know that the JCPOA is only one part of the puzzle.
Iran's regional role, ballistic programme and threats
to maritime security in the Gulf need to be, and are
being, addressed. We do that through political dialogue
and, if need be, coordinated sanctions. France, the
United Kingdom and Germany are right now looking
into options of how to foster regional cooperation
on maritime security. We are convinced that active
de-escalation by all sides will yield positive results,
whereas greater pressure and unilateral actions will do
the opposite.

With regard to Israel and Palestine, overall, I
have served almost eight years as a diplomat in Israel.
Germany's steadfast commitment to the security of
Israel is a cornerstone of its foreign policy, and it is the
bedrock of my personal belief. There, as in the region
as a whole, the United States is the key stability factor.
I hope that it will continue its long-standing policy of
supporting both parties in reaching a negotiated two-
State solution. What is badly needed is a resumption of
dialogue, in the absence of which violence is spreading.

In conclusion, today's debate once again
underscores that the Middle East offers one of the most
intricate webs of political, religious, social, economic
and cultural forces worldwide. It is a fascinating and
wonderful region. The people in the Middle East
deserve peace and stability. We, the Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole, need to support all
initiatives that bring us closer to that goal.

