Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the Senegalese presidency for
organizing this open debate for the invitation extended
to our Foreign Minister.

Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

In View of the evolving nature and challenges of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Bangladesh
remains seized with efforts to continuously update and
strengthen its deployment and operational capabilities
on the ground. The growing frequency and magnitude
of threats posed by various non-State actors, including
terrorist groups, have made our task daunting and
complex. In recent times, our peacekeepers, contingent-
owned equipment and other capabilities have come
under a number of indiscriminate attacks, particularly
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali.

In recognition of our valuable contribution
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, our
peacekeepers have withstood those attacks and other
prevailing threats, and continue to serve with a high
degree of professionalism and dedication. Against that
backdrop, we wish to focus on five critical issues.

First, the proliferation of asymmetrical attacks
against peacekeepers underscores the importance
of linking peacekeeping operations with sound and
sustainable political strategies to resolve conflicts.
There is a need to maintain regular engagement and
consultations between host Governments and the
concerned peacekeeping or special political missions
to make peace processes and agreements inclusive and
broad-based. Depending on the context, there may be a
need to explore avenues for dialogue with the various
conflicting parties in order to encourage them to
adhere to the principles and rules of engagement for
the deployment and presence of peacekeeping missions.

Secondly, the Council must attach the highest
priority to the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers and other personnel, including through
regular and meaningful triangular consultation
involving troop- and police-contributing countries
and the Secretariat. In order to improve situational
awareness and the threat assessment on the ground, the
enhanced use of technologies needs to be considered
from a pragmatic viewpoint, while addressing questions
relating to national sovereignty, transparency and
confidentiality. Due emphasis should be placed on the
mission's interface with local communities, traditional
views of human intelligence, and awareness of
applicable investigation and prosecutorial mechanisms.
The crucial role played by joint operations centres,
joint mission analysis centres and other security-related
analysis capabilities needs to be optimized through
regular gap analysis and core capacity-building.

Thirdly, the protection of civilians in the face
asymmetrical threats should be given due priority in
line with the concerned mission mandates. In View of
the growing and targeted attacks against civilian and
military aviation capacities and other critical enablers,
their protection and upkeep also deserve urgent
consideration. The development and dissemination of
specific policies, operational guidelines and training
manuals to address pressing issues of concern should
be pursued through regular interface with troop- and
police-contributing countries.

Fourthly, it is evident that peacekeeping missions
are not equipped to engage militarily in counter-
terrorism operations, and must not be mandated to do
so. There are good practices whereby missions have
effectively contributed to enhancing the capacity of host
Governments in counter-terrorism efforts, including
through support for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security and correction sector refor,m
and promoting human rights due diligence. There may
be potential ways for missions to expand their support
for developing appropriate policies and strategies for
countering terrorism and preventing Violent extremism,
as well as their underlying drivers, subject to specific
requests by host Governments.

Fifthly, in the context of increased volatility
in security environments, we must ensure that the
adequate provision of defence stores in missions,
as well as increased investment in medical and
casualty evacuation, gets its fair share of attention.
The introduction of risk premiums for troops and
police deployed in difficult environments and the
call for periodic review of the death and disability
compensation rates are steps in the right direction. The
role of the United Nations Operations and Crisis Centre,
and the ongoing work on crisis management, should
be properly leveraged, including through appropriate
contingency planning.

In conclusion, the increasing and deepening
asymmetric threats facing United Nations peacekeeping
operations require a whole-of-United-Nations response
in accordance with the respective mandates and
competencies of the organs and entities involved.
We therefore emphasize the importance of further
expanding the scope of this dialogue in relation to
the relevant normative discussions across the system,
including within the framework of the comprehensive
approach to sustaining peace.

