Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month, and by
assuring you of our full support. I also congratulate
Ambassador Rosenthal of Guatemala and his delegation
on their excellent leadership of the work of the Council
during the month of October.

I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing and for presenting the Court's fourth
report to the Security Council pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011). I would also like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Ms. Bensouda on her assumption of the
position of Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, and to wish her every success in fulfilling this
highly responsible duty.

Azerbaijan is not a party to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. Nevertheless,
we proceed from the strong understanding that
protecting civilians, upholding rights and insisting
on international accountability all contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security and
are thus responsibilities of the international community
as a whole.

Libya is undergoing a fundamental transition
to democratic statehood. It is clear that the efforts to
restore peace, security and stability in Libya are not
unchallenged. We commend the Libyan authorities for
their engagement in the judicial process with the ICC
and for permitting the conduct of investigative activities
on their territory, in particular to collect evidence from
voluntary sources. We take positive note of the formal
renewal by the Libyan General National Congress of
the mandate of its focal point to the ICC.

We note that the Government of Libya is
investigating the same cases as those selected by the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC. The report of the
Prosecutor clarifies that admissibility analysis should
be based on an assessment of whether the national
authorities have investigated or prosecuted or are
investigating or prosecuting such cases generally. In
this regard, we note that the Government of Libya has
clearly expressed its commitment and desire to ensure
an effective and genuine investigation and fair trials,
consistent with the highest international standards.

We also commend the Libyan authorities for their
continued efforts towards strengthening the rule and
reforming the country's national judicial system. At the
same time, it is obvious that the Government of Libya
should continue cooperating with the ICC and provide it
with all necessary information that might be needed by
the Court's judges to properly assess the admissibility
challenges.

We take note of the Prosecutor's update on the
continued analysis of the information gathered to
determine whether Rome Statute crimes occurred in
relation to reported gender crimes and crimes allegedly
committed by different parties in Libya since February
2011.

The Government of Libya has committed to a
comprehensive strategy to address all crimes and end
impunity in the country. The activation of the strategy
will undoubtedly demonstrate that justice remains a
key priority underpinning efforts to ensure peace and
stability in Libya and reaffirming the rights of victims
to seek resolution within the national legal system.
We support the call made by the Prosecutor on the
international community to step up its efforts to assist
the Government of Libya in combating impunity and
reinforcing a culture of the rule of law.

