Mrs. Kaur (India): At the outset, I would like to
welcome you, Mr. President, to the Security Council
and to thank you for presiding over this meeting. I
would also like to thank the Guatemalan delegation
for convening this debate, which is very important and
timely. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Judge Sang-Hyun Song, President of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and Mr. Phakiso
Mochochoko for their valuable statements.

Peace and justice are intertwined. There is no
peace without justice and there is no justice without
peace. To be just implies acting in accordance with the
rule of law. A coherent application of the rule of law at
all levels of governance is a precondition of avoiding
conflicts and ensuring peace and justice. This applies
to both international and national affairs.

India believes that the advancement of the rule of
law at the national level is essential for the protection
of democracy and of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as well as for socioeconomic growth. This
should be the primary objective of States. Similarly, the
rule of law at the international level is a sine qua non
for ensuring peace and justice among States. We recall
the wisdom of world leaders who, in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), recognized the
need for universal adherence to and implementation of
the rule of law at the national and international levels.

Since then, this topic has been on the agenda
of the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly.
The High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law held
recently during the sixty-seventh session of the
General Assembly reaffirmed the commitment of the
international community to implementing the rule
of law at the national and international levels with a
view to achieving the objectives of the maintenance of
international peace and security, peaceful coexistence
and development.

The peaceful settlement of disputes is an important
tool in the maintenance of international peace and
security and in the promotion of the rule of law. The
Security Council needs to lay more emphasis on
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations so
as to promote peaceful settlement of disputes rather
than take coercive measures.The International Court
of Justice, as the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, also has its role under the Charter and as per
its Statute in adjudicating disputes between States.

Since the rule of law serves as a key element of
conflict prevention and peacekeeping, as well as of
conflict resolution and peacebuilding, India has always
supported international cooperation for the development
and codification ofinternational criminal law.

India has also been a supporter of international
cooperation to suppress and deter heinous crimes of
international concern through the relevant judicial
instruments.

India firmly opposes impunity for serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. Refusing to tolerate impunity is the only
way to ensure truth and reconciliation and to establish
peace and justice.

At the same time, India firmly believes that
international efforts to address the issues of serious
crimes of international concern and impunity should
be anchored in the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. We need to strengthen the rule of
law at the international level by avoiding selectivity,
partiality and double standards, as well as by freeing
the international criminal justice institutions from
the clutches of political considerations. The final
agreed definition of the crime of aggression during
the Review Conference of the Rome Statue in 2010
and the possibility of States parties opting out of the
jurisdiction of the Court for the crime of aggression is a
case in point when we talk of double standards.

There is also a need to promote the rule of law
as a core value across the United Nations system. For
that, we have to reform the architecture of international
governance, including the Security Council, so that it
may be reflective of contemporary reality.

India's reservations about the Rome Statute and the
International Criminal Court are well known. The role
given to a political body like the Security Council in its
work has prevented the ICC from becoming a universal
institution, and three of the five permanent members
of the Council are not parties to the ICC. Furthermore,
the selectivity with which the Security Council has
made referrals under Article 16 of the Rome Statue has
raised concerns about political considerations playing
a dominant role in such referrals, which also raises
questions about the independence of the International
Criminal Court. Under such circumstances, the solution
to ensuring peace and justice at the national and
international levels is not the ICC or the establishment
of ad hoc international criminal tribunals. The solution
lies in building national institutions through capacity-
building efforts so that they can function in a way
consistent with the rule of law.

In conclusion, the Council needs to promote the
pacific settlement of disputes. The United Nations
system and international judicial institutions have to
promote the rule of law in their work and avoid political
biases. And the international community has to provide
greater resources for empowerment, empowering States
to build institutions that promote the rule of law and
help their citizens realize their legitimate aspirations.
Only that will ensure that the world community is able
to meet the challenges that face us today at the national
and international levels, including the resolution of
conflict situations and post conflict peacebuilding,

