The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the killings, in particular of civilians, that
recently took place in Kisangani. The Council
calls for an immediate cessation of all violations
of human rights and international humanitarian
law. It reiterates its demand that the city be
demilitarized in accordance with relevant
resolutions, in particular resolution 1304 (2000),
and with the pledge made by the Rassemblement
Congolais pour la Democratie-Goma to the last
Security Council mission. The Council also calls
on the parties to cooperate in the full reopening of
the Congo river, including to commercial traffic.

"The Security Council invites the Secretary-
General to consider whether a temporary increase
in the deployment in Kisangani of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), within the
current authorized troop level, may contribute to
easing tensions. The Council requests MONUC to
continue to monitor reports of extrajudicial
violence and to report to the Council.

"The Security Council draws the attention
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to
the seriousness of the events that took place in
Kisangani on 14 May 2002 and immediately
thereafter.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of MONUC assisting, within the
current mandate, in the full demilitarization of
Kisangani. In this respect, the Council welcomes
the proposal by the Secretary-General in
paragraph 50 of his tenth report, of 15 February
2002 (8/2002/ 169), in accordance with resolution
1355 (2001) of 15 June and 1376 (2001) of 9
November 2001, to reinforce MONUC's civilian
police unit with 85 officers to assist in the
training of the local police.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to consider expeditiously any further
recommendation that the Secretary-General may
deem necessary."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2002/ 17.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.
