Mrs. Odera (Kenya): My delegation, too, welcomes
the decision to hold a debate on this important topic, in
particular given its relevance to our continent, and we wish
to thank you, Mr. President.
Primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the Security
Council. International consensus on a proper Security
Council response to situations of conflict is evolving. For
a long time in the past the most obviously acceptable
definition and the most practical measure in the hands of
the Security Council in responding to a conflict situation
was the deployment of peacekeepers within the limits of
Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter. That was in
addition to preventive measures such as diplomatic efforts,
negotiation, mediation, good offices and fact-finding
missions.

At the end of the cold war it became immediately
practical for the Security Council to agree on a more
proactive definition that included other efforts not entirely
falling within the confines of Chapter VI. Thus peace
enforcement, which is now more and more in use under
Chapter VII, has gained regard as a necessary and regular
aspect of international consensus.

Today there is a growing realization that societies
emerging from situations of conflict are themselves in
conflict situations, and that specific measures are needed at
the national and international levels to deal with those
situations. Certain specific measures and programmes are
required to be put in place to address the critical priorities
involved. The objective is to encourage the delicate process
of nurturing peace and, more important, to prevent a
recurrence of the forces of conflict. There are many kinds
of actions that need to be taken at the end of a conflict in
order to consolidate peace and prevent the recurrence of
armed confrontation. Such actions include efforts aimed at
national reconciliation; the establishment of national unity;
the safe, smooth and early repatriation and resettlement of
refugees and displaced persons; the reintegration of ex-
combatants and others into productive society; the
establishment of well-managed regulatory institutions; and
the establishment of a fair and reliable legal and judicial
system and of a civilian police force.

Those programmes and measures are today popularly
categorized under the subject of post-conflict peace-
building activities. They may also include economic
programmes. In his report entitled "The causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa", submitted to the Security Council
in April 1998, the Secretary-General rightly pointed out:

"Where a country's capacity to develop and
implement a comprehensive economic programme
has been disrupted by conflict, consideration must be
given to relaxing the normally strict financial
conditions imposed by international lending
institutions." (S/J998/318, para. 67)

He goes on to say that some conditionalities may be
antithetical to the peace process, and suggests that peace-
friendly programmes be tailored to fit the particular
situation.

The multidisciplinary nature of the post-conflict
peace-building situation requires effective and politically
sensitive coordination in order to put in place the requisite
strategic framework to deal with this special situation.
Lessons learned from recent United Nations experiences
in post-conflict peace-building situations point to the need
for the Secretary-General to set up a peace-building
support structure to coordinate these activities. In such a
situation, the ideal person to head such an office would be
a political representative of the Secretary-General,
preferably assisted by the United Nations Development
Programme Resident Coordinator.

Such an arrangement must have the full support of
the Security Council. It has been argued elsewhere that
such support from the Council would be outside its
mandate. It is the conviction of my delegation that, on the
contrary, post-conflict peace-building activities are within
the proper scope and mandate of the Council, precisely
like diplomatic efforts, negotiations, mediation, good
offices and fact-finding missions, because they have the
same objective of preventing conflict. The Security
Council should therefore rise to the occasion and support
such efforts to the extent possible, in order to ensure the

 

successful conclusion of its tasks in a given conflict
situation.

