Mr. Azubalis: It is a great pleasure for me to
address the Security Council as Chairperson-in-
Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). With 56 participating
States spanning the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian
regions, the OSCE is the world's largest regional
organization under Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. We highly value the close cooperation that we
enjoy with the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The OSCE Summit, held in Astana last year, set
the strategic direction of the organization. In Astana,
OSCE Heads of State and Government recommitted
themselves to the vision of a free, democratic, common
and indivisible Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian security
community, rooted in agreed principles, shared
commitments and common goals. This message was
echoed by the United Nations Secretary-General who
spoke eloquently at the Summit of the core principles
and common values on which both organizations are
based, and called for closer cooperation in order to
expand peace, advance human rights, generate
sustainable development and build a safer world.
Lithuania's chairmanship of the OSCE will try to work
towards the realization of these goals.

Allow me now to present our chairmanship's
priorities. These include tangible progress in
addressing protracted conflicts; improved
implementation of media freedom commitments;
strengthened OSCE response to transnational threats,
including those emanating from outside the OSCE
2
area; enhancing the OSCE's role in the area of energy
security; and finally, promoting tolerance education
throughout the OSCE area.

Let me address some of this year's central issues.
With respect to protracted conflicts, as Chairperson-in-
Office I place high priority on seeking progress in the
resolution of these conflicts, fully respecting the norms
and principles of international law enshrined in the
United Nations Charter, as well as the Helsinki Final
Act. We will continue to pursue active OSCE
participation in the political process aimed at settling
the Transdniestrian conflict on the basis of full respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Moldova. During my recent visit to
Chisinau and Tiraspol, I met with the political
leadership on both sides of the Dniestr River to discuss
the settlement process. I remain cautiously optimistic -
especially after recent consultations with my
counterparts in Moscow, Kyiv, Berlin and Brussels -
that this year we will be able to resume official
negotiations in the five plus two format.

The OSCE role in pursuing a settlement of the
Nagorny Karabakh conflict through stronger
engagement by the co-Chairs of the Minsk Group will
be maintained. We invite the conflict parties and other
OSCE participating States to consider options for
confidence-building measures and to strengthen OSCE
monitoring activities, particularly in the light of
growing tensions on the ground.

The chairmanship remains committed to the
OSCE'S active engagement in the framework of the
Geneva international discussions to reduce tensions
and build trust among affected communities. Geneva is
a unique forum in the sense that three major
international actors - the European Union, the OSCE
and the United Nations - plus the United States and
Russia, are working closely together for security and
stability in the region. The full-fledged participation of
a representative of the United Nations is extremely
important to the success of this process. Therefore,
there is a vital need to find here in New York a
long-term arrangement ensuring continuous United
Nations representation at the Geneva talks. We will
urge all participants to take full advantage of the
Geneva framework to develop measures to improve
security and alleviate humanitarian needs. We will
work with the participating States to explore
possibilities for extending the OSCE's activities on the
l 1-23402

ground, including through a meaningful OSCE
presence.

As Chairperson, I place media freedom in general
and the safety of journalists in particular very high on
the Chair's list of priorities for 2011. As a former
journalist, I understand the importance of being able to
work in an environment free of intimidation. Working
with the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the
Media, in Vilnius in June we will organize a
conference on the safety of journalists. I look forward
to active United Nations participation in that event.

In my opinion, it was disappointing that OSCE
standards, including media and election standards,
were not met during December's presidential elections
in Belarus. The chairmanship also regrets the decision
of the Government of Belarus to terminate the work of
the OSCE Office in Minsk. The Office has provided
valuable assistance to Belarus, its people and
Government in strengthening institutions,
consolidating the rule of law and fostering relations
between the Government and civil society, in
accordance with OSCE principles and commitments. In
our view, this work is not complete. We remain
engaged in consultations with the Belarusian
authorities to explore ways in which the OSCE can
continue to support the Government and people of
Belarus.

During the Lithuanian chairmanship, programmes
to develop tolerance education and to combat hate
crimes and all forms of discrimination will be
encouraged and further promoted.

Crises and conflicts in the OSCE region over the
past several years have demonstrated the urgent need to
strengthen our organization's capabilities to act
effectively across the entire conflict cycle. The OSCE
does this in a variety of ways, including through its
field presences, the work of its Vienna-based
secretariat, and its three specialized institutions. We
must provide early warning when there are signs of
smoke. Despite progress in recent years, some areas of
the OSCE - such as parts of the Caucasus, South-East
Europe and Central Asia - remain vulnerable.

Early warning must be followed by early action.
That is why we have been quick to respond to recent
events in Albania. In close coordination with the
European Union and other concerned parties, we have
engaged in a continuous dialogue with Government
and opposition leaders. We will continue, via the OSCE
11-23402
field presence and in cooperation with our international
partners, to monitor the situation and provide
assistance where we can. I trust that our efforts will
help to reduce tensions there.

Last year, the OSCE community was faced with a
crisis in the Fergana Valley. The situation has calmed
down to some extent, but tensions remain. The OSCE
Community Security Initiative, developed jointly with
Kyrgyzstan, is the key international response to the
violence in that fragile State. As we speak, OSCE
personnel are deploying to southern Kyrgyzstan. The
Initiative will help the Kyrgyzstan authorities to
address the specific security situation that evolved in
the country after the June events. In implementing the
Community Security Initiative, we stand ready to
cooperate with the United Nations to achieve the
maximum synergy from our efforts.

Let me now turn to OSCE cooperation with the
United Nations. A long-standing example of successful
OSCE-United Nations cooperation in the field is
Kosovo. There, the OSCE Mission (OMIK) continues
to implement its mandate under Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) as an integral pillar of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. It is the Lithuanian chairmanship's intention
to ensure that OMIK continues to play its agreed role,
working to ensure the security and well-being of all
communities in Kosovo. The chairmanship shares
United Nations concerns about reports of human organ
trafficking in Kosovo during the 1990s, and supports
the call for an independent investigation and
clarification of the facts.

Following the adoption by the General Assembly
in September of the Serbian- and European Union-
sponsored resolution 64/298 on Kosovo, the Belgrade-
Pristina dialogue offers a concrete opportunity to move
forward on issues of mutual concern and to improve
the lives of ordinary people. The OSCE stands ready to
contribute to this process in areas where it has the
relevant expertise. In Astana, the OSCE's participating
States agreed that in facing emerging threats, such as
terrorism, organized crime and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, greater unity of purpose
and action must be achieved.

Recognizing the leading role of the United
Nations in the fight against terrorism, the Lithuanian
chairmanship is firmly committed to fruitful
cooperation with United Nations bodies in promoting
3
the universal legal framework against terrorism. At the
Astana Summit, the Secretary-General called upon the
OSCE to join the fight against proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Working with the participating
States, the chairmanship will facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

We also intend to step up our response to
organized crime. As a regional arrangement of the
United Nations, we can do more to help States
implement the Palermo Convention and its three
Protocols. We will also look at how to strengthen the
capacity of participating States to respond to emerging
challenges, such as cybersecurity. To this end, we
intend to hold an OSCE conference on this topic during
our chairmanship. Active United Nations participation
in that event would be most valuable and highly
appreciated.

Based on its own experience in the Baltic region,
Lithuania believes strongly in the value of regional and
subregional cooperation. We see cooperation at that
level as a tool to promote genuine security and
stability, to resolve conflicts and to achieve sustainable
economic development. In our interconnected world,
we must place special focus on cooperation between
the OSCE and adjacent regions.

In that spirit, the Lithuanian chairmanship will
intensify its work in support of United Nations-led
international efforts to stabilize Afghanistan, which is
an OSCE partner for cooperation. Our primary goal
will be to counter the transnational threats stemming
from its territory. We will work through concrete
projects, in close cooperation and coordination with the
Afghan authorities, our own Central Asian
participating States, the United Nations and other
international actors and organizations active in the
region.

The OSCE experience could also be an example
to other regions of the world, including among our
Asian and Mediterranean partners for cooperation. We
stand ready to share our experience and expertise
where they are needed, for example in the Middle East
and the Korean peninsula. Twenty years ago, the OSCE
played a key role in managing the challenges of
transition in Eastern Europe. In these times of dramatic
change in Tunisia and Egypt, perhaps the OSCE
toolbox, principles and institutions could provide
inspiration to others.
We will continue to share the wealth of OSCE
experience in cross-dimensional security with other
regional organizations, such as the African Union, the
League of Arab States, the Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Regional
Forum and the Organization of American States.

I thank members of the Security Council for their
attention.

We look forward to ongoing practical cooperation
between the OSCE and the United Nations. The more
effective that the OSCE can be in promoting security
and cooperation in Europe, the more time the Council
will have to devote to other challenges in the other
areas of the world.

