Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from F rench): The agreement on the definitive ceasefire between
the Guatemalan Government and the Unidad Revolucionaria
Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG), signed in Oslo on 4
December 1996, is the felicitous outcome of a long process
marked by a series of peace agreements signed in Madrid,
Mexico, Oslo Stockholm and, finally, in Guatemala City on
29 December 1996. This is certainly the beginning of a new
era and the culmination of the joint efforts of the parties
themselves, the countries of the region and the entire
international community.

The United Nations has always followed the situation
in Guatemala with special attention and sustained interest
because it constituted, in everyone's view, a serious threat
to international peace and security and, consequently, to the
members of the international community as a whole.

It is important to recall that the General Assembly, in
keeping with its obligations under the Charter, has always
played a central role in promoting peace in Guatemala, and
to this end it created the United Nations Mission for the
Verification of Human Rights and of Compliance with the
Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human
Rights in Guatemala (MINUGUA).

The Security Council, aware of the importance of
peace in Central America for the rest of the world, paid
tribute through its resolution 530 (1983) to the Contadora
countries for their tireless efforts to facilitate the definitive
return of peace and stability to the region. It is therefore
quite appropriate, wise and also in keeping with its mandate
that the Security Council, 14 years after the adoption of that
resolution, decided to devote a debate to the new situation
in Guatemala.
We are grateful for the various clear reports of the
Secretary-General on this important issue, which have given
us all the elements we need for a detailed understanding of
the events and every reason to rejoice at the advent of the
long-awaited peace in Guatemala. My delegation therefore
welcomes with great satisfaction the Agreement the parties
to the conflict have reached, which, by providing for a
definitive ceasefire, opens up new prospects for peace,
stability and development in a country whose population
has suffered for too long the torments of a war that lasted
for decades, 35 years to be more precise.

In the View of my delegation, it is only natural that
the international community as a whole and the Security
Council in particular should support unreservedly the
peace process in Guatemala and should take all necessary
measures to consolidate this process and promote the
strict implementation of the ceasefire Agreement. This
Agreement is an important stage in the building of a
democratic society based on recognition of and respect for
its pluralistic make-up and the rights of each citizen.

In recalling that the negotiations in Guatemala were
both long and difficult, my delegation wishes to further
highlight the responsibility that the Security Council has
to respond favourably to the request made by the
Secretary-General in his report with respect to
strengthening in the short term the United Nations
Mission in Guatemala. The addition to MINUGUA of a
group of military observers and requisite medical
personnel would seem to us indispensable in order to
ensure that peace in Guatemala become a reality. Indeed,
there are prior conditions to be met and steps which the
two parties must take decisively and without delay in
order to make possible the overall implementation of the
provisions provided for in the peace Agreement.

Therefore, now more than ever the actors in the
political life of Guatemala, and more especially the people
of Guatemala, need to feel the presence and also enjoy
the concrete support of the United Nations so as to avert
the vicissitudes that are involved in any settlement of any
conflict of this type. In this way, they will be in a better
position to respond to the need to work to overcome the
numerous difficulties still remaining and any possible
pitfalls. The people of Guatemala, who have never
doubted the United Nations, deserve our unflagging
support and our total solidarity.

My delegation hopes that all the conditions will be
met so that the peace in Guatemala is a final and genuine
peace, with a return to a normal and decent life for the
entire population of this country. Yes, we hope that the
ceasefire, once it enters into force, will be respected
scrupulously by all the parties and that the separation of
the forces will take place in a spirit of cooperation and
mutual understanding. The disarming of the Unidad
Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG) under the
conditions provided for in the Agreement is necessary

 

because it is the keystone for establishing and strengthening
trust between the parties.

With regard to the demobilization of the combatants,
it seems essential to us to start thinking now - bearing in
mind similar situations - about the conditions needed in
order to help them to return to civilian life. This will only
be possible with the effective aid of the international
community.

While welcoming the important advance that brothers
who were once enemies have made in Guatemala, my
delegation recognizes and deeply appreciates the
contribution of the countries of the region, which have
expended much energy and demonstrated great savoir faire
in finding, inspired by the cultural values and political
concepts of their own countries, the ways and means of
bringing about a definitive peace in Guatemala.

We, in this respect, wish to extend, here and now, this
well-deserved tribute to the Governments of Norway, Spain
and Sweden, the United Nations personnel and all those
who, by their keen interest in the fate of the Guatemalan
people, have made it possible to bring about the return of
civil peace and to foster national reconciliation in the
country.

Guinea-Bissau will support all efforts to preserve this
peace so well deserved by the people of Guatemala.

Therefore, my delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution, the merit of which has been disputed by no
one here and which should be adopted without opposition.

