Mr. Eitel (Germany): Although we are already

approaching the end of the first half of your presidency,
Sir, it may not be too late for me to state the pleasure I
derive from working in the Security Council under your
able guidance. It is well in line with the kind and
successful stewardship of last month's President, that is,
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby of Oman.

Germany fully supports the statement to be made by
the representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union. In addition to what he will be saying, let me say
that the draft resolution before the Security Council
confers upon its members a challenging responsibility. By
their affirmative vote, they set effectively in motion an
enormous international operation - both in military and
in civilian terms.

Today's New York Times carries a photo of
American soldier Peter Long of Buffalo, holding his wife,
Stephanie, before leaving his Army base in Mannheim,
Germany, en route to Bosnia. In the same manner,
soldiers and civilians of many countries, including many
Germans, will very soon go to Bosnia to safeguard peace,
to help rebuild the country, to provide security by police
work and to assist in bringing about democratic
elections - all united in a joint, complex and
far-reaching international peace endeavour.

For some time, at the end of the twentieth century,
almost five decades after the Second World War, we did
not really think that such an inhuman and brutal war
would be possible in the middle of Europe, a war
affecting millions of people, taking more than 250,000
lives, and displacing 2 million persons - 400,000 of
whom have taken refuge in Germany and currently are
waiting to be able to return to their homes in Bosnia.

 

Thus, today's draft resolution is a signal of hope for
the people in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We stand at the
beginning of another even more intensive, phase of
peace-securing and peace-building.

The draft resolution authorizes the deployment of a
multinational force to implement the Dayton Peace
Agreement, signed yesterday in Paris. This force will go to
Bosnia for about one year. Until then, a durable peace will
have to be achieved. In this context, it is important to note
that all parties have consented to the deployment of the
Implementation Force (IFOR) - including the use of force
should this be necessary. It is absolutely essential that the
parties comply with their commitment to refrain from the
use of force and that they fully cooperate with IFOR also
in the military side of the implementation of the Dayton
Agreement.

Another remarkable aspect of the implementation of
the Peace Agreement is, as has just been said by our British
colleague, that the Russian Federation - for the first
time - will cooperate with the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in such an operation. We sincerely
hope that this will give a new quality to the relationship
between NATO and Russia.

The military part of the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement is the foundation of the peace we are all
hoping for. The actual construction - equally important -
is, however, a civilian task. Among other things: we have
to strengthen the political consensus that has been achieved
and should lead to the holding of free and fair democratic
elections; we have to assist the local security forces
through the work of the members of the International Police
Task Force to be established next week; human and
minority rights must be monitored; important humanitarian
tasks must be fulfilled; and we have to begin with the
reconstruction and development of a devastated country and
its economy.

In this effort, the United Nations will continue to have
an important peace-keeping role in Bosnia. We fully
support the concept of a strong International Police Task
Force and of a United Nations civilian mission.

One remark on Sarajevo, this very special place: Out
of our own sad experiences, the German side has made it
clear right from the beginning that we would oppose any
solution which would lead to a division of yet another
European capital. This View has been confirmed in Dayton.
On the other hand, we are also following with concern the
current expressions of fear and anguish among the Serb

 

population of Ilidza and other suburbs of Sarajevo - and
this has just been voiced also by Mr. Jovanovic. While
we trust that the Bosnian Government will honour its
commitment to respect the rights of its Serb citizens, we
support steps to strengthen security and
confidence-building also in those parts of Sarajevo.

Since I have just mentioned Mr. Jovanovic, allow
me a word concerning the admission of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to the
General Assembly. Let me say that we shall welcome
it - of course, under the conditions which have been
determined by the respective organs of the United
Nations.

The comprehensive endeavour on the civilian side
will be led and coordinated by the High Representative,
Mr. Carl Bildt, and his team, including German
Ambassador Steiner, his Deputy in Sarajevo. There, as
elsewhere in Bosnia, the many international organizations
involved must all work in the same direction and must
not stand in each other's way. It is important that there be
no overlapping or duplication of efforts. In this respect,
the draft resolution spells out clearly the responsibilities
of the High Representative as the final authority in theatre
regarding civilian implementation and as coordinator of
the civilian operation with the authority to give guidance
as appropriate.

Both in the military and in the civilian fields
Germany will contribute actively to the implementation of
the Peace Agreement. The deployment of 4,000 troops
marks the first time in the history of the Federal Republic
of Germany that we are contributing on this scale to such
a military mission abroad.

After having relied for decades on the solidarity of
our allies, we think that it is now time for Germany to
demonstrate solidarity and to show our readiness to
assume responsibility in the maintenance of international
peace and security on a larger scale.

Economic, political and social reconstruction is one
prerequisite for stability. Other requirements are
disarmament, arms control and a comprehensive system
of confidence-building measures. As far as these are
concerned, we hope that the Petersberg Conference to be
held in Bonn on Monday will be the starting-point for
intensive and successful negotiations in this regard.

While we are concentrating our efforts to restore
peace in Bosnia, we must not forget that yet another,

 

similar problem has to be solved in Eastern Slavonia - a
region to which our Croatian colleague drew our attention.
If the international community and the members of this
Council are unable to live up to the responsibilities
conferred upon them by the Basic Agreement, there is an
additional risk that the peace process in Bosnia will be
endangered.

In this hour, our thoughts go, with the highest respect,
to the men and women who for more than three years have
devoted themselves, and in some cases sacrificed their
lives, in the service of the United Nations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Among them, our French partners have paid
the heaviest price, with the death of 56 French Blue
Helmets. Also for this reason, we have followed with
particular joy the happy end of the release of the two
French pilots who were held hostage for more than 100
days of uncertainty.

While we today look ahead, with cautious hope, to a
better future for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
are aware that wounds will not heal easily and that the
families of the victims will need time. Those responsible
for war crimes and violations of international humanitarian
law must be brought to justice. Here, I agree fully with our
colleague from Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 16 November
1995 the International Tribunal issued indictments against
the Bosnian Serb leaders Karadzie and Mladie for their
supposed role in the atrocities committed against the
Bosnian population of Srebrenica in July 1995.

Without uncovering of the truth, without justice,
national reconciliation can hardly be achieved. It is
therefore right that the draft resolution before us stresses
the importance of full cooperation with the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. This draft resolution
also makes it clear that the Implementation Force has a role
to play in this respect.

The international community will not be able
indefinitely to sustain the peace operation that effectively
begins today. Therefore, the parties themselves must face
their responsibility. They must fully use this best chance in
a long time to achieve peace with the help of the entire
community of nations. If this effort fails, the parties will be
alone - very alone - for a long time.

But, for now, together with the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - Bosnian and Bosnian Serb citizens alike -
we are putting all our hope in the unique chance that the
Peace Agreement and its full implementation offer to all of
us. It seems that, for the first time in four years, people in

 

Bosnia and in Europe will be able to celebrate Christmas
without war.

Germany will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

