Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing, which
was very precise and informative, as always. Allow me
also to welcome in the Chamber Their Excellencies
Mr. Riad Al-Malki and Mr. Ayman Safadi, Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Palestine and Jordan.
Let me begin by reaffirming Poland's commitment
to a just and comprehensive resolution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict through a two-State solution, and
an agreement that ends the occupation, which began in
1967, ending all claims and fulfilling the aspirations of
both parties, including Israeli and Palestinian security
needs and Palestinian aspirations for statehood and
sovereignty on the basis of relevant Security Council
resolutions and internationally agreed parameters.

Poland will continue to call on all parties to refrain
from actions in contravention of international law that
would imperil the viability of a two-State solution.
In that context, we are concerned about the recent
announcements of a possible annexation of areas in
the West Bank, particularly the Jordan Valley and the
northern shore of the Dead Sea. If implemented, that
would constitute a serious breach of international law.

The situation in Gaza remains dire, continues to fuel
extremism and radicalization and fosters instability.
We call on all parties to take urgent steps leading to
a fundamental change in the humanitarian, political,
security and economic situations in Gaza, including
by ending the closure policy and a sustained opening
of the crossing points important to the daily lives of
Gazans, while at the same time addressing Israel's
legitimate security concerns. We commend the efforts
led by Egypt, Qatar and the United Nations Special
Coordinator to improve the humanitarian situation in
Gaza, as part of the future Palestinian State.

We must be frank with ourselves. On the political
track, we must acknowledge that the process is currently
almost entirely blocked. The intra-Palestinian division
only aggravates the situation of the people of Gaza and
weakens the national aspirations of the Palestinians.
There is an urgent need to relaunch the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process. Everyone must be committed to
the Egyptian efforts in that regard.

We should uphold the existing international
consensus that the only way forward for the Palestinians
and Israel is the negotiation of a two-State solution,
with the State of Israel and an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State in the West
Bank and Gaza living side by side in peace and security.

Today our main aim should be to restore a political
horizon for the resumption of such a meaningful peace
process. A resolution of all final-status issues, including
Jerusalem, should be found through the negotiated two-
State solution.

Regrettably, the situation on the ground continues
to deteriorate, and the idea of a two-State solution
continues to be dismantled piece by piece, in particular
by an expansion of Israeli settlements. We are very
close to the point at which it would be difficult, if not
impossible, to establish a viable Palestinian State.

Poland's position on the Israeli settlement policy in
the occupied Palestinian territory is clear and remains
unchanged. It is also the European Union's well-
known stance. All settlement activity is illegal under
international law. Not only does it erode the viability
of the two-State solution and the prospects for a lasting
peace, but - we must to be honest with ourselves - it
is an obstacle to peace.

The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) provided a
strong reaffirmation of the international consensus on
that matter. The resolution underlines the illegality of
the Israeli settlements, stressing that the cessation of
settlement activities is essential for salvaging the two-
State solution.

Allow me to conclude by praising the collective
efforts by the international community to allow the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to fulfil its
mandate to provide essential relief, development and
protection services to Palestinian refugees and those
displaced by the conflict. In our opinion, UNRWA
remains a key contributor, providing humanitarian
assistance, stability and security in the region.

