The President (spoke in French): Before moving
to the item on the agenda, I would like to convey the
condolences of the Security Council to the delegation
of the Russian Federation on the occasion of the events
that occurred in Moscow yesterday, involving the loss
of lives of innocent people. I ask the Russian
delegation to receive the condolences of the Security
Council on this occasion.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Azerbaijan, Canada, Colombia,
Egypt, Italy, Japan, Norway, the Republic of Korea,
Sierra Leone, Switzerland and Ukraine, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
ofthe Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Egeland to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing from Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

I now give the floor to the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.


