Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, the Chinese delegation would like to thank
you, Mr. Minister, for coming here to New York to
preside over this meeting. We should like also to thank
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and Ms. Ann M. Veneman, Executive
Director of UNICEF, for their briefings. In addition,
we thank the Secretary-General for his presence at this
meeting and for his statement.

China attaches great importance to the Council's
discussion of this issue. We are opposed to the
recruitment and use of child soldiers and to other
violations of the rights and interests of children in
armed conflict. It is our hope that the Council will play
its unique role in the consideration of this question.
China explained its position in detail in July this year,
when the Council last debated the issue (see S/PV.5494). Here, I should like to highlight the
following points.

First, the Council needs to continue to carry out
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. All armed conflicts
inevitably put children and other vulnerable groups in
harm's way. If the Council is able to prevent, reduce
the number of and resolve conflict situations by
tackling their root causes, it will be providing the best
possible protection for children. We consider that
approach to be far more meaningful and effective than
any attempt to remedy the situation after conflict has
already broken out. The events of the past year bear
that out. The recent escalation of tension in part of the
Middle East has once again taken a heavy toll on the
lives of many children, whereas positive developments
in peace processes in other regions of the world have
brought hopes to children. That is further proof that the
Security Council should devote more attention to the
conflicts themselves.

Secondly, in considering the issue of children and
armed conflict, the Council needs to draw a distinction
between the situations that are on its agenda and those
that are not. The work of the Council is based on
country-specific situations. While the question of
children and armed conflict is a thematic issue on the
Council's agenda, it is closely linked to particular
peace processes and to the specific nature of particular
conflicts.

The situations on the Council's agenda are
essentially different from those not on its agenda. It is
true that the Council should be concerned about the
protection of children in both types of situations;
nonetheless, it should follow different approaches in
dealing with them. Relevant resolutions of the Security
Council have specific provisions to that effect.
Furthermore, many countries not on the Council's
agenda have misgivings about the motives behind and
implications of the Council's consideration of the
situations in their countries. Therefore, the Council
should try to allay their concerns by engaging them in
dialogue and cooperation so as to convince them that
the purpose of its work is to protect children.

Thirdly, we need to continue to improve the
monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and
armed conflict, as well as the work carried out by the
Working Group. Although progress has been made
since the mechanism became operational, a little more
than a year ago, it is still at an early stage of
application. With the independent review only recently
completed, the mechanism needs to be improved
through further practice and should refrain from
moving too fast or acting too hastily.

The Working Group has deliberated on the
situations of children in many countries and has made
recommendations to the Security Council. China hopes
that the Working Group will continue to demonstrate
professionalism and that, as a result of cooperation and
constructive discussions with the Governments
concerned, it will continue to submit effective
recommendations to the Council.

Furthermore, China has always advised against
the frequent resort to sanctions or threats of sanctions
by the Security Council, and we consider caution to be
especially necessary with regard to the question of
children and armed conflict. Every conflict situation is
different, and there can be no generalizations or a one-
size-fits-all approach. We need to work with the
countries concerned and encourage and support their
efforts to protect children. We hope that the work of
the Security Council can truly improve the plight of
children in armed conflict.

