Mr. Fonseca (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I find
myself in the same position as my colleague from
Malaysia. I too fall into the same category of "note-less
Ambassador" that you, Mr. President, have created, butI
think I am a conscientious one. I would say that, after
hearing so many statements, my delegation has little left
to say about specific aspects of the problem that you have
proposed for our consideration.
I think that the point concerning instruments that can
strengthen peacekeeping operations in Africa was well
addressed by my colleagues and, as Ambassador Fowler
said, these instruments are known to us.

The base on which we should act is also known to
us, and there are no surprises in what we have heard
today. There is some consensus concerning the direction
in which we should move. The fact that the instruments
are known does not solve the problems of peace in
Africa, and on this point I should like to make two
comments.

First, reference has been made to the fact that one of
the things lacking in Africa to make those instruments
effective is political will. Political will is a very abstract
entity which at times works almost like a magic solution
for very complex problems. We know how difficult it is
to create political will. There is a history of frustration
with regard to peace operations in Africa precisely
because of the difficulty of building such political will.

The other problem that I wanted to touch on is the
fact that though we may be familiar with the instruments,
the big problem is how to adapt them to specific crises,
because every crisis, every conflict in Africa has its own
dynamics, its own logic, and we have to be able to
calibrate the instruments to match the conflict. That, too,
is a very delicate and difficult political issue.

 

Having made these two general comments, I wish now
to touch on more specific matters that have to do with the
questions that you, Mr. President, have posed.

With regard to the cooperation between the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the Security
Council, I believe that the questions raised by my
colleague from Malaysia are also very pertinent. They are
not new; we have discussed them very often. I wonder why
could they not be answered and resolved in a quick and
immediate fashion - something that I think is in part the
fault of the Council, because our procedures are often too
formal. The time, the natural forum for responding to
questions such as these, a more open, more frank debate, is
informal consultations, but I do not believe that the
Secretary-General of an organization such as the OAU has
ever been invited to such consultations. So in part it is our
fault that there are difficulties in creating informal
procedures to resolve this kind of question.

On the question of instruments, may I just touch on
one of the instruments that we do have, namely sanctions,
and I will draw on the example of sanctions against
UNITA. Clearly Ambassador Fowler's work has been
recognized by us all as extremely important. I think that is
a curious case because even before he completed his work,
we were already feeling that the effects of the sanctions had
changed, that they had become more effective. I think this
has a lot to do with his personality, with his leadership,
with the strength that he brought to bear on this work, but
it also has to do - and this is very important - with the
changing political atmosphere regarding UNITA; a tendency
to strip UNITA of legitimacy, not only in the eyes of
Africa but also in the eyes of important actors in the
Western world.

I am going to follow the example of the Ambassador
of Gambia and mention you, Mr. President. You have said
some weighty things about Mr. Savimbi.

(spoke in English)

"Savimbi was the West's creature. Savimbi - the
blood of hundreds of thousands of Angolans drips
from his hands".

(spoke in Spanish)

These are very serious things that we didn't hear about
some of those involved in the Angola problem a few years
ago. This is something new that has helped create the
political atmosphere that allowed the work of Ambassador
Fowler to have the impact it has had.

Finally, I would like make a comment with regard
to something that I believe Ambassador Petrella has
mentioned and that has to do with the complex nature of
the roots of African conflicts.

I was very struck by what Ambassador Holbrooke
said on the question of AIDS. I think that was the first
time I heard it said that AIDS could have repercussions
on security. As we all know, AIDS is traditionally dealt
with as an epidemiological issue. The natural forum to
deal with the AIDS problem is not the Security Council,
but the World Health Organization. But I think that we
can admit that there is a deep truth to what he said. I do
not know precisely what the relationship between the
problem of AIDS and security is, but I believe we can
acknowledge that it is at least something we should think
about.

So what is the implication of this? The implication
is very simple: in order to address the problems of
conflict and crises in Africa, we need to move beyond the
Security Council. I think that this is the natural and
necessary conclusion to be drawn from the kind of
observation made by Ambassador Holbrooke. The
problem is how to do this. How can activities be
coordinated, and even more than activities, how can a
coordinated diagnosis be arrived at that will include not
only specific political and security aspects, but also the
economic, social and other aspects that have to do with
health conditions in Africa.

