The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I too would like to warmly thank the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for accepting our invitation. I also thank the
Secretary-General and the representatives of the World
Bank, the United Nations Development Programme
and the European Union for their participation in this
debate.

I should like to emphasize three elements in my
statement today. The first is the importance of a
strategic dialogue between the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations. At a time when that
country is entering a stage of progressive stabilization,
this discussion affords us a valuable opportunity to
take stock together of the actions taken so far and to
analyse the challenges to come. Today's debate is thus
part of a process of dialogue that should continue, both
in New York and on the ground. In that regard, I
welcome the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Roger Meece.

Secondly, this dialogue is all the more necessary
in view of the fact that the Congolese are preparing
elections at all levels, as Minister Tshibanda discussed
earlier. This is an essential stage in the country's
democratic transformation. As a number of members of
the Council said this morning, the organization of the
electoral process is a major challenge that requires
special vigilance in order to ensure that the elections
will serve to consolidate peace in the country. France
will pay particular attention to the conditions under
which the elections will be organized. They should be
free, transparent, peaceful and credible. We would like
the United Nations and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to lend all
possible support to the process, which means backing
the efforts of the Independent National Electoral
Commission. The first and most pressing challenge is
registering all the voters. Earlier, Minister Tshibanda
presented us with a timeline for the organization of the
elections, which we welcome and will seek to see
implemented. France is ready to support the process
fully. We are committed to working side by side with
the United Nations and the Congolese authorities in
order to set up two police battalions for rapid response.
We call on other partners to contribute to training the
Congolese police.

Finally, we are aware that the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains precarious.
There are four particularly pressing challenges,
namely, neutralizing the activities of armed groups in
the east; setting up effective security forces; improving
the mining sector and the exploitation of natural
resources; and ensuring the protection of civilians,
particularly against sexual violence, and strengthening
the fight against impunity.

In conclusion, the international community,
which for a long time has been committed to improving
security in the region, is ready to back the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We require a clear commitment
on the country's behalf on how it intends to continue
with its democratic transformation, such that together
we will be in a position to build a partnership of trust.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Tegegnework Gettu, who
will speak on behalf of the United Nations
Development Programme.

