The President: I thank the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania for his kind words addressed
to me and to my predecessor.

The next speaker is the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

Mr. Ibrahim (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
(interpretation from Arabic): I would like to extend my
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I would also
like to express our gratitude and appreciation for the skill
demonstrated by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Gambia and members of his delegation in their
stewardship of the Council last month.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable

 

peace and sustainable development in Africa. The report
contains many subjects and proposals that merit serious
examination and deliberate study by bodies of the United
Nations.

My delegation will only make preliminary remarks on
the report at this stage. Following an in-depth analysis, we
will define our position regarding the subjects and the
proposals contained therein when the report is discussed by
other relevant bodies.

I would like to state at the outset that the Secretary-
General indeed put his finger on the root causes of the
perennial problems when he identified the results of the
policies and strategies of the Congress of Berlin in 1885 as
the primary causes which fuel conflict and division
afflicting several African societies. The colonial Powers
attending the Congress of Berlin partitioned Africa into
territorial units. Kingdoms and States in Africa which
enjoyed a high civilizational and cultural level were
arbitrarily divided and groups and ethnicities were
arbitrarily and unjustly fragmented. Likewise, unrelated
areas, peoples and tribes were joined together.

The review contained in the report of the Secretary-
General reveals that the full spectrum of Africa's problems
of political instability in some regions and economic
underdevelopment in most if not all countries arose as a
result of the practices of those who drew the political
boundaries of Africa's countries. Not a single African State
demarcated its own political borders with its neighbours.
The colonial Powers did that; they divided tribes and
communities and sowed the seeds of the violent conflict
that we are now witnessing in most parts of the continent.
African communities knew neither tyranny nor human
rights violations before colonialism. Disputes between
tribes, communities or African political entities were
resolved peacefully by the wise elders and leaders of
Africa.

Despite that, we cannot belittle the political and moral
responsibility of all local political actors. It is their
responsibility to avoid by all possible means the tragedies
and disasters that arose from the fragmentation of their
societies and to explore every available means of ensuring
harmony and peaceful coexistence among all sectors of
those communities. Africa remains in its early stages of
development and therefore has every right to choose the
political and economic formulas suitable to its particular
environment.

In the economic arena, Africa has fared no better
than in its social and political spheres. The trade relations
laid down by the colonial Powers resulted in long-term
distortions, affecting African economies and economic
structures. The consequences of this are still being felt
today. The conventional patterns of trade that prevailed
during the colonial era, which focused on mining, the
extraction of raw materials and their transfer outside
Africa, have not significantly changed. Moreover, no
significant investment was made in the infrastructure,
such as in roads, railroads, ports, education or health,
among other things.

The trade agreements offered to Africa continue to
impose certain conditions that result in inequalities. These
conditions include demands of unrestricted foreign
investment in all areas and an orientation towards
privatization. This has resulted in the African
Governments' being forced to sell their economic sectors,
including their mining and forestry interests. To whom
were these resources sold? Not, of course, to the private
entrepreneurs of Africa, but to the foreign companies and
monopolies, whose primary concern is to make enormous
profits and satisfy the needs of their shareholders in
advanced economic and financial centres.

Is this not an injustice to Africa and an infringement
of the sovereignty of its peoples? Those who wish to
assist Africa should help to train African nationals and to
promote Africa's capacity to exploit the continent's
resources and primary commodities. Thus, risks and
returns would be shared within a partnership. Africa has
as yet no economy and no market and there can therefore
be no African partnership in the market economy. There
will be no peace without development, growth and
economic prosperity. There will be no development and
prosperity under the heavy debts burdening Africa. Until
the unconscionable terms of assistance imposed by
financial institutions, intergovernmental or private, are
rescinded; until Africa's debts, in which Powers vying for
control of the continent have ensnared African States, are
written off; and until fair economic and trade cooperation
agreements that take into account the particular
circumstances of every African State are reached between
Africa and the developed countries, the African
Governments will find themselves unable to satisfy the
basic needs of their peoples and will remain caught in a
vicious circle of conflict over the remaining meagre
resources.

It is Africa's full right to demand debt cancellation
and it is the duty of creditors seriously to consider that

 

request if they are truly troubled by the deteriorating
humanitarian, social and economic conditions in Africa and
if they truly see themselves as the future economic and
trade partners of Africa and not the new colonialists of the
continent. Any relationship, including economic and trade
relations, if anchored in equality, would have highly
tangible benefits.

However, it is unfair at this point to require the
African States to engage in competition, to their detriment,
with those who have progressed at Africa's expense and
have had a head start of centuries. It is, indeed,
unreasonable that Africa should be left to languish in the
grip of intra- and inter-State conflicts and backwardness. It
is illogical that the international community should stand
idly by, throwing crumbs of charity to Africa and giving
lip-service that solves no problems, satisfies no hunger and
offers no genuine hope of salvation.

If the developed countries do have the good faith and
political will to assist in the development of Africa, they
should at least desist from taking any measure that would
hinder the development efforts of the African countries.
One such measure is the imposition of arbitrary economic
sanctions, such as those imposed by the United States of
America on Libya, the Sudan and Nigeria - freezing their
assets, severing political and economic relations, and
denying them access to technology needed for growth and
progress. As if all this were not enough, the United States
has enacted legislation to block cooperation between those
States and other countries.

The responsibility for everything that occurred in
Africa in the past and that is now taking place should be
borne by those who originally caused it. The time has come
for the Powers that colonized Africa, exploited its wealth
and resources and enslaved its peoples to offer solemn
apologies and pay full reparations for all the damage
wrought by colonialism. As Mr. Robert Mugabe, President
of the Republic of Zimbabwe and Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity, stated before the General
Assembly and the Security Council, Africa seeks no charity
from anyone; rather, it claims a restoration of its rights. A
refusal to pay compensation and to offer an apology can be
understood only as a perpetuation of a racist attitude that
looks down upon the peoples of Africa.

These were general remarks on the causes and sources
of conflict in the African continent. My delegation would
now like to make some specific remarks on the content, or
lack thereof, of the report.

First, my delegation is extremely surprised that the
report does not make any reference whatsoever to a
conflict that has a negative impact on peace and security
on the African continent as well as on the development
efforts there. I am referring to the existing dispute over
the Lockerbie issue between the United States of America
and the United Kingdom on one hand, and the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya on the other. It is even more surprising
because the dispute has been, since its inception, at the
centre of interest of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) at the highest level. The OAU has over the years
made continuous efforts to reach an expeditious, peaceful
and fair solution that would uncover the truth and end the
unjust suffering of the Arab people of Libya, who have
been the victims of unjustified sanctions whose illegality
has been proven.

This interest in the dispute on the part of the OAU
was expressed by His Excellency President Mugabe of the
Republic of Zimbabwe, current Chairman of the OAU,
during his statement before the Security Council on 25
September 1997:

"I would be remiss were I not to raise another
matter of concern to the African continent that
requires the attention of the Council and that was
debated at the last summit meeting of the
Organization of African Unity, namely, the need to
find a solution to the dispute between Libya, the
United States of America and the United Kingdom
over the Lockerbie tragedy. In addition to the
families of those who lost their lives, many other
innocent third persons continue to suffer as a result
of the sanctions imposed on Libya. Now that Libya
has agreed that the two accused Libyans can be tried
under Scottish law, by Scottish judges but in a third
country or at the International Court of Justice, we
feel that this offer should receive your serious
consideration so that matters can move forward. The
Organization of African Unity stands ready to assist
in trying to break the present impasse." [S/PV.3819,

p- 4]

The Secretary-General of the OAU and the ministers who
spoke at that Council meeting agreed with this statement.
If the Security Council does indeed wish to help
resolve African problems, it only has to act today in
accordance with the wishes expressed in no uncertain
terms by the African nations and the international
community as a whole before the Security Council on 20
March 1998. Thus it would lift the sanctions imposed on

 

the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and adopt one of the options to
resolve the dispute proposed by the OAU and the League
of Arab States and endorsed by the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, the Non-Aligned Movement and the
majority of the members of the Security Council, or await
the ruling of the International Court of Justice, which
stressed that it has jurisdiction to consider the dispute and
the purely legal nature of that dispute. Therefore, there
remains no moral/political or legal justification for the
maintenance of sanctions.

Secondly, my delegation strongly supports the right of
all States to acquire the means of self-defence and believes
that it is their exclusive, inherent right in view of the
potential of foreign threats. It is inadmissible that only
African States should have their expenditures for the
acquisition of armament restricted to a certain percentage
without regard to the particular circumstances of each State.
In this context, the proposal of the Secretary-General,
whether regarding the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms or the volume of military spending,
should be reviewed. In this regard, we must recall that a
number of African countries are threatened today by a non-
African country that has an enormous arsenal of weapons
of mass destruction and refuses to subject those weapons to
any international supervision, while being supported by a
permanent member of this Council. My country would also
cite the military arrangements that are being made outside
Africa in order to prepare for possible interference in
certain African countries.

Thirdly, my country, whose people have suffered for
over six years as a result of the harmful impact of the
illegal collective sanctions which this Council was
pressured to adopt, would warn against the slippery slope
of hasty adoption of such sanctions irrespective of pressures
or temptations. This stems from my country's belief in the
futility of such sanctions in the first place, and its
recognition of their devastating effects on the living
conditions of entire peoples. We also believe that resort to
peaceful channels and means for the resolution of conflicts
is the only way to secure lasting peace and security.

Fourthly, my country welcomes the consolidation of
cooperation between the United Nations and the OAU in
the area of the peaceful settlement of disputes. We see this
as a natural matter which lies within the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter that afford
regional arrangements an important role in the maintenance
of international peace and security. As my country looks
forward to the promotion of this cooperation, we call upon
the United Nations, the primary custodian of international
peace and security, to enhance the capacity of the OAU
to prevent, manage and settle disputes and promote
peacekeeping efforts. This should be done through
supporting the Mechanism established in 1993 by the
OAU for this purpose. My country would like to
underscore the need for the United Nations to increase its
support of the capacity of the OAU and subregional
groups to carry out conflict prevention, management and
resolution. We also strongly oppose any policies aimed at
creating any military or security arrangements under any
pretext coming from outside the continent or without the
consent of the OAU. Africa, in the final analysis, has no
ally except itself. Experience has taught us that African
skill and wisdom, when not impeded by foreign Powers,
can indeed find peaceful and practical solutions to African
conflicts and disputes.

Finally, my delegation fervently hopes that today's
meeting will not prove to be an isolated event or a single
occasion. In this regard, we agree with the Secretary-
General's proposal that the Security Council should
convene at the ministerial level once every two years and
at the summit level once every five years. We also hope
that concern for African issues, especially those relating
to peace and development, will not be addressed by one
intergovernmental body only, but will be dealt with at the
highest levels across the board in all organs of the United
Nations system.

The President: I thank the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for the kind words he addressed
to me.

The next speaker is the representative of Colombia.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.


