Mr. Mladenov: Today, I will devote my regular
briefing on the situation in the Middle East to presenting,
on behalf of the Secretary-General, the eleventh report
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which
covers the period between 11 June and 11 September.

Let me reiterate that developments during the
reporting period cannot be divorced from the broader
context - Israel's continued military occupation of
Palestinian territory, settlement activity and the threat
of annexation; Hamas' continuing hold over Gaza and
its militant activity; unilateral actions that undermine
peace efforts; severe challenges to the fiscal viability
of the Palestinian Authority; and the persistent risk of
military escalation in the region. All those developments
collectively erode the prospects for a two-State solution.

Paragraph 2 of resolution 2334 (2016) calls on
Israel to

"immediately and completely cease all settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem" [and to] "fully respect
all of its legal obligations in this regard".

No steps were taken to that effect during the reporting
period. During this period, however, Israeli authorities
advanced some 3,000 housing units in the occupied
West Bank, including some 400 units in East Jerusalem.
Among the plans advanced were 354 units in Nili, 346
in Beit El and 215 in Asfar, which are all located east
of the route of the separation barrier. In addition, the
Security Cabinet reportedly discussed on 30 July the
advancement of another 6,000 housing units. However,
in a rare step, the Government also approved granting
construction permits for 715 housing units for
Palestinians living in Area C.

A decision by the District Court in Jerusalem,
published on 29 June, determined that under the
so-called market regulation principle, four houses
built in the Israeli settlement of Alei Zahav could be
retroactively regularized under Israeli law, despite
being built on private Palestinian land without the
consent of the owner. The market regulation principle
allows for houses built "in good faith" on private
Palestinian land without the consent of the owner to be
retroactively regularized under Israeli law and the owner
compensated. The decision is the first implementation
ofthis principle, according to which up to 2,000 housing
units in settlements could be retroactively regularized.
In response to the 23 August terrorist attack near
Dolev, the Israeli Government decided to submit a plan
for the establishment of a new neighbourhood in the
settlement with approximately 300 new housing units.
This decision is in line with the practice to expand
settlements in the wake of attacks in the West Bank.
Finally, on 29 August, a year after being evicted from
a disputed building in Hebron's H2 area, several dozen
Israelis moved into the compound, despite ongoing
legal proceedings to determine ownership.

Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures by Israeli authorities have continued across
the occupied West Bank and East Jerusalem. Citing the
absence of Israeli-issued building permits, which are
nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain in Area C
and in East Jerusalem, 165 Palestinian-owned structures
were demolished or seized during the reporting period,
which resulted in the displacement of 170 people,
including 85 children. Of those, nine structures were
demolished by their owners, including seven in East
Jerusalem and two in Area C of the West Bank.

On 22 June, Israeli authorities demolished nine
buildings in the Wadi Al-Hummus neighbourhood in
the village of Sur Bahir in East Jerusalem, most of them
located in Areas A and B of the West Bank, although on
the "Jerusalem" side of the wall, citing their proximity
to the separation barrier as a security concern. This
resulted in the displacement of 24 Palestinians,
including 14 children.

On 3 July, the authorities delivered several
demolition orders for structures in the Hebron
governorate, the first such orders based on military
order 1797, which authorizes an expedited process for
demolition of unauthorized new structures in Area C
and gives owners only 96 hours to demonstrate to the
authorities that they possess a valid building permit.
During the reporting period, three structures have been
demolished on the basis of this military order.

On 10 July, after a costly 24-year legal battle, a
Palestinian family was evicted from its property in
the Silwan neighbourhood of East Jerusalem and the
premises handed over to Israelis. This was done after
the Israeli Court ruled in favour of a settler-related
organization, which had obtained ownership of much
of the property.

On 26 August, the authorities demolished a house
and a restaurant - the latter for the third time - in
Beit Jala, displacing five Palestinians and affecting the
livelihoods of another 32. Following the demolition,
a new Israeli settlement outpost was reportedly
established nearby, without a building permit from the
Israeli authorities.

Resolution 2334 (2016) also "calls for immediate
steps to prevent all acts of violence against civilians,
including acts ofterror, as well as all acts ofprovocation
and destruction. However, the reporting period saw
worrying levels of violence throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory.

In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, three
Palestinians, including one child, and two Israelis, also
including one child, were killed, and 336 Palestinians
and 21 Israelis were injured in various incidents,
including clashes with the Israeli Security Forces (ISF),
security operations, attacks and settler-related violence.

On 27 June, in the Al-Issawiya neighbourhood
of East Jerusalem, a 21-year-old Palestinian, who is
alleged to have targeted Israeli forces with fireworks,
was shot and killed by a policeman. Throughout the
following two months, tensions in the neighbourhood
remained high, as security forces have conducted
raids, house searches and arrests. These operations
have triggered clashes with residents and were usually
conducted at night, causing disruption and trauma to
residents and businesses.

According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), on
30 June, three Israeli settlers physically assaulted a
70-year-old Palestinian man living near the Abraham
Spring in the H2 area of Hebron. On 6 July, a group of
seven Israeli children physically assaulted a 10-year-
old Palestinian child near the Al-Ibrahimi Mosque in
the H2 area of Hebron. On 12 July, a nine-year-old
Palestinian boy was shot in the forehead by the ISF
during clashes in Kafr Qaddum, in the West Bank, and
remains in critical condition.

On 8 August, a 19-year old Israeli was stabbed to
death in the West Bank, close to the settlement ofMigdal
Oz, south of Bethlehem. Two Palestinian suspects were
later arrested by the ISF. On 15 August, two Palestinian
teens stabbed and injured an Israeli police officer in
Jerusalem's Old City. One ofthe assailants was shot and
killed. On 16 August, two Israeli teens were injured in
a car-ramming attack near the settlement of Elazar,
south of Bethlehem. The 26-year-old driver was shot
and killed by an off-duty policeman. On 23 August, an
improvised explosive device was detonated near the
settlement of Dolev, northwest of Ramallah, killing a
17-year-old Israeli girl and severely injuring her father
and brother. According to the OHCHR, a Palestinian
family was forced to leave its home in the West Bank
village of Urif after repeated attacks over the past year.

Tensions in Jerusalem's Old City also continued.
On 10 August, the Muslim Eid Al-Adha and the Jewish
commemoration of Tisha B'Av coincided, which led to
tensions at the holy sites. Israeli authorities allowed
Jewish visitors to gain access to AI-Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount on that day under police protection. In
the days before the holiday, Muslim religious leaders
had urged worshippers to come en masse to AI-Aqsa
Mosque for Bid prayers. Clashes between police forces
and worshippers reportedly resulted in 29 Palestinians
and four Israeli security officers being injured.

In Gaza, the overall levels of violence and ensuing
casualties have decreased during the reporting
period, but tension continues. The Israel Defence
Forces (IDF) continues to use riot dispersal means
and live ammunition against the continuing Great
March of Return demonstrations. In this context, four
Palestinians, including two children, were killed, and
496 were injured by live fire. Some 10 Palestinian
militants, meanwhile, were killed in other incidents,
and 13 were injured, while one Israeli soldier was
injured by a grenade thrown across the fence, and three
were injured in other incidents.

In the same period, 33 rockets and mortar shells
were launched from Gaza towards Israel. Most were
intercepted but 18 landed in Israeli towns, causing
material damage. Although fewer incendiary kites,
balloons and other devices have been launched from
Gaza compared to the last reporting period, at least 140
fires were reported in Israel.

In a worrying development, on 27 August,
three Palestinian policemen were killed, and three
pedestrians were injured in two separate apparent
suicide explosions targeting police checkpoints inside
Gaza. On 6 September, the Israeli Security Forces shot
and killed two Palestinian teenagers, aged 14 and 17,
during the Great March of Return demonstrations at the
Gaza perimeter fence. On 7 September, according to
the IDF, an armed drone launched from Gaza dropped
an explosive device on an Israeli military vehicle at the
perimeter fence. In retaliation the IDF struck a number
of Hamas targets in Gaza.

Separately, between 23 and 27 June, three men were
arrested and reportedly subjected to ill treatment during
interrogation by Hamas for organizing a charity event
coordinated with a non-governmental organization
connected to Israel. Between 6 and 8 August, at least
four men were detained after they criticized Hamas on
social media. All were subsequently released.

Resolution 2334 (2016) calls upon the parties
"to refrain from provocative actions, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric". Unfortunately, such actions
continued during the reporting period. On 12 July, a
senior Hamas official called on Palestinians overseas
"to attack every Jew on the globe by way of slaughter
and killing," telling them "enough of the warming up".
The official's statement was condemned as repugnant
by the Palestinian Authority, and Hamas later said that
it did not represent the organization's views. On several
occasions, however, officials from Hamas and other
Palestinian factions welcomed and celebrated stabbing,
car ramming and bombing attacks against Israelis in the
occupied West Bank, calling the perpetrators heroic.
Fatah officials also continued to honour and glorify
perpetrators of past terrorist attacks.
Israeli officials also made provocative and
inflammatory statements. Leading politicians have
sought to publicly minimize the connection of
Palestinians to their ancestral land, called for the
annexation of Israeli settlements in Area C of the West
Bank, and rejected the notion of Palestinian Statehood.
During a visit to Hebron on 4 September, senior
Israeli officials reiterated pledges for the expansion
of settlements there and the annexation of the city.
Further, on 10 September, the Prime Minister declared
his intention, if elected, to "apply... Israeli sovereignty
over the Jordan Valley and the northern Dead Sea", as a
first step to applying Israeli sovereignty over

"settlements in Judea and Samaria, as well and also
on other important regions for [Israel's] security,
for our heritage, and for our future".

Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterated calls by the
Middle East Quartet for affirmative steps to be taken
immediately to reverse negative trends on the ground
that are imperilling the two-State solution. Some positive
developments were witnessed during the reporting
period, but they were once again overshadowed by
negative trends.

In Gaza, the United Nations and its partners
continued to implement the critical economic and
humanitarian interventions identified in the last two
reports of the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process to the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians. With those
efforts, the energy supply to households in Gaza
has more than doubled and some improvements in
the economy have been felt. A slight decrease in the
unemployment rate to 46.7 per cent in the second
quarter of 2019, from 47 per cent, was reported.

Qatar has continued to generously fund the supply
of fuel to the Gaza power plant and the daily availability
of electricity has more than doubled. More than 10,000
jobs, including 3,000 for women, have been created
by the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and other United
Nations agencies. Some easing of the import and export
restrictions by Israel, additional permits, as well as the

extension of the permitted fishing zone to 15 nautical
miles from the coast and the return of confiscated
fishing boats, are also welcome developments.

Despite those efforts, Gaza's health-care system
remains on the brink of collapse. In July, 44 per cent of
essential medicines in Gaza were completely depleted
and 26 per cent of essential medical disposables had
less than one month's supply remaining. Over 1,000
people injured in Gaza will require complex limb
reconstruction treatment and may risk losing limbs due
to infection.

On 22 August, Israel and the Palestinian Authority
reached an arrangement, whereby the Palestinian
Authority received on an ad hoc basis approximately
$568 million in reimbursed taxes levied by Israel on fuel.
While providing some temporary relief, the Palestinian
Government's ability to deliver services remains
severely affected by the continued disagreement over
the bulk of the tax revenue transfers.

On 27 August, Palestinian families demonstrated
throughout the West Bank and Gaza, calling for
the return by Israel of the bodies of the Palestinians
killed, while allegedly carrying out attacks on or
clashing with the Israeli security forces. In a decision
on 9 September, the Israeli High Court of Justice
reversed an earlier ruling and decided that Israel is
authorized to withhold Palestinian bodies. According
to the Palestinian Authority, 253 such bodies are being
withheld by Israel. Sadly, almost two years after the
reconciliation agreement brokered by Egypt, internal
Palestinian divisions remain deeply entrenched.

The generous support of Member States to date has
allowed UNRWA to reduce its funding shortfall from
$211 million in January 2019 to $120 million. As a result,
half a million Palestinian children resumed school on
time this year. In East Jerusalem, however, UNRWA
has reported on efforts by the Jerusalem municipality
to interfere with its work, including obstructing solid
waste services in Shuafat camp, replicating sanitation
services and attempting to enter an UNRWA vocational
training centre in Kalandia without authorization by
the Agency.

In its paragraph 5, resolution 2334 (2016) calls
on Member States "to distinguish, in their relevant
dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel
and the territories occupied in 1967". I note ongoing
separate proceedings in the European Court of Justice
and the Federal Court of Canada related to the labelling
of products originating in Israel and the territories
occupied in 1967. The resolution also calls upon all
parties to continue, inter alia, to exert collective efforts
to launch credible negotiations. No meaningful efforts
were made in that direction during the reporting period.

In closing, on behalf of the Secretary-General, I
would like to share some broad observations concerning
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) during the
reporting period.

The expansion of settlements has no legal validity
and constitutes a flagrant violation of international
law, as stated in resolution 2334 (2016). It must cease
immediately and completely. The expansion of illegal
Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, continues unabated. The existence and
expansion of settlements, including in East Jerusalem,
fuel anger and disillusionment among the population and
significantly undermine the prospects for establishing a
contiguous and viable Palestinian State, with Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States.

I reiterate the Secretary-General's concern over
statements regarding the annexation of the Jordan
Valley and the northern Dead Sea as a first step towards
applying Israeli sovereignty over all settlements and
other areas in the occupied West Bank. Such steps, if
implemented, would constitute a serious violation of
international law. They would be devastating to the
potential of reviving negotiations and regional peace,
while severely undermining the viability of the two-
State solution.

The demolition and seizure of Palestinian structures
also continues. The Sur Bahir demolitions and the
evictions in Silwan, as well as the use of military order
1797 to demolish structures, are particularly concerning.
Some 200 Palestinian families in East Jerusalem have
eviction cases filed against them, mostly by settler-
related organizations. The number of structures
demolished and people displaced since the beginning of
2019 has already exceeded figures for the entire year of
2018. Such policies must be reversed, and Israel should
abide by its obligations under international law.

The situation in Gaza remains volatile. It is shameful
and intolerable that people, including children, continue
to be killed and injured during demonstrations and
by indiscriminate rocket attacks or other hostile acts.
The Israeli security forces have the responsibility to
exercise maximum restraint and to use lethal force only
when strictly necessary, as a last resort, in response
to an imminent threat of death or serious injury and
in accordance with international law. Children should
never be the target of attacks or exposed to violence.
The launching of rockets and mortars towards Israeli
civilian populations is prohibited by international
humanitarian law, and Hamas and the Palestinian
Islamic Jihad must cease that practice immediately.

I unequivocally condemn all attacks on Palestinian
and Israeli civilians, including settler-related violence,
and call on all sides to refrain from violence and to
clearly and unequivocally condemn attacks when they
occur. All perpetrators must be held accountable for
their crimes. I also reiterate the call for the status quo
at the Holy Sites to be upheld, in line with the special
and historic role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
as custodian of the Muslim and Christian holy sites in
Jerusalem.

I remain deeply concerned about developments
relating to the clearance of revenues of the Palestinian
Authority. Despite the Palestinian Authority's
temporary reprieve as a result of the reimbursed taxes
levied by Israel on fuel, the financial crisis is very far
from over. I urge both sides to engage in a constructive
manner with the goal of restoring the revenue transfers
in full, in line with the Paris Protocol on Economic
Relations.

I would like to also reiterate that the fate of two
Israeli civilians and the bodies of two Israeli Defence
Forces soldiers missing in Gaza remain an important
humanitarian concern for all of us.

Despite our sustained efforts, the deteriorating
humanitarian and economic situation in Gaza is a
mounting concern. It is not possible to genuinely and
sustainably improve the socioeconomic situation
there without significantly easing restrictions on the
movement and access of goods and people, with the
goal of ultimately lifting them, in line with resolution
1860 (2009), and by reuniting Gaza and the West
Bank under a single, legitimate Palestinian national
authority. At the same time, it is critical to ensure that
the current calm be sustained in order to gradually
introduce longer-term projects that will support Gaza's
development.

I reiterate the call on all Palestinian factions to
actively engage with Egypt on reconciliation. Despite
the challenges, it is critical that those efforts continue.
The United Nations remains steadfast in its support
of Egyptian efforts in that regard, and all Palestinian
factions must take concrete steps to ensure the
reunification of Gaza and the West Bank. Gaza is and
must remain an integral part of a future Palestinian
State as part of the two-State solution.

As we approach third anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016), we can only lament the
worsening situation on the ground. Settlements have
expanded, demolitions have accelerated, violence and
incitement have continued. Achieving intra-Palestinian
unity seems an ever-more distant prospect, and credible
negotiations have yet to be launched.
It is hard to tolerate the steady deterioration of the
already difficult status quo. It reflects the collective
failure of leaders, politicians and the international
community to deliver on the vision that peace between
the State of Israel and the State of Palestine can be
achieved through peaceful negotiations, with support
from the international community, based on the 1967
lines, international law, relevant United Nations
resolutions and previous agreements.

There is no other viable solution to end the conflict.
Those who continue to support a two-State outcome
must acknowledge that derailing that prospect means
that Palestinians and Israelis are facing a grim future
of perpetual occupation, endless violence and threats
to regional stability.

