Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2018/1092) on the situation in Afghanistan and the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We appreciate the briefing
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto, based on the report, and thank those others
who briefed us on the topic.

Afghanistan continues to faces multiple and
complex challenges to its security, stability and
development. The people continue to pay a heavy price
because of the instability and violence affecting the
country. We remain very concerned by the deliberate
acts ofviolence that have been directed against civilians,
particularly throughout the electoral process, including
the spike in attacks on electoral and related targets on
20 October, which exceptionally resulted in the highest
number of civilian casualties recorded on a single
day in 2018. Therefore, we condemn in the strongest
terms those recent attacks. Once again, we take this
opportunity to express our sympathy and solidarity
with the Government and the people of Afghanistan for
their suffering and loss of innocent lives.

We reiterate our support for the proposal by
President Ghani for direct negotiations with the Taliban,
which has received broad and strong support from
Afghans and the international community. We also take
note of the international and regional communities'
continued commitment and effort to support the
Afghan peace process, including the various forms
of engagement with the parties to the conflict. The
long-term security and stability of Afghanistan can be
ensured only through a comprehensive and inclusive
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation and
political process. In that regard, the renewed call made
by the Afghan Government for direct peace talks with
the Taliban is encouraging. However, that will not make
any difference without a genuine response from the
Taliban with regard to the peace process or engagement
in direct peace talks with the Afghan Government
without any preconditions.

We congratulate the Afghan people and
the Government for the holding of democratic
parliamentary and district council elections within the
set time frame despite enormous security challenges.
We also commend the people for their endurance in
exercising their democratic rights amid high-level
security incidents around the election areas throughout
the country. Nevertheless, the number of incidents
witnessed on 20 October is a matter of concern that
could potentially undermine the electoral process. It
could also overshadow the next presidential election,
to be held in April 2019, if no substantive measures
are taken on the early preparation days. We believe
that building the confidence of the Afghan people
in the electoral process through the involvement and
participation of all the relevant stakeholders will be
key to ensuring the timely and successful holding of
the presidential elections. All Afghan stakeholders
have important responsibilities in that regard, and we
hope that they will demonstrate the necessary political
will and commitment to doing their part for the sake of
lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan.

Without sustained and inclusive economic growth
and development, Afghanistan cannot effectively
address its peace and security challenges. That is why
the National Unity Government needs coordinated
and comprehensive support from the international
community if it is to advance its political reform and
national development priorities, particularly as they
are envisaged in the Afghanistan National Peace
and Development Framework. It will be vital to
ensure that the international community sustains its
engagement and delivers on its various commitments.
In that regard, we welcomed the joint communique of
the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan,
which acknowledged and reaffirmed the commitment
of participants to an Afghan-led and -owned peace
process with the full and meaningful participation of
women. The joint communique also reaffirmed the
international community's commitment to a post-
settlement partnership with Afghanistan, including in
the economic arena. It also underlined the importance
of deepening regional cooperation in every area,
including on the political, security, economic and social
fronts, to the benefit of the whole region.

Finally, the ongoing engagement of the United
Nations in support of the Afghan peace process, as well
as for the country's social and economic development
and in the areas of humanitarian issues, human rights
and the holding of peaceful and credible presidential
elections, remains very important, and we will continue
to follow developments in that regard. UNAMA's efforts
to promote and support initiatives for peace talks and
reconciliation, as well as dialogue and support for
social and democratic development, with full respect
for the country's sovereignty and leadership, remain
very important. We therefore commend its active
engagement with the Government, civil society and the
people of Afghanistan, in line with its mandate.

Since this will be Ethiopia's last debate on this
topic as a member of the Council, we would like to
take this opportunity to express our appreciation to
Special Representative Yamamoto and his team for all
of their dedicated efforts in support of the people and
Government of Afghanistan. We also commend the
Netherlands for its role and efforts as the penholder on
Afghanistan over the past year.
