Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I congratulate the United
States on its successful leadership of the Council this
month. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. J an Kubis, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing and for his outstanding
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan. His tireless work over the past several
months has been essential as Afghanistan grapples with
a challenging election period. As the end of Mr. Kubis's
tenure approaches, I wish him every success in his
future endeavours. I also wish to thank the Secretary-
General and his team for their support of my country
throughout the election process, and for the Secretary-
General's recent report (S/2014/656) on the situation in
Afghanistan.

On 5 April and 14 June, millions of Afghans cast
their votes to elect the future leader of the country,
risking their lives and defying Afghanistan's enemies
to exercise their democratic rights. In doing so, they
demonstrated remarkable bravery in the face of
terrorism and a stalwart commitment to a peaceful,
democratic and prosperous Afghanistan. The elections
marked the end of Afghanistan's transition and the
beginning of the transformation decade - a moment
of tremendous importance as the country emerges
from over 30 years of war. For the Afghan people, the
elections represented an historic opportunity to vote for
hope, democracy and lasting peace.

However, despite the impressive turnout and
enthusiasm of millions of Afghans, the elections have
turned into a protracted, complex and even at times
messy process, with many unforeseeable challenges.
Disputes related to allegations of fraud in the second
round and subsequent political turmoil necessitated
substantial efforts to avoid a crisis. To that end, with
the support of the international community, both
presidential candidates signed a joint declaration
on 8 August, in line with the political and technical
frameworks agreed on 12 July. The declaration detailed
their unified vision for a full audit, based on agreed
criteria prepared by the United Nations, and the
formation of a national unity Government consistent
with the Afghan Constitution.

Following the agreement, the Independent Election
Commission, in close collaboration with the United
Nations and the international community, carried out an
audit in accordance with Afghan laws and international
standards. In an exercise unprecedented in scale and
complexity, the Commission evaluated every single
vote cast in the run-off, from 22,828 ballot boxes and all
34 provinces. The audit was conducted under extensive
national and international observation and supervision
to protect the credibility and fairness of the election
results. It has been an immense undertaking, involving
hundreds of United Nations staff, diplomatic personnel,
international and domestic observers, agents from each
campaign and Afghan electoral staff. On behalf of the
Government and the people of Afghanistan, I would
like to express my appreciation to all domestic and
international observers and staff who worked day and
night to complete the audit.

We are grateful to the international community,
particularly the United States and the United
Nations - and namely to President Obama and
Secretary John Kerry, who remained in touch with the
candidates either by phone or directly by travelling to
Afghanistan - as well as to Mr. Jan Kubis and other
United Nations colleagues for supporting the audit
process and for their role in facilitating negotiations
and cooperation between the two campaign teams. The
Afghan people expect those efforts to bring a successful
and prompt end to the process.

The audit has now been completed, and we await the
announcement of the final results. The Afghan people
are eager to move past this difficult chapter and to see a
new Government start its work, in the spirit of national
unity, to preserve the gains of the past decade and
bring peace and prosperity to all. As President Karzai
reiterated yesterday, the Afghan people urgently need
to see the process come to a close and a new President
and Government inaugurated.

President Hamid Karzai chaired a meeting this
morning with the elders, thejihadi leaders and the heads
of the chief branches of the State to discuss election
issues and the negotiations between the two candidates.
Participants in the meeting expressed concern over a
prolonged election process and said that people have
grown restless and are worried. The meeting decided
that the elders would meet with the two candidates
tomorrow morning, Friday, 19 September, to help reach
a quick agreement.
The past six months have been extremely challenging
for the people of Afghanistan. The electoral impasse
has seriously impacted the economy of the country, the
security of the country and the mindset of its people.
In order to ensure future stability, the following issues
require the immediate focus of Afghanistan and its
international partners,

First, the economic situation is increasingly dire,
exacerbated by the political uncertainty surrounding
the elections dispute. The past several months have
seen a steep drop in economic growth, domestic
revenue collection and national income, amounting to
billions of dollars in losses and threatening the long-
term stability of the country. The Government is doing
its utmost to keep the financial stability of the country
intact, but it will be difficult to resolve the impending
crisis without international support.

Secondly, the security situation is worsening. The
Taliban and other terrorist and violent extremist groups
took advantage of the electoral impasse to destabilize
the country with violence. Their use of suicide attacks,
improvised explosive devices and rocket mortars in
populated areas have caused a surge in casualties
of civilians and security personnel, making this the
deadliest period for the Afghan National Security
Forces and the Afghan people since 2001. Cross-border
shelling has further contributed to a dismal security
situation and associated loss of life. While the Afghan
National Security Forces have countered the majority
of insurgents, and in doing so demonstrated ability,
professionalism and courage, the shadow of the violence
continues to loom large over Afghanistan.

Thirdly, there is a dangerous atmosphere of
division and fragmentation. The political impasse has
jeopardized the resounding hope and enthusiasm so
prevalent on election day, and with them the Afghan
people's optimism for the country's future. We
have worked tirelessly over the past decade to build
national consensus and unity, but over the past several
months, fears of a return to the dark days of the past
have reemerged. The Afghan nation would like to see
humility, reason and restraint triumph over mistrust
and division; only that will allow the country to build a
peaceful and democratic future.

While immediate dangers require urgent focus, the
successful conclusion of the election process and the
formation of a new Government will allow for further
progress on Afghanistan's long-term priorities and
commitments. The country continues to look forward
to advancing towards its goals so that it can realize
sustainable peace, stability and prosperity at last. The
imminent democratic transition offers an opportunity
to reinvigorate efforts towards wider reform, inclusivity
and the participation of all segments of Afghan society
in the country's future. A new beginning will also allow
for further progress on the peace and reconciliation
agenda so that the armed opposition will lay down
their arms and contribute to a peaceful and prosperous
Afghanistan.

At the same time, regional cooperation will remain
essential, not only to peace and reconciliation, but also
to stability and progress in the wider neighbourhood.
Afghanistan is dedicated to strengthening bilateral
and multilateral engagements to enhance development
and trade and to counter terrorism, extremism and
sources of instability in the region. The upcoming
Istanbul Process conference in Tianjin, China, will
be an important step in that regard, and we appreciate
China's leadership in moving the initiative forward.

Afghanistan is committed to long-term partnerships
with the international community, which will be
crucial to the success of the transformation decade
and beyond. We welcome the declaration of NATO
in Wales earlier this month that it stands ready to
train, advise and assist the Afghan National Security
Forces after 2014, and its enduring commitment to
the country throughout the transformation decade.
Ongoing support from our international partners is
of vital importance as international forces draw down
and the Afghan forces take full responsibility for
security throughout the country. We also look forward
to enhanced cooperation between Afghanistan and
the donor community. The ministerial development
conference to be held in London on 25 November will
allow us to reaffirm and renew existing commitments
as part of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework
and to strengthen Afghanistan's long-term partnership
with the international community.

Nations are building their own future, but in today's
world the international community has an important
role to play in helping war-affected countries emerging
from conflict. That is why we are here again today
in the Council to debate the situation in Afghanistan.
After 13 years of tremendous work and substantial
gains, the Afghan people yearn to live in peace and
security. As we move forward, stability is paramount,
not only to my country and my people, but also to the
wider neighbourhood, and countries in the region have
a major stake in peace and security in Afghanistan. It
is crucial that the country not again become a backdrop
for political rivalries, and that the region and the wider
international community stand by us to support the
successful end of the election process.

