Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2165 (2014) and applauds Luxembourg,
Australia and Jordan for their efforts in making the
resolution a reality.

Today the Council has taken steps to ensure
that humanitarian aid reaches those most in need in
Syria. It is deeply regrettable that this new resolution
proved necessary. In February, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2139 (2014), which
should have enabled the widespread delivery of
humanitarian aid to people in Syria. Instead, the Syrian
regime continued its use of barrel bombs, siege and
starvation tactics and its blocking of delivery of aid to
its own people. Millions of people were left suffering,
while supplies of food and medicines were left waiting
if only access were granted.

Since the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014), in
February, the Syrian humanitarian crisis has worsened
significantly. A further 1.5 million people are in need,
with an additional 1.2 million in hard-to-reach areas.
Resolution 2165 (2014) is designed to reverse that trend.
We are determined to ensure that it has a real impact on
the ground.

Today's resolution authorizes the United Nations
to use four additional border crossings to deliver
life-saving humanitarian aid to some of the hardest-
to-reach areas, without any opportunity for the Syrian
regime to obstruct, impede or delay that assistance.
That means that an additional 1.3 million people can
be immediately reached. As such, it marks a major
step forward in the international community's efforts
to respond to the horrendous suffering in Syria. It
addresses the Syrian regime's appalling neglect of the
human suffering of its own people.

We call on the Secretary-General to swiftly deploy
the monitoring mission so that aid can flow through
the additional border crossings, and to implement
the operation in coordination with the existing
non-governmental organizations that are already
playing a vital role in getting aid to people in need.

The number of individuals engulfed in the tragedy of
the Syrian crisis is staggering. Over 170,000 people are
dead. Hundreds of thousands more have been injured.
More than 10.8 million people are in need - 4.7 million
ofthem in hard-to-reach areas, and 2.9 million refugees.
Today the Council has demonstrated that it is possible
to work together to alleviate some of that suffering. But
this resolution is just one step in addressing the world's
worst humanitarian crisis. The only lasting solution to
the crisis in Syria is through a political solution. The
United Kingdom urges all parties to work cooperatively
with the new United Nations Special Envoy, Mr. de
Mistura, towars a Syrian-led political transition that
truly reflects the will of the people.

This is a strong resolution that is practical and
operational and that will save millions of people's lives.
But much more is needed to bring an end to the tragedy
taking place every day in Syria. The United Kingdom
will continue to work for an end to hostilities and to
empower the United Nations to deliver life-saving aid.

