Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
would like to thank Mr. Guehenno for his concise
briefing and his able stewardship of the Senior
Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities. We are also grateful to Ms. Malcorra
for sharing the invaluable perspective of the
Department of Field Support on this issue. We also
recognize the presence of Ambassador Gasana, Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, and appreciate his
contribution to this debate.

The civilian capacity review is an ambition yet
necessary advancement in the effort to make our
service delivery more responsive to the needs of
Member States in the twenty-first century. As threats to
peace and stability increasingly arise from health and
environmental hazards, as well as from armed conflict,
our response mechanisms must be recalibrated and
optimized. The framework so well delineated in the
report before us (see S/2011/85) provides a solid
foundation for this project. Nigeria accordingly
supports the vision of the review.

The four key pillars which frame the
recommendations are very well defined. They aim to
strengthen national ownership, broaden and deepen the
pool of international civilian capacity and improve the
appropriateness, timeliness and effectiveness of United
Nations support. There are several peacekeeping and
peacebuilding programmes that would benefit from a
better harnessing of the capacities of all actors. Indeed,
transition situations, such as in South Sudan, that we
have identified this morning present opportunities to
identify best practices in applying civilian capabilities
in consonance with nationally determined priorities.

The need to assess local needs and existing local
capacities, including the capacity to absorb assistance,
before we even set about deploying international
capacities has often been central to our discussion,
especially in the Council. This is mostly true of
countries emerging from conflict, which face critical
shortages of the capacities and institutions to sustain
peace. The United Nations system has an obligation to
support the development of home-grown capacities
while temporarily filling the gaps to re-establish the
rule of law and restore basic services.

With this review, we now have a policy proposal
that will determine how these strategies are
implemented in the field. As the report seeks to enlist
all the key actors in this endeavour, we are encouraged
by the initial steps taken by the United Nations
Development Programme and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to review their
needs and capacity assessment methodologies to better
attune their work in the field. We sincerely hope that
the DPKO and the Council can together find ways to
reflect certain elements of the review when renewing
peacekeeping mandates.

I must say that we are encouraged that the review
addressed even the most sensitive areas of analysis,
including training for better leaders among a civilian
core and creating a culture of accountability. The
recommendations in this regard acknowledge that, as a
facilitator and partner for peace, the United Nations
must be guided in its every action by the needs and
priorities of the communities that we serve.

Nigeria would very much like to see this review
as a catalyst for change. It is with satisfaction,
therefore, that we welcome the Secretary-General's
decision to establish a Steering Group empowered to
facilitate decision-making and pursue coordinated
action. We have no doubt that Ms. Malcorra is up to the
task of leading the Steering Group. We look forward to
receiving the formal views of the Secretary-General
and his proposals on concrete reform measures and
resource allocation.

The civilian capacity review enjoins all of us to
utilize available resources more effectively and more
efficiently, to seek out and deploy our brightest and
best, and to draw on the full range of global and
national capacities. In that way, we can increase the
ability of the United Nations to keep pace with
changing circumstances in the field.

In concluding, I must state that Nigeria has
invaluable experience in building international civilian
capacities. The Nigerian Technical Aid Corps Scheme,
since its inception 17 years ago, has deployed over
2,000 volunteers to complement national efforts to fill
capacity gaps in more than 27 African, Caribbean and
Pacific countries, in the true spirit of South-South
cooperation. Indeed, we have shared technical know-
how and expertise with recipient countries based on
assessed and perceived needs. In supporting the review,
we are willing to offer lessons learned and to work
closely with the United Nations.

