Mr. Honwana: At the request of the Council, I
have the honour to present an update on the latest
reports we have received about the situation on the
border between Djibouti and Eritrea. At the outset, I
would like to reiterate that the United Nations does not
have a presence in the area and that this briefing relies
only on reports we have received. I look forward to
hearing the Prime Minister's briefing for greater detail.

Since the Secretariat's last briefing to the
Council, all our interlocutors have described the
situation at the border as calm but tense, with military
regroupings on either side of the border. Apparently,
the de facto ceasefire that Djibouti and Eritrea have
observed since last week continues to hold. According
to local Somali radio, Eritrea has reportedly deployed
heavy military equipment in Ras Doumeira, north-east
of Obock. Another source reported the reinforcement
of Eritrean troops near the town of Daddato, located
north-west of Obock. That may indicate tensions in the
north-west and the north-east of Djibouti. A Somali
newspaper also reported that, on 15 June, an Eritrean
gunboat was sunk after being hit by a missile. All the
crew of the gunboat are believed dead and it is not
known whether the missile was fired by a French
warship or the Djiboutian navy.

While the local press and other sources report
that Djiboutian forces have reoccupied lost ground and
have massively regrouped near the border, other
reports indicate that they have in fact retreated to a
position about four kilometres from the border in order
08-39798
to be out of range of Eritrean mortars. We also
understand that there is a new Ethiopian military
presence on the Ethiopian side of the meeting point of
the borders between Ethiopia, Eritrea and Djibouti.

Reportedly, some 300 French troops have been
placed in the north-east of Djibouti to provide medical
and logistical support to the Djiboutian army. The State
Secretary of the French Ministry of Defence was
expected to arrive in Djibouti today. He is expected to
meet with President Ismail Omar Guelleh to discuss the
border crisis and to visit French troops.

On 11 June, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Eritrea issued a press statement accusing Djibouti of
conducting hostile anti-Eritrean campaigns and
"concocted animosity". On 12 June, Eritrean State
radio in the local Tigrigna language blamed Djibouti
for the border issue and accused the United States of
inflaming regional conflicts. That was in response to a
United States State Department press release issued
earlier that condemned "Eritrea's military aggression
against Djibouti".

On the same day, during an emergency meeting,
the League of Arab States called on Eritrea to withdraw
its forces from the border area. France and Egypt have
also urged Eritrea to allow mediation efforts into the
conflict. In addition, on 12 June, the African Union
joined the United Nations in calling for talks between
Eritrea and Djibouti to end the border clashes. In a
statement, the African Union Peace and Security
Council urged the two countries to show maximum
restraint, resort to dialogue to resolve any bilateral
disputes and give their full cooperation to all efforts in
that regard.

The Secretariat remains in close contact with our
colleagues in the region and regularly meets with the
Permanent Representatives to receive views from both
sides. In a meeting with me on 19 June, the Permanent
Representative of Eritrea acknowledged that
skirmishes had occurred in the border area a few days
before, but he said that Djibouti had initiated the attack
and that Eritrea had only reacted in self-defence. He
blamed the United States for creating wars in the Horn
of Africa region. He also reiterated Eritrea's peaceful
intentions towards Djibouti and questioned the
Security Council's hastiness in issuing a presidential
statement last week. He furthermore mentioned that the
African Group would hold a meeting on the border
issue with the League of Arab States, as well as the
08-39798
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Eritrea, in New
York on 23 June. He claimed that Djiboutian
dramatization and internationalization of the border
incident had gotten out of hand.

In turn, on the same day, the Permanent
Representative of Djibouti said that the situation at the
border was very risky and could ignite into a war at
any minute. Many soldiers had died as a result of the
fighting and there were numerous troops and heavy
equipment present at the border. He said that Eritrea
had thus far failed to explain the reasons for its
military presence in the area and refused to resume
dialogue with Djibouti. Eritrea had also rebuffed the
President of Yemen's offer to act as a mediator. The
Permanent Representative added that Djibouti had
never had any intention of waging war, but had been
forced to respond to the attacks by Eritrea on the
ground. He stated that the current state of affairs was
costly to Djibouti and that both countries needed to
return to the status quo ante.

The Secretary-General had an excellent meeting
with the Prime Minister of Djibouti yesterday. The
Prime Minister reiterated that this was a war situation
involving massive military regrouping on either side of
the border. They agreed on the urgent need to resolve
the situation through dialogue and confidence-building
and a return to the status quo ante. We believe that the
ceasefire should be consolidated, the matter should be
settled peacefully and the status quo ante should be
restored.

