Mr. Ramos-Horta: I would like to take this
occasion to tell you, Sir, how privileged and pleased
we feel that this meeting is taking place today, still
under your presidency. I would also like to express my
most sincere appreciation to the previous Presidents of
the Council, particularly during the month of January,
when we had the first meeting of the year on this
subject, and in May, when President Xanana Gusmao
and I addressed the Council under the United States
presidency.

Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
your Government and your people on your successful
bid to host the Olympic Games in 2008. I hope that by
then the East Timorese will be worthy competitors in
Beijing and will be able to take some medals away
from the Chinese athletes.

We have come a long way since the International
Force in East Timor (INTERFET) first landed in the
country. I do not want to go through again what we
have already said and what Sergio Vieira de Mello has
already so eloquently stated in his speech about what
the international community found in East Timor and
the difficulties, the destruction, the despair, the loss of
lives, the dislocation of people - more than one third
of the people have been uprooted and taken to West
Timor and elsewhere in Indonesia - and what we have
achieved so far.

Two years after the historic referendum, on 30
August, the people of East Timor will again go to the
polls and, for the first time ever in our 500-year
history, will vote to elect deputies for a Constituent
Assembly, who will draft a constitution setting the
legal framework for the declaration of independence
and the election of a President.

We have assured the Council throughout our
engagement with it, in the discussions, that - beyond
the efforts of the peacekeeping forces, which have done
an outstanding job in protecting the borders of East
Timor and providing safety and tranquillity to the
people throughout the districts ~ we on the East
Timorese side itself will do our utmost to cooperate
with the international community in ensuring peace and
tranquillity for ourselves.

This June we dissolved the National Council of
Timorese Resistance. In the history of decolonization,
this must be quite a unique experiment. Never before in
the history of decolonization had a coalition movement
dissolved itself to allow its members to create a multi-
party society and system.

There was some concern and fear that with the
dissolution of the National Council of Timorese
Resistance - the umbrella body that led the people of
East Timor towards independence and, in particular,
mobilized and organized the people for the 30 August
1999 referendum - there would be violence. Yet the
transition from the National Council of Timorese
Resistance to a multi-party system has been going very
smoothly.

In the first week of July, witnessed by Sergio
Vieira de Mello, the two Bishops of East Timor,
Xanana Gusmao and myself, and with His Holiness the
Pope having sent a message, the East Timorese
political parties signed a pact of national unity
committing themselves to accepting non-violence as a
norm and the results of the 30 August elections,
regardless of the outcome for each of them. So far, they
have been true to the commitment that they have made.
Political campaigning has started throughout the
country, with thousands of people participating, yet
there has not been a single case of violence among the
political parties.

The border region itself has been relatively quiet
despite occasional incidents. We regret an incident that
happened only yesterday with the fatal shooting of an
Indonesian soldier, who was armed but in civilian
clothes. The exact circumstances and exact location of
the incident have not yet been determined. I received
this information only this morning from my office in
Dili. Apart from these incidents, however, the situation
throughout the border region has been relatively quiet
and safe. This is a tribute not only to the
professionalism of the peacekeeping forces but also to
the successful efforts of the United Nations itself,
through Sergio Vieira de Mello and the head of the
peacekeeping forces, to engage the Indonesian side in
dialogue. We commend the efforts of the Indonesian
military commander in the Bali region, particularly in
West Timor, General Willem da Costa, under whom,
since he took over the operational leadership in West
Timor, the situation has improved.

We have also pursued efforts at dialogue with the
pro-autonomy and the pro-integration faction in East
Timorese society. There were successful meetings at
the end of May in East Timor, involving almost 100
people, of whom about 50 came from West Timor and
elsewhere in Indonesia. President Xanana Gusmao has
travelled to the border region and engaged some militia
leaders and political elements from the other side in
dialogue.

Bishop Basilio Nascimento, the head of the
Diocese of Baucau, also had a very successful visit to
West Timor, where he was received by thousands of
people. Preparations are under way for Xanana
Gusmao again to travel to the border region and maybe
to West Timor itself to continue the dialogue with not
only the authorities in West Timor, but also our own
people who are still in the camps in West Timor.

We have just arrived from the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) ministerial
meeting in Hanoi, to which we had been invited by the
host country, Viet Nam. Once again, we reiterated to
our neighbours, particularly ASEAN countries, but also
to others - the dialogue partners such as China, Japan,
Korea, Australia, New Zealand and the United
States - our continued commitment to develop
relations with the region, including with Indonesia,
because we believe that a strong, dynamic and creative
relationship with the region will be our best defence.
Only our ability to create a web of relations and
interests with the countries of the region will ensure
that East Timor will be able to continue to develop
peacefully in the years to come. As Sergio Vieira de
Mello has just mentioned, we have recently concluded
an interim arrangement, a framework agreement with
Australia, governing the sharing of revenue from oil
and gas in the Timor Sea. The successful conclusion of
the discussions on the Timor Sea is also a tribute to the
maturity and the sense of responsibility of the two
sides, East Timor and Australia.

As Sergio Vieira de Mello mentioned, and as has
been our concern, we nevertheless hope that we will be
able to develop alternative sources of wealth for East
Timor in order to prevent East Timor from becoming
dependent on only one or two commodities, such as oil
and gas. In this regard, I would like to inform the
Council that we are continuing discussions with the
World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme, Sergio Vieira de Mello, Timorese
compatriots and donor countries to set up a strategic
development task force that would look at long-term
development in East Timor. In this regard, we are
receiving concrete assistance from the Government of
Malaysia, which will provide a senior official from the
Office of the Prime Minister, dealing with economic
development, to assist us in developing a strategic
framework for the development of East Timor in the
medium and long term. In December, we hope to
present to the donor conference in Oslo a preliminary
vision of the economic outlook for East Timor in the
years to come.

If everything goes well, we will be able to
announce here when East Timor will be independent.
The decision will be made by the Constituent
Assembly in consultation with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We hope we
will be able to keep to the initial calendar previously
drawn up, and the date will be sometime early next
year. Presidential elections should take place
immediately after the adoption of the constitution, and
independence would occur sometime early next year.

However, in spite of the positive note I am trying
to convey, which is a reflection of the reality in the
country, it is also important to remember that peace in
East Timor is still very fragile, because of 25 years of
trauma, of people living in a culture of violence and
fear. It is not easy to erase this state of mind after 25
years of violence. Peace is fragile also because as long
as armed elements continue to operate in West Timor,
the people of East Timor will continue to live in fear of
what will happen in the post-independence period. The
incident involving an Indonesian soldier who
apparently strayed into East Timor and was shot dead
by vigilant New Zealand forces only underscored the
need for the two sides to continue to cooperate even
more closely to rid the entire region of weapons and
violence along the border. On the East Timorese side,
we very much look forward to working with the new
President and the new Government of Indonesia; we
send them our warmest greetings. In the last few days,
the Indonesian people have shown extraordinary
maturity in accepting the changes peacefully. We are
continuing our efforts to engage the new
Administration in Indonesia in dialogue. We look
forward to the time when East Timor and the
Indonesian province of Nusa Tenggara Timur, the
territory of West Timor in particular, can develop a
partnership to eradicate poverty, malaria, tuberculosis
and other ills. To achieve this, it is necessary that the
Government in East Timor and the Government in
Jakarta reach a stage where we really trust each other
and act with transparency.

I conclude by emphasizing that we are conscious
of the need for the United Nations to downsize the
military component of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor. We are also conscious of
the need to downsize the civilian component in East
Timor. After all, this is in our interest. We have no
interest or desire to have the indefinite presence of a
foreign force in East Timor, as professional as they are,
as welcoming as they are, as well behaved as they have
been so far. It is the nature of a society and a country to
want to be masters of their own destiny. We do not
wish to impose on the international community an
indefinite presence of the peacekeeping forces on the
ground nor of civilian personnel. However, peace is
still fragile although the process has been
extraordinarily successful due to the leadership of the
Secretary-General and due to the Special
Representative. What the United Nations has achieved
in East Timor in partnership with the donor countries
has been unique. However, any consideration of hasty
withdrawal soon after independence could undermine
what has been achieved at such great cost, in terms of
financial resources and in terms of lives, because the
East Timorese made such a great sacrifice and
sacrificed many lives to achieve what we have
achieved so far.

For this reason, I end with an appeal to the
members of the Security Council and the donor
community to support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General's report regarding the civilian
component and the recommendations for a prudent,
cautious downsizing of the military component after
independence.

We hope that next year we will all be able to
return here, and the elected President, Prime Minister
or Foreign Minister will return to this Council and
thank members once again for the tremendous support
and generosity that has been shown by the Council, the
Secretary-General, the agencies, the donor countries in
general and civil society.

