President Al Sisi (Egypt) (Spoke in Arabic): Let
me begin by thanking Mr. John Key, Prime Minister of
New Zealand, for convening this meeting.

I would like to express my deepest condolences
to United Nations workers who were targeted by a
cowardly attack two days ago while trying to fulfil their
mission to bring humanitarian assistance to civilians.
That should not go uncontested.

We are here today not merely to examine the
heartbreaking tragedy in Syria, which we have all
been following on a daily basis, but rather to assume
our responsibility as member States of the Security
Council, charged with the responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security and to find a practical
and swift formula to stop the bloodshed in Syria and
to bring an end to the five years of conflict and reach
a unified vision for a comprehensive solution to the
Syrian crisis - one that rescues our brethren in Syria
from their prolonged ordeal.

Five years have passed, and the bloodshed in Syria
has not stopped, with hundreds of thousands of Syrians
killed and with millions of refugees and internally
displaced persons. The political solution remains
elusive. Syria continues to suffer the rapacity of regional
and international parties that are seeking to exploit its
predicament for their own narrow interests, thereby
creating a breeding ground for vicious terrorism, which
is hijacking the future of Syria.

Allow me to speak frankly about what I believe to
be the root causes of the problem and the inherent flaws
in prior attempts to contain the crisis. An honest and
critical reading of the Syrian crisis over the past five
years is imperative if we are to overcome our differences
and move forward to save Syria and its people. I would
like to summarize my remarks in three key points.

First, any honest and fair reading of the previous
attempts to deal with the Syrian crisis thus far
leads us to one conclusion: we have become overly
preoccupied with the symptoms rather than the root
causes of the problem. We continue to be consumed in
recurring debates on reaching interim arrangements,
ceasefires or cessations of hostilities to reduce the
killing and destruction, or in attempts to alleviate
the ensuing humanitarian disaster, and so forth. We
have failed, however, to move forward in addressing
the core problem, which is the absence of a just and
comprehensive political solution that takes into account
the legitimate aspirations of the people of Syria.

We welcome the cessation of hostilities reached a
few days ago thanks to the efforts of Russia and the
United States. This cessation of hostilities led to a
decrease in violence despite certain violations and the
refusal of certain parties, supported by the outside, to
uphold their responsibilities, and insisting on hijacking
the future of Syria. Despite all of those violations,
the agreement was necessary to reduce violence.
However, such an agreement in itself is not enough. It
must be complemented by an immediate resumption of
political negotiations in order to reach a just, final and
comprehensive solution to the Syrian crisis. I hereby
call upon Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura to invite
all parties to the next round of negotiations as soon as
possible.

Secondly, the broad outlines ofany political solution
in Syria are quite obvious. However, transforming
those outlines into practical measures on the ground
requires upholding the principles of the national unity
and territorial integrity of Syria and maintaining
equality among each of its citizens across the political
and social spectrums, with the single exception of
terrorist organizations, which cannot have a place in the
future of Syria that we all hope for. There is no place
for terrorism in Syria, nor is there room for attempts
to re-brand the terrorist organizations. We therefore
categorically reject any attempts to circumvent Security
Council resolutions that designate those groups as
terrorist organizations.

Thirdly, it is important that we recognize that we
are running short of time. Every day that passes by with
Syria's wounds still open offers yet another opportunity
for terrorism to flourish and for sectarianism to
undermine the foundations of the nation-State in Syria
and the Levant. Let me be honest: anyone who thinks
that there can be a military solution to the Syrian crisis
is mistaken, and anyone who believes that terrorist
organizations can play a role in Syria's future is
delusional.

Our experiences during the Geneva and Vienna
meetings and with resolution 2254 (2015) have proved
beyond any doubt that finding common ground
among the key stakeholders of the Syrian crisis is not
impossible and that we can make significant progress
towards a political settlement in record time should
there be a political will to do so.

Egypt's experience in hosting an all-inclusive
conference for the various moderate Syrian opposition
groups in June 2015, which brought together Syrians
from across the political spectrum, with no foreign
interference, has shown that these parties can agree on
comprehensive documents that draw a road map for the
transition out of the current plight in Syria. The Cairo
Conference documents were produced by Syrians
without any interference from a non-Syrian party. They
clearly demonstrate that it is possible to find a Syrian
solution to the crisis. Council members must have all
noticed that these documents have been the foundation
of every subsequent effort, Syrian or international, to
put forward a practical political settlement.

The road ahead is clear. The implementation of
the cessation of hostilities should be developed into
a comprehensive ceasefire in Syria, which would,
in turn, guarantee the free passage of humanitarian
assistance to civilians in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas. As Council members know, Egypt has succeeded
in delivering humanitarian aid on two occasions to
more than five besieged areas in Syria, thanks to our
open channels of communications with all the different
parties and stakeholders. We continue to count on the
commitment of all parties to the agreement on the
cessation of hostilities as a necessary step towards
easing the humanitarian tragedy and delivering aid to
those affected by the conflict.

We reaffirm our readiness to provide all kinds
of support to this endeavour. However, the revival of
serious political negotiations remains a necessary
condition for the cessation of hostilities to hold and for
humanitarian access to continue. History has taught
us that no ceasefire arrangements have ever endured
without a political prospect that addresses the root
causes of the crisis. Syria is no exception.

Egypt's vision ofa solution in Syria is based on two
pillars. First, the national unity and territorial integrity
of the Syrian State must be preserved and the collapse
of its institutions prevented. Secondly, the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people to rebuild their own
State through an acceptable political solution that
represents them all and creates an enabling environment
for reconstruction efforts must be upheld. From this
point of view, we value the efforts of Special Envoy De
Mistura and we support his work for the resumption of
political negotiations immediately and without delay. In
that context, we reaffirm the importance of including
representatives from the Syrian Government together
with all opposition groups without discrimination in
the negotiations, in order for the negotiations to bear
fruit, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

We have no more time to lose. With the passing of
each day more blood will be spilled and more innocent
Syrians will continue to suffer. Egypt remains eager to
communicate with all parties to the Syrian crisis and is
committed to working with our partners in the region
and the international community to provide every kind
of support for the much-needed political solution in
Syria. It is our collective responsibility to restore hope
to the people of Syria. It is time for us to assume this
responsibility and tackle the root causes of the problem
immediately and without any delay.

