Mr. Osman (Somalia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I would also like
to commend your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, my brother Ambassador
Jerry Matjila, for his exemplary leadership in guiding
the work of the Council in the month of October.

We take note with a reservation regarding
resolution 2498 (2019) just adopted, which renews the
sanctions regime on Somalia. We regret that important
inputs were not considered so as to reach consensus.
The Federal Government of Somalia goes on record
again in seeking the lifting of the sanctions imposed on
Somalia since 1992. In that regard, I would like to raise
the following four points.

First, the sanctions imposed on Somalia constitute
the longest-standing United Nations sanctions regime
with the broadest mandate. Not only do the measures
of this outdated Somali sanctions regime fall short in
taking into account the Somali positive new reality on
the ground but they are also not properly aligned with
the Federal Government's flagship policy of rebuilding
a unified and sufficiently equipped Somali National
Army capable of safeguarding our people and territory.

Despite our belief that sanctions are flawed in
principle, they continue to be imposed on Somalia
without any clearly defined benchmarks to attain the
full lifting of the sanctions. We welcome the visit by
the Secretary-General's technical assessment mission
to Mogadishu in June to conduct a review of the arms
embargo. We have taken the team's recommendations
on board.

Secondly, as the Council is aware, the terrorist
group Al-Shabaab remains a serious threat to the
peace and stability of Somalia and of the region. The
international community has generously spent millions
of dollars on the United Nations Somalia and Eritrea
Monitoring Group and the Panel of Experts on Somalia
for the past decade. We firmly believe that that is not
sustainable and will not properly address the root cause
of the problem. Since we have limited capacity for
securing the remote areas along our borders, we call
our partners to invest in improving our Government's
capacity in border control to curb the flows of foreign
fighters and illegal weapons, as well as other resources.
It is our main responsibility to monitor and safeguard
our borders.

Thirdly, the military base in Berbera continues to be
in clear Violation of Somali sovereignty and territorial
integrity and contravenes the relevant Security Council
resolutions. I take this opportunity to commend the
Council for taking my Government's complaint on
board with regard to the build-up of the military in
Berbera. We welcome the Council's ongoing offer of
efforts to swiftly address those blatant Violations.

Fourthly, the best practice in monitoring a United
Nations arms embargo is to include expertise regarding
the subject matter and use evidence-based reporting
with a reasonable standard of proof. However, there
seems to be very little consideration given to such a
practice today. Although the number of panellists on
the Panel of Experts on Somalia is one of the largest
among United Nations sanctions regimes, the quality
of their work and reports remains mixed due to their
questionable level of technical professionalism and
regional expertise. And yet the Panel continues to report
false accusations, claims and gossip, undermining our
reform efforts and our fight against the terrorist group
Al-Shabaab.

The Federal Government of Somalia will not
tolerate the naming of Somali individuals and business
enterprises in past, current or future Panel of Experts
reports without a reasonable standard of proof. In that
regard, in order to pave the way for future collaboration,
we call for the establishment of a reliable mechanism
to redress cases where allegations are wrongly made.
We also suggest selecting from a pool of experts with
a high level of technical professionalism and regional
expertise, in line with the Security Council's best

practices, to conduct future investigations in Somalia.

In conclusion, we thank the Security Council for
its continuous support for Somalia's progress. We
encourage our partners to invest in the sustainable
solution we have identified in order to counter current
threats. That is the only way we Somali people can
reach lasting peace in Somalia.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
