Mr. Cornado (Italy): I wish to thank Ambassador
Kai Eide, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, for his frank, complete and
thoughtful briefing on the situation in Afghanistan. I
agree with the points made to that effect by
Ambassador Tanin, the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan. Italy fully supports the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union. I
would like to add just a few remarks drawing on our
national experience and our civil and military
commitment to Afghanistan.

First of all, let me reaffirm my country's full
support for the leading role of the United Nations in
coordinating the overall international effort in
Afghanistan in order to ensure greater aid
effectiveness, transparency and secure Afghan
ownership. We share the Secretary-General's
assessment that the current mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and the 2009 budget provide the Mission with the
necessary tools to implement the tasks assigned to it by
this Council and reaffirmed by the Paris Conference of
June 2008. We therefore concur with the Secretary-
General's recommendation to extend UNAMA's
present mandate for a further 12 months.

The first priority in 2009 - a critical test year -
is to hold free, fair and inclusive presidential and
provincial elections in accordance with the Afghan
Constitution. These elections are essential to winning
back the hearts and minds of the people and to
ensuring that the next Afghan Government has
legitimacy and a solid mandate. We thus welcome the
Independent Electoral Commission's confirmation that
the election will be held in August 2009, and we
encourage the Afghan institutions to find a solution in
order to ensure a functioning Government between 22
May and the inauguration of the next president. My
Government has already made a contribution to the
United Nations Development Programme Enhancing
Legal and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow, and will
also provide support for security on the ground through
our participation in the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF).

The many challenges facing Afghanistan and the
broader region require renewed international
engagement, a comprehensive approach and a long-
term commitment to working with the people and
institutions of the country. Overall security has
deteriorated in the past month and the insurgency has
staged stronger attacks. In his report (S/2009/ 135), the
Secretary-General has identified two disturbing trends
on the rise: attempts to destabilize new areas and
increased use of more sophisticated and asymmetric
attacks by the insurgents, with an increasing cost in
civilian lives. The announced military surge should
help to provide better security, ensure free and fair
elections and create a safe environment for good
governance and development.

We should also continue to use every means
possible to further reduce civilian casualties. ISAF has
done a great deal in this respect through improved
tactical guidelines and transparency. We should also
increase Afghan ownership and responsibility in
military action.

Simply increasing the military effort, however,
will not be enough. We must step up the international
community's assistance to the Afghan authorities in
strengthening their military and police forces through
training, mentoring and empowerment. Italy already
has six operational mentoring liaison teams embedded
in various Afghan National Army units, and a seventh
will be fielded shortly. Through our Carabinieri, we
also provide training and support for the reconstruction
of the Afghanistan National Police. Italy is also one of
the largest contributors to the European Union Police
Mission in Afghanistan, and the Italian Government is
considering further contributions.

Military efforts must be complemented by
stepping up civilian and economic assistance. Our
interventions are directed to the health and
infrastructure sectors and to other cross-cutting areas,
such as women's rights, assistance to refugees and
internally displaced persons, food security, demining
and fighting child trafficking. We are also committed to
improving governance in Afghanistan and to building
up the civil administration capacity of the country at
the central and local levels.

We followed with great interest the remarks made
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
especially on the recent positive developments in the
crucial sector of governance. The Special
Representative again highlighted the importance of
cooperation between key elements inside the
Government, which has improved such critical sectors
as security, finance, agriculture and commerce.

Our efforts in the justice and rule of law sector
since the initial post-conflict phase are well known.
The full programming sequence and planned
implementation of an Afghan national justice
programme remain of crucial importance. Coordinated
action by all relevant Afghan institutions is needed in
all the provinces.

The situation in Afghanistan is a regional issue.
To an increasing and more urgent extent, it therefore
requires an inclusive approach. We thus welcome the
ongoing efforts of the Government of Afghanistan and
its neighbouring and regional partners to foster trust
among and cooperation with each other. Following
previous G8 presidencies, Italy wishes to continually
reinforce the G8's engagement in favour of
Afghanistan. To this end, we intend to organize a
ministerial outreach meeting with the participation of
partners, neighbouring countries and other key
stakeholders, to be held in Trieste on 26 and 27 June.
We intend to focus attention on four areas in which
multilateral cooperation is significant and should be
further enhanced: border management, drug trafficking
and money-laundering, cross-border projects and
confidence-building measures at the civil society level.

