Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure to have you here in New York, Mr. President. We thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his important contribution and Mrs. Robinson for her inspiring words. Similarly, we welcome the many high- level representatives who have honoured us with their presence at today's meeting. It is fitting that we meet here today to commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations and discuss the importance of addressing ongoing challenges to the maintenance of international peace and security, as required by the world in which we live. It is precisely when tensions run high that respect for the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations becomes more essential and mandatory than ever. The Charter of the United Nations is far from being a mere document with guidelines on international law. This document serves as an indispensable guide for all nations on the path to the same destination - that of peace. It goes above and beyond Government mandates and State matters. The main objective of the Charter of the United Nations is to safeguard the dignity of human beings through the maintenance of international peace and security. Upholding its provisions is therefore not a superfluous matter. On the contrary, it is a matter of humanity and dignity, for which we are all responsible. The Dominican Republic is honoured to have signed the Charter of the United Nations and reaffirms, here in the Chamber today, its commitment to defending, promoting and respecting it. We, the peoples of the United Nations, are called upon to uphold the Charter in order to protect present and future generations from the scourge of war. Preserving peace is essential to building just and inclusive societies that provide opportunities for people to develop in freedom and where their human rights are guaranteed and economic growth and political stability are ensured. The Dominican Republic would like to emphasize the importance of promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes within the framework of multilateralism as a mechanism for conflict prevention, while taking into account the various tools that the Charter places at the disposal of States for that very purpose. We urge the international community to have faith in the power of dialogue and compromise to resolve disputes, while preserving peace and security throughout the world as the guiding principle, above any dispute and particular interest. In addition, we stress the need to continue working to strengthen the culture of peace. Present and future generations must view peace as the natural order of things and conflict as an isolated event. The development of a culture of peace through the promotion of the Charter is a useful preventive tool that can be realistically implemented by States, with the cooperation of the regional and subregional bodies of this consortium of nations. The United Nations is the home of all nations, where conflicts must be prevented and resolved to bring to our peoples the hope of a future free from war. It is here that we all have a common stepping stone for building a better world. The Charter is our manual for peaceful coexistence; let us continue to defend, respect and promote it. Allow me to conclude by recalling the words of the Dominican humanist of continental renown, Pedro Henriquez Urefia, who noted that the ideal of civilization is not the complete unification of all men and all countries but rather the harmonious preservation of their differences.
