Mr. Danesh-Yazdi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
wish to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the Council presidency for this month
and by thanking you for convening this debate on an
issue that is truly threatening international peace and
security.

The war machine of the Israeli regime has
continued to destroy the lives and livelihoods of the
innocent Palestinian and other peoples in the region.
Not only has that machine of horror and terror
continued to perpetrate war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Palestine, but it has also inflicted
enormous suffering and pain on the whole civilian
population of Lebanon for 34 continuous days and
nights. The whole world witnessed the horror as that
regime was joined by its ally - that is, the United
States - in their desire to wreak havoc throughout a
whole country, despite the tragic human toll.

In an unspeakable and brutal bombing campaign,
the Israeli regime, as the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2006/670) indicates, killed about 1,200
Lebanese and injured thousands more, the majority of
whom were women and children. Indiscriminate and
blanket air strikes, aimed at collectively punishing the
Lebanese people, destroyed an estimated 15,000
apartments and 140 bridges, according to the same
report.

The Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs also stated in her report to the

Security Council on 18 August that enormous damage
had been inflicted on the road and bridge networks,
other essential infrastructure and residential housing,
with some areas in the south having seen 60 per cent of
their residential housing destroyed. She further referred
to reports by the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the United Nations Mine
Action Service (UNMAS), indicating widespread
contamination by unexploded artillery, airborne
missiles and cluster munitions, including in residential
areas and public buildings, causing injury and death
among returnees and hindering the provision of
humanitarian relief.

Indeed, the recent all-out war against Lebanon
was a clear indication of a pre-existing and ill-intended
plan by the Israeli regime, which had already secured
the support of its ally - that is, the United States. In
the past several weeks, more evidence has emerged
supporting that assertion. The Wall Street Journal
revealed in its issue of 19-20 August that "at least since
2004, the Israeli military had plans in place for
possibly attacking" Lebanon. It goes on, adding that
the Israeli decision "transformed a border shoot-out
into a war and Virtually guaranteed it would become a
crisis".

Nonetheless, once again the Israeli onslaught
proved that it is impossible to intimidate the people in
the region into submission or to quash their desire to
live free from occupation and terror.

In fact, although the latest aggression was
successful in laying waste to buildings and civilian
infrastructures and in killing civilians, it obviously -
as the whole world witnessed - brought about results
that were opposite to those that the aggressors had
sought. It strengthened the resolve of the people to
resist aggression, occupation, intimidation and terror.

The cessation of hostilities, although belatedly
called for, is a relief for the Lebanese civilians and the
whole international community, which witnessed the
horror of Israeli State terrorism hovering over a
defenceless country for 34 days. Here, I should put on
record my Government's sense of profound frustration
over the inaction and the handicap imposed on the
Security Council for many weeks, preventing it from
fulfilling its primary responsibility - inaction that
allowed an entire population to suffer such terrible pain
and loss and that proved very costly to the Council's
credibility and integrity.
We are also alarmed at the actions and behaviour
of the Israeli regime, which is bent on undermining the
ceasefire and possibly paving the way for another
round of war against Lebanon. This sense of concern
cannot be overlooked, especially given the fact that the
United Nations has confirmed several instances of
violations of the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006)
by the Israeli regime in the past few days. On
19 August, the Secretary-General, referring to an
Israeli terrorist commando raid, expressed his deep
concern at a violation by the Israeli side of the
cessation of hostilities. The stated reason for that failed
terrorist raid is preposterous, as it immediately became
clear that the invaders were on a mission to abduct.
Earlier, the Secretary-General had noted, in his latest
report (S/2006/670), dated 18 August, several instances
of violation of the cessation of hostilities by the Israeli
regime and also, in paragraph 13 of the report, "one to
four Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace daily", as
observed by the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL).

In addition to attempting to keep the cessation of
hostilities fragile, the Israeli regime is refraining from
carrying out measures that would strengthen it. Also,
despite the enormous humanitarian need in Lebanon
and the massive access problems faced by aid workers,
the continuing sea and air blockade against the country
has yet to be lifted.

Moreover, there is no sign of any move on the
part of the Israeli regime to address fundamental
underlying political problems, including the release of
Lebanese prisoners from the Israeli dungeons where
they have been held for many years; the return of the
Sheba'a Farms to Lebanon; and the provision of
minefield maps showing the mines laid during the
18-year occupation of southern Lebanon.

At the same time, and as reported to the Council
today by the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, the Israeli regime continues its acts of
aggression and State terrorism in the Palestinian
territory as well. A few hours after its failed terrorist
commando attack on the Bekaa valley, the Zionist
forces, in another incursion into the Gaza Strip,
abducted the Secretary General of the Palestinian
parliament, bringing to more than 50 the number of
officials from the Palestinian Government thus far
abducted and detained by the Israeli regime. That
incident occurred the day after Israeli troops abducted
the Palestinian deputy Prime Minister and the deputy
Speaker of the parliament.

The massive abduction of Palestinian officials is
a new tactic and policy in the framework of the
continued criminal acts against the Palestinians,
specifically aimed at eradicating or weakening the
Palestinian Government, which took office as a result
of a free and fair election. It is ironic that those who
claim to be seeking to promote democracy in the
region look approvingly upon this ongoing repression
and criminal act.

The abduction of Palestinian officials is
manifestly an act of State terrorism committed,
unabatedly, along with numerous other crimes by the
Israeli regime in the occupied Palestinian territory. The
Palestinian economy has already been strangulated
since January by an unjust and illegal embargo, and the
Palestinians remain under siege even after the
occupiers claim to have withdrawn from Gaza.
Furthermore, the expansionist Israeli regime continues
to build the illegal separation wall, flouting the will of
the international community as expressed in the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and in the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
(ICJ).

In our View, putting an end to the impunity with
which the Israeli regime has been allowed to carry out
its crimes is the only way to bring about a viable and
stable peace in the region and to stop it from
perpetrating State terrorism. The Security Council has
an enormous responsibility under the United Nations
Charter to take the necessary steps in that direction. We
hope that all the members of the Council will live up to
their responsibilities in properly addressing the
underlying causes of the crisis in the region.

Before concluding, allow me to place on record
the fact that my delegation categorically rejects the
absurd allegations made against my country, reiterated
once again in the Council today by the representative
of the Israeli regime and its supporters. This has indeed
become a tired pattern of behaviour by that aggressive
regime and its supporters, aimed at distracting the
international community's attention from the Israeli
regime's crimes, aptly described by Lebanese and
Palestinian officials as crimes against humanity.

Those allegations are part of a psychological war
supported by a massive propaganda machine and
designed to create a smokescreen to hide Israel's
egregious crimes and State terrorism. A case in point is
the latest failed terrorist commando raid by the Israeli
regime in Lebanon. While its goal was in fact
abduction, it was deceitfully portrayed as an effort to
foil the transfer of arms to that country.

However, such allegations cannot and will not
divert the attention of the international community
from the root causes of all tensions in the Middle East;
that is, occupation, State terrorism and the aggression
perpetrated by the Israeli regime against the countries
in the region. Indeed, those few who have tacitly or
explicitly supported the crimes of the Israeli regime
against the Palestinian and Lebanese people are clearly
accomplices in those crimes and should be held
accountable for that complicity.

