Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming your duties as the
President of the Security Council for this month. I
assure you of our delegation's support and cooperation.

My delegation welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General as requested by resolutions 2304 (2016) and
2327 (2016). I would like to make a few points, if you
would allow me, Sir.

On humanitarian access, we have stated in the
Council time and again that it is not, has not been and
will never be the policy of the Government to hinder
or impede access to any humanitarian organization.
We understand the critical role they play in helping our
people. Therefore, as a Government, we strive to see
them succeed in reaching the populace - but we call
for responsible reporting. What I think is lacking in that
regard is an honest, open dialogue and understanding
between the Government and the humanitarian agencies.

As stated by the Secretary-General in his report
issued in May, His Excellency the President declared
a unilateral ceasefire in the country and called on the
army command to heed his call. However, it was not
a blank check for the rebels to continue their attacks
and provocations on the local population while the
army stood aside and watched. Those provocations and
hit-and-run attacks led to the hot pursuit that resulted
in the eventual capture of Pagak - the headquarters
of the rebels - by the South Sudan People's Defense
Forces. Today Maiwut state is calmer than before, and
life is returning to normal.

At this juncture, we would like to applaud the
brotherly gesture of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia, through the regional Government of
Gambella, in the prompt holding of a security meeting
with their counterparts in Maiwut state and in
discouraging those who took refuge across the border
from using it as a launching pad for attacks in South
Sudan. We also applaud the President of the Gambella
region for encouraging the South Sudanese refugees
to return to their homes, after he had been assured
of their safety and protection. We would like to take
this opportunity again to call upon the Council to
encourage the opposition leaders and their forces who
crossed into Ethiopia and other neighbouring countries
to embrace the spirit of peace and return home and
joint the reconciliation process.

On the implementation of the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, allow me to say that much has been
undertaken by the Transitional Government of National
Unity, including under its chapter V. Therefore,
the upcoming revitalization process - according
to our understanding - which is being led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
is merely intended to maintain the focus and momentum
of the parties, rather than to renegotiate the Agreement;
just as the national dialogue and Sudan People's
Liberation Movement reunification process, which is
being shepherded by His Excellency President Yoweri
Kaguta Museveni of Uganda, is a complementary
initiative to consolidate and cement the success of the
Peace Agreement.

Allow me to conclude with the question of the
Regional Protection Force. As a Government, we
agreed unreservedly to the deployment of the Force and
to working closely with the United Nations, the African
Union and IGAD in seeing the smooth implementation
and operationalization of the mandate of those troops
in South Sudan. The Government is still committed
to that decision and to cooperating with the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan. However, the lack of The President s aka in Arabic: I now invite
P

consultation that we witnessed few days ago in Juba Council members to informal consultations to continue

is something we hope will not be the norm, but rather our dlscussmn on [he "bled"

the exception. The meeting rose at 11.05 am.
