Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I wish to thank
the Security Council for having invited me to participate
in today's discussion, which is taking place soon
after the closing of the general debate of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, during which
the Democratic Republic of Congo and the members
of the Council themselves - its partners - were
highly active.

A new positive dynamic has been established that
is likely to eventually lead the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to lasting peace and stability, following the
peaceful transition of power that we witnessed at the
beginning of the year. Regional diplomatic initiatives
have been launched. A coalition Government has been
set up, with an ambitious agenda that aims to stabilize
the country, improve its governance and lead it towards
economic development. It is now incumbent upon the
entire Congolese political class to support that dynamic
and work towards its consolidation. The establishment
of the National Assembly, the Senate and provincial
assemblies - the parliamentary sessions of which
started last week - as well as the recent formation of
the Government that l have just mentioned, mark the
starting point for the consolidation of democracy in
the country.

Finding a balance in the functioning of those
institutions remains fragile. The United Nations is
working closely with the presidency, the Government
and all Congolese institutions to help them to prioritize
options for the consolidation of stability and ensure
that the activities of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO), as well as agencies,
funds and programmes, are aligned with national
priorities, thereby serving to enhance their impact.
While continuing to support the Congolese authorities
in neutralizing the armed groups, which pose an
unacceptable threat to the civilian population, we must
together strengthen the sovereign functions of the State
and its ability to manage the country by promoting the
rule of law.

(Spoke in English)

The opportunities offered by the advent of a
new political dispensation bring a wind of hope, as
the Secretary-General said during his recent visit to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Yet seizing
that opportunity is not without risks and challenges,
and it must also urgently translate into sustainable
improvement and relief for the many Congolese who
continue to live in a state of insecurity, dependency
on humanitarian aid and economic exclusion. As
described in the report before the Council (S/2019/776),
the recent escalation of intercommunal and armed
group violence - at times running along ethnic
lines - and egregious human rights violations have
led to significant population displacements in several
areas in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu provinces.
A large number of armed groups - both national and
foreign - including notably the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF), Nduma defense du Congo Renove
(NDCR), the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda (F DLR) and splinter groups, continue to exact
an intolerable toll on civilians, adding to an already
dire humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
I am particularly concerned regarding the level of
brutality used against civilians in a number of recent
incidents. The killing and post-mortem decapitation of
14 civilians, including ll children, in Bukatsele, Ituri,
as well as reported cases of female genital mutilation in
Fizi territory, South Kivu, are unacceptable and deeply
troubling. We will make every effort to ensure that the
perpetrators are apprehended and held accountable.
Another troubling incident occurred in the form of a
cross-border attack by a FDLR splinter group in Kinigi
village in Rwanda, resulting in civilian casualties
and threatening regional stability and security. The
expression of support from bilateral and multilateral
partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo with
a View to finding common security responses to the
situation in the east of the country is therefore both
timely and encouraging.

I believe strongly that, in addition to addressing
these security threats through military means, further
strengthening the core function of the State, including
through the professionalization of the defence and
security sector and the empowerment of the judiciary,
will enable the Government to better respond to these
threats. While further addressing the root causes of
this conflict, MONUSCO places great emphasis on
supporting the Government, including encouraging
local and national mediation and reconciliation efforts
and responding to incitement to ethnic hatred through
target strategies against hate speech. The ongoing
process involving the Force de resistance patriotique
de l'Ituri illustrates that efforts to ensure conducive
security contacts, coupled with sustained political and
community engagement, can yield tangible results.
Currently, more than 900 elements are pre-cantoned
awaiting a peace agreement, expected to be concluded
later this year.

Besides those processes, the reintegration of
former members of armed groups following the wave
of voluntary surrenders in early 2019 remains a critical
task. I strongly believe that that will impact on stability
in the country, and I therefore call on the international
community to support the Government in delivering on
sustainable, locally anchored and flexible community-
based approaches that will deliver justice and set the
basis for long-term peacebuilding and development.

I am encouraged by the overall downward
trend in the number of new Ebola cases throughout
September and early October. That is linked to the
strengthened coordination of overall response efforts
and an enhanced and integrated approach to create an
environment conducive for the response and a sharper
focus on building community acceptance to ensure full
access to areas affected by the virus.

We must, however, not waver in our support, as
the battle is far from won. Creating acceptance for
the response remains a daily challenge in areas more
recently affected by the virus. That serves to remind
us of the importance of not only addressing Ebola, but
also responding to the broader needs of the population,
including safety, health-care, sanitation and education.
That is in line with population's clear message sent
during the electoral period, calling for sustainable
development, health-care, education and, above
all, peace.

I reiterate the readiness of MONUSCO to assist the
Government in supporting the protection of civilians,
advancing stabilization and further strengthening
key State institutions. We collectively need to take
advantage of this wind of hope and navigate towards a
future that corresponds to the hopes and expectations of
the Congolese people. I would like to thank the Council
and Member States for their continuing support in
that regard.

