The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I thank Mr. Robert Serry for his detailed briefing
this morning. We also welcome the Foreign Minister of
the State of Palestine, His Excellency Mr. Riad Malki,
who has come to New York especially to attend this
meeting of the Security Council.

In the past quarter, two significant developments
took place. Following a spiral of violence in November,
a ceasefire was agreed on between Hamas and Israel.
The ceasefire is generally holding. Sporadic breaches
should come to an end. And on 29 November, the General
Assembly voted to make Palestine a non-member
observer State (General Assembly resolution 67/19).
That decision reflected the Palestinian people's greatest
aspiration, supported by the vast majority of the General
Assembly and the international community.

Regrettably, after that momentous development,
two punitive measures were initiated against the
State of Palestine by Israel: the announcement of
new settlements, including in the E-l area, and the
withholding of tax revenues owed to the Palestinian
Authority. The first measure scuttles a two-State
solution; the second debilitates Palestine economically
and financially. Both measures must be rolled back.
They are not in the interests of regional peace and
stability, nor of Israel.

We condemn the Israeli announcement that it
will expand settlements. In fact, the international
community is against that proposed expansion.
Settlement construction in the occupied Palestinian
territory contravenes international law, especially the
Geneva Conventions. The planned settlement in the
E-l area, by connecting earlier illegal settlements with
other settlements in and around East Jerusalem, would
divide the West Bank into two enclaves and destroy the
contiguity of the Palestinian State. It would thus render
a two-State solution unworkable. The contiguity of the
Palestinian State has been reaffirmed as an integral part
ofthe peaceful resolution of the Middle East conflict in
the Quartet road map. All States Members of the United
Nations, and especially the members of the Quartet, are
therefore guarantors of a two-State solution.

World leaders have spoken against planned
settlements, but so far there is only negative response
from Israel. At the end of last month's consultations on
the Middle East, the vast majority of Council members
expressed their position on settlements at a press
stakeout here. The Quartet, however, chose to remain
silent. The year 2013 is crucial. Ifthe relevant actors do
not take action now, a two-State solution may not remain
viable at all. It is probably the last opportunity for the
international community to move towards a lasting
resolution ofthe conflict. Procrastination in pursuing a
two-State solution is leading to its erosion. Delay does
not mean suspension of activity; it is tantamount to the
abdication of responsibility.

We urge both the Quartet and the Security Council
to display a sense of urgency. If the Quartet cannot or
does not move, countries with interest and influence in
the region should act to facilitate a resumption of the
peace process, based on the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Quartet road map, the Madrid principles and the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
A resumption of the peace process, however, should
mean action with clear benchmarks and deadlines. A
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
cannot be assured without Israel's withdrawal from
all occupied lands, including those of Lebanon and the
Syrian Golan. The Security Council must also ensure
and monitor the implementation of resolution 1860
(2009), as well as other relevant resolutions. The illegal
blockade of Gaza and the collective punishment of its
population must cease.

Peace in the Middle East has remained a dream
for six decades. A solution based on two States is
not an issue for the Palestinians alone. A single State
would also mean a demographic imbalance for Israel,
as well as continued strife, volatility and suffering.
Peace would remain elusive. The best course of
action for resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict lies in
establishing an independent, viable and contiguous
State of Palestine on the basis of pre-1967 borders, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. Two States, living side
by side in peace and security, is the goal that we ought
to pursue single-mindedly.

Let me now turn to Syria. As Syria descends
into deeper conflict, racked by internecine violence,
the humanitarian crisis there continues to grow
exponentially. There are pronouncements and
protestations by the international community to the
effect that it must respond swiftly to stop the killings
and move the Syrian nation - Government and
opposition - towards dialogue and a political process.
But beyond political rhetoric, there is no progress
towards engagement. The only realities are continuing
carnage and political stalemate. The Security Council
itself remains immobilized.

The Secretary-General and Joint Special
Representative Lakhdar Brahimi have used their
political capital and clout to persuade the parties,
countries of the region and Council members to evolve
a common platform for ending the vicious cycle
of violence in Syria. Diplomacy is all about hope,
so we must not lose hope. We need a ray of hope, a
breakthrough, a process that brings Syria and the region
out of this quagmire. The levers for a breakthrough are
self-evident.

First, both the Syrian Government and the
opposition have to change their mind-set that they can
win this bloody war militarily. Secondly, engagement
is the only viable path, and it is the only viable option
before the parties. They have to move towards each
other. They have to move towards common ground.
Thirdly, the regional Powers and key Council members
need to persuade Damascus and the opposition to
renounce violence and come to the negotiating table. In
this conflict, the Syrian people as a whole are losing, but
nobody is winning. Fourthly, the supply of arms must be
stopped forthwith. We know from our recent historical
experience that the supply of arms to groups advocating
and practising different brands of extremism can have
unintended consequences. An apparent quick fix today
could be a nightmare for national and international
actors tomorrow as multiple regions are plunged into an
even greater period of volatility. Fifthly, humanitarian
access needs to be improved to alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian people.

Finally, we fully support the diplomatic efforts
being made by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. We wish him
success. We want diplomacy to succeed.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to request all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with longer statements are requested to
kindly circulate their texts in writing and to deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to representative of Lebanon.

