Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Ambassador
Nikki Haley on her appointment as the United States
Ambassador to the United Nations. I have no doubt that
our two States will be able to strengthen our bilateral
relationship based on our common interests. I would
also like to congratulate the United States on acceding
to the presidency of the Security Council this month.
We have seen a critical and fresh outlook on many of
the issues under consideration, which is commendable.

I thank the United States for organizing this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East, and
in particular on the Palestinian question - an issue
that is at the very heart of the conflicts in the Middle
East and a very deep and historical injustice endured
by the Palestinian people. That injustice has become
a wall of tears used and exploited by terrorists to play
the Palestinian card and to further their own ends. It
is also used by certain corrupt regimes, such as the
Iranian regime and the Al-Assad regime, as well as by
Hizbullah, which supports them.

Saudi Arabia reiterates its position of full support
for the Palestinian people in their effort to regain their
sovereign rights, including the right to an independent
State throughout the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967, including East Jerusalem, in line with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. We call on Israel to withdraw from all
occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan,
Lebanese territories and any other occupied Arab land.

My country has not been content merely to
proclaim its support for its Palestinian brethren; it has
also supported the Arab Peace Initiative, adopted at the
2002 Summit of the League of Arab States in Beirut,
which constitutes the primary Arab contribution to the
peace process. The Initiative marked a new chapter
towards the achievement of ajust and lasting peace, if
only Israel and all the other States of the region that
seek peace and prosperity would support it. I also note
the Amman declaration, adopted at the Arab League
Summit in March. The declaration strengthens the Arab
Peace Initiative and could enable serious negotiations.
However, the Israeli side must also accept that offer
of peace.

One dangerous aspect of the conflict in Palestine
are Israeli plans and measures to judaize the city of
Jerusalem and to change its demography and Arab-
Islamic identity, as well as the status of Christian and
Islamic holy sites in Israel. Saudi Arabia rejects all
such changes. Jerusalem was the first city - the first
Qibla - to which Muslims once turned when praying.
We cannot accept that the legal status of Jerusalem
could be changed. Jerusalem cannot be recognized as
the capital of Israel, and countries should not transfer
their embassies to Jerusalem. International law should
be respected, and all attempts at political manipulation
must cease.

The international community met in Paris for the
Middle East peace conference, where it demonstrated
its commitment to the two-State solution, which is the
only solution that will make it possible for us to achieve
peace. My delegation has clearly stated that the path to
peace is very Clear. We need to follow the mechanisms
that already exist to put an end to occupation and create
a Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
within the pre-1967 borders.

We have seen extremely worrying developments in
the Syrian tragedy over the past few weeks. We have
seen the Syrian authorities continue to use chemical
weapons against their own people, and the Iranian
Republican Guard and the various militias, including
Hizbullah, continue to undermine the lives and dignity
of the Syrian people. Syrians are killed, displaced
and besieged in an unacceptable way, even as the
international community has made repeated calls for
an end to these hostilities.

The Security Council has yet to bring those
responsible for these acts to justice. We cannot accept
impunity, even if it should happen to prevail today.
However, we are convinced that justice will triumph
in the end. We must support the Syrian people in their
aspirations to freedom and dignity. We will eventually
achieve peace and dignity, however long it takes.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia supports the military
operations of the United States against military targets
in Syria in response to the chemical weapons attack
in Khan Shaykhun. The Kingdom insists on the
need to put an end to the barbaric actions, including
murder and ethnic cleansing, targeting certain Syrians.
These unacceptable actions perpetrated by the Syrian
authorities give terrorists such as Da'esh and Al-Nusra
Front an excellent opportunity to fill the void that is
left by the authorities in this situation. We insist on
the need to strengthen international efforts to weaken
the grip of these terrorist organization on parts of the
Syrian territory.

My delegation supports the efforts of the Special
Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and his mandate,
established pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015). We
need to make progress and implement the first Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and move towards
the creation of a transitional authority in Syria that is
able to welcome all of its people without distinction and
reject terrorism, violence and intolerance.

We had hoped that the nuclear agreement with Iran
would make it possible to end the nuclear programme
in that country and push Iran to abandon its nuclear
ambitions. We had hoped that Iran would finally choose
a policy of good-neighbourliness, based on strict respect
for international law, and cease to interfere in the
affairs of neighbouring States. However, what we are
seeing on a daily basis is endless proof that Iran has no
respect for these principles or for diplomatic customs,
in particular. You probably saw, Madam President, that
the diplomatic missions of Saudi Arabia in Iran were
attacked. Such actions are unacceptable.

Furthermore, Iran continues to back militias in Iraq
and Yemen, which is an absolutely unacceptable form
of interference. What we are seeing is the reproduction
of the Hizbullah model in other countries. Iran is also
interfering in the Kingdom of Bahrain. All of this is
unacceptable. Iran should content itself to respecting
international law rather than undermining security and
stability in various parts of the world.

