Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to begin by thanking Foreign Minister Aman
for presiding over this meeting and for Malaysia's
leadership of the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Zerrougui and UNICEF Deputy
Executive Director Brandt for their briefings and their
important work on this issue, as well as, in particular,
our guest briefer, Eunice Apio, for her powerful
words today and for the tremendous work that she and
Facilitation for Peace and Development are doing to
help women and children recover from armed conflict.

Let me say first that we share the outrage of Special
Representative Zerrougui at recent reports of children
being unlawfully targeted and killed and sexually
assaulted in Unity state, South Sudan, apparently by
Government forces or Government-backed militias.
According to UNICEF, as many as 129 children from
Unity state were killed during only three weeks last
month. Survivors reported that boys were castrated
and left to bleed to death, girls raped and children tied
together, their throats slit. Those heinous crimes must
not go unanswered, and it is for each ofus to make clear
to the perpetrators that their actions against their fellows
citizens will have a cost. The United States will work
with other Member States in the Council and through
other forums to respond to the call to action that those
barbaric crimes demand to protect the children of South
Sudan and to ensure that the perpetrators of those acts
are held accountable.

The Secretary-General's annual report on children
and armed conflict should be a valuable and trusted
resource for advancing accountability against the
world's most serious abusers of children. This year
alone we have seen the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) publicly execute and stone children.
We have seen kids manipulated to literally explode
themselves in the service of Boko Haram terrorists, and
the continued unlawful recruitment and use of children
in South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Sudan.

The Secretary-General's annual report should
contribute to our common cause to protect children
by using standards that are applied uniformly when
documenting the actions of all parties in conflict, so that
it is perceived as credible, objective and non-political.
But if that report is politicized, if it becomes more of a
political tool to advance political agendas rather than a
clear application of facts to objective standards, it will
be seriously compromised.

Let us be clear. The idea that the Government of
Israel would be listed on the same page as ISIL, Boko
Haram or Syria, as some have suggested in this debate,

is factually and fundamentally wrong. The comparisons
of casualty numbers that we have heard from some
today are totally misleading. Multiple United Nations
agencies and this year's report on children and armed
conflict (S/2015/409) have explicitly stated that the
casualty numbers in Syria cannot be verified and are
almost certainly underreported. Comparing those
underreported numbers to documented deaths meets no
standard of credibility and seems like a blatant attempt
to vilify rather than illuminate.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2225
(2015) and the addition of abductions as a trigger for
being listed in the Secretary-General's annex. Mass
abductions, especially of young women and children,
are becoming part of the extremists' playbook for
terrorizing communities, and the United States supports
fully the attention that this violation will now receive.
Today I want to highlight what we can do better to help
children victimized by armed conflict.

First and foremost, it is obviously the responsibility
of States and armed groups to stop taking children from
their homes to engage in hostilities. We have made some
progress in places such as the Central African Republic,
where armed groups recently agreed to stop recruiting
child soldiers and committed to releasing the 6,000
to 10,000 child soldiers currently in their ranks. But
promising to release children is just the beginning - in
fact, releasing those children from armed forces and
armed groups is itself also just the beginning. The work
of reintegrating them - meaningfully, compassionately,
respectfully - is critical and all too often overlooked.
It is a long path to recovery, and our collective attention
span to the challenge needs to be expanded.

After Boko Haram militants attacked and burned
down the village of a l6-year-old girl in Nigeria last
year, they made her watch as her captors brutally killed
her neighbours. Her captors beat her when she tried to
escape. When she finally managed to escape in June, she
was met with rejection and suspicion by her neighbours
who had survived the massacre. They stigmatized her
and other girls escaping from Boko Haram, taunting
them and calling them "Boko Haram wives", leaving
the escaped girls isolated and alone. And that young
girl, pregnant with the child of her captor, continues to
struggle - like so many liberated children - through
psychological and physical trauma.

On top of all of that, for those who have escaped
or have been released or rescued, many have missed
whatever educational and other opportunities that may
have existed. Suffering physically and psychologically
and lacking opportunity, these children are not only in
pain, they are caught in a terrible bind. That is why
initiatives like the one launched by the United States
last March, a public-private partnership that has
created spaces to provide support, has deployed mobile
clinics and outreach workers in Iraq and has supported
Yezidi women and girls who escaped captivity, are so
important.

Of course, the best way to give children the
bright future that we want them to have is to protect
them from harm in the first place. That is why tools
like the Child Soldier Prevention Act of 2008 in the
United States are critical. We urge other Governments
to adopt similar legislation to help end the practice of
the unlawful recruitment and use of child soldiers by
holding accountable Governments that violate those
basic principles. Under that United States law, foreign
Governments that unlawfully recruit or use child
soldiers, or that support armed groups that do so, are
subject to restrictions on certain United States security
assistance and the commercial licensing of military
equipment, as they should be.

We also lead by example when engaged in military
operations. United States forces receive training in
civilian protection throughout their careers; it is woven
throughout military doctrine. The imperative to avoid
harming civilians, including children, has become even
more explicit in recent tactical directives from our
commanders to their forces, directives that go beyond
what is required under international law and often
result in forces having to assume additional operational
and other risks in order to minimize the possibility of
harming children. It is the right thing to do, and other
militaries should follow that example.

When those engaged in or supporting peacekeeping
efforts are accused of abusing the very children whom
they are sent to protect, there must be zero tolerance.
There is no room in United Nations peacekeeping or in
any regional or national missions for those who prey on
the vulnerable.

As the Secretary-General's report shows, too many
States and armed groups are not living up to their
minimum obligations under international law. That is
why we have convened here today, and that is why we call
on all of our colleagues to commit ourselves once again
to documenting violations and abuses against children,
to take seriously the need for rigorous standards and
methodology in monitoring and reporting across all
trigger events - now including abductions - and to do
all we can to help children who have been through such
horrendous experiences in armed conflict to recover.

Children who have been touched by armed conflict
deserve to live meaningful lives that are free from
violence and the painful effects of their experiences.
They deserve to experience life beyond war, and it is
our responsibility to ensure that they will.

