Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor on a subject of great importance to
my country and to the family of the United Nations as a
whole. I thank Canada for convening this open debate on
the Carlsson report today, almost four months to the day
since the report was issued. My appreciation and
congratulations also go to your distinguished predecessors,
Sir, whose leadership of the Council led this body in its
wise deliberations. We wish you all the best.

We wholeheartedly thank all members for their
statements, and for their words of regret, sympathy and
support for us and for those who perished - especially
those who bravely died trying to save lives.

The Government and the people of Rwanda wish to
thank His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan for commissioning
such a courageous report on behalf of the Organization; we
congratulate him. The United Nations, the world and
Rwanda owe thanks and appreciation to former Prime
Minister Ingvar Carlsson and his team, which was
composed of Mr. Han Sung-Joo and Lieutenant General
Rufus M. Kupolati, assisted by Ms. Elinor Hammarskjold
and Mr. Lee Shin-wha, for their painstaking and
comprehensive work in compiling what is known today as
the Carlsson report. The report describes in fine detail
what happened and what did not happen when it was or
was not meant to happen during a specific period of time
during Rwanda's genocide while United Nations
peacekeeping forces were on the ground in my country.
Every word, every phrase, every paragraph contains
details of what went wrong, when, how and - shyly -
why.

This is the time for us not to dwell on the past but
clearly to state what comes next and to maintain the
momentum. The world and Rwanda are now waiting to
hear from all members of the Security Council; we have
already heard their statements, for which we thank them,
but what comes next? As a committed and concerned
Member of the United Nations, my country, Rwanda,
wishes to hear from all members of the Council about the
policies and measures that this body has taken or has the
intention of taking to make sure that what tragically
happened in Rwanda, as witnessed on the world's
television screens, never again occurs elsewhere on the
globe. The report shows beyond any possible doubt that
the world failed Rwanda. The Rwandese Government and
the Rwandese people are grateful to those who have put
their hands on their hearts and apologized on behalf of
their peoples and their Governments for failing Rwanda.
I know that this is not an easy thing to do; it is a
courageous stand that is meant to reconcile us with the
sad past. We wish also to reiterate our sincere thanks to
those who assisted us in difficult times; those times are
not yet gone.

Every Rwandese person - and indeed every friend
of Rwanda - has been in one way or another a victim of
what happened. Victims of genocide in Rwanda are
cruelly suffering from physical, psychological and post-
traumatic hardships. The Government of Rwanda is
bleeding itself to contain their cries, but in vain given the
overwhelming dimension of the problem and the scarce
means it has at hand. The Carlsson report's conclusions
and recommendations are worth revisiting to make sure
that nothing of this sort happens again. Moreover,
recommendations 13 and 14 specifically appeal to all, as
individual Member States, for belated action so that
victims of genocide, including the bitterest, most
desperate survivors, can feel the wind of change coming
their way from the international community. A unique
"mini-Marshall plan" is needed for Rwanda, as many
members often rightly say in the corridors of this
building, but on an individual basis. It is possible to
shock the world again - but by doing something

 

dramatically positive at last. All members can do this as
individual countries, and as countries of the world.

It is never too late to make things right or to mend
fences. The Rwandese people whom the whole community
failed had the right to life and lost their best gift from God.
I believe they too have an ear to listen to what we are
saying today; we pay tribute to them. The country and the
survivors lost everything they worked for and lived for. I
am here representing them all. They too have a right to
justice, recovery, rehabilitation, reintegration and genuine
reconciliation as part of a concerted compensation effort
from individual members and from others, from the
countries of Council members and from the rest of the
membership of the Organization. We have concerns. The
Carlsson report is the members' report. What they do with
it is what matters to the world and to the victims. If the
Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese people can assist
members to assist them better, let me reiterate our full
support and cooperation where immediate action is of the
essence.

The report clearly challenges the conscience of the
international community and invokes the responsibilities of
the parties to the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. Reluctance to
acknowledge that genocide was going on in Rwanda was
nothing but a manifestation of the unwillingness of the
powerful to live up to that responsibility. It is a fact that
many of those who masterminded the genocide in
Rwanda are at large to this day. As Rwanda struggles to
rebuild itself, surely let the words of the Secretary-
General, who is not with us today, be a basis for action:

"Of all my aims as Secretary-General, there is none
to which I feel more deeply committed than that of
enabling the United Nations never again to fail in
protecting a civilian population from genocide or
mass slaughter". (Press release SG/SM/7263, 16 December 1999)

That should be a statement not only of the Secretary-
General, but of the Security Council and of us all.

We hope that, in this way, General Dallaire and the
survivors of the genocide will be given a chance to shake
hands with God and with the other heroes: those amongst
us who have made long-term partnerships with Rwanda
to rebuild the country and to restore the badly torn fabric
of Rwandese society.

