It is my great honour to deliver this statement today on behalf of Indonesia and Viet Nam, the two countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) that are members of the Security Council. At the outset, we would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Central Africa, Mr. Francois Lounceny Fall, for his informative briefing. Indonesia and Viet Nam fully acknowledge the enormous challenges that Central African countries are facing during this period marked by the impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). This pandemic is ruthlessly sparing no one and putting a strain on all efforts aimed at achieving sustainable peace, stability and development in the region. While the electoral cycles are under way in 8 of the 11 countries in the region, resources must be mobilized not just to respond to the impacts of the pandemic but also to settle the persistent insecurity and humanitarian issues. Our two countries express grave concern over the unabated violence perpetrated by armed groups and terrorists in certain parts of the region, especially in the Far North, North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon, the Boko Haram affected-area and the Lake Chad basin. We condemn in the strongest terms all attacks against innocent civilians and civilian objects. We urge all parties to heed the ceasefire call of the Secretary-General so as to pave the way for dialogue and address humanitarian needs. Instability and COVID-19 are indeed deepening the humanitarian crisis in many parts of Central Africa. It is extremely distressful to see, inter alia, the sharp increase in the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance in Cameroon, the exacerbation of malnutrition, food insecurity and diseases in Chad and the adverse impacts of extreme weather events on people in the Congo. At today's meeting, Indonesia and Viet Nam wish to highlight the following points. First, we fully believe that the only viable way to achieve sustainable peace is through addressing the root causes of instability in the region. A comprehensive set of measures should include supporting ongoing diplomatic and political efforts, enhancing reconciliation efforts at national and regional levels, addressing threats posed by armed groups and terrorists, strengthening the governance of natural resources, providing development opportunities for countries and ensuring equitable and sustainable development for all. Secondly, as two countries from ASEAN, Indonesia and Viet Nam highly value the importance of strengthening regional and subregional friendship and cooperation. It is our firm belief that regional cooperation is the key to realizing the shared aspiration for stability and development. Our delegations are therefore very pleased to see the continued commitments of Central African countries to enhancing their mutual cooperation. Notably, at the regional level, we welcome and fully support the institutional reform initiatives of member States of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS). The entry into force of the new ECCAS treaty and the establishment of the new regional peace and security architecture will solidify the foundation for further substantial progress. We also salute the swift action of countries of the region in response to COVID-19 by adopting the regional response strategy as well as their endeavours to enhance bilateral relations. Thirdly, the efforts of Central African countries should be coupled with international support in order to achieve better results. Our delegations call for sustained technical and financial assistance from international partners and United Nations entities in order to assist ECCAS and its member States. Special focus should be given to preventing conflicts, ensuring stability and lasting peace, and promoting development in the region. Tackling the impacts of COVID-19 and addressing emergency humanitarian needs are also urgently needed at this critical moment. In closing, we commend and fully support the work of the Special Representative and his Office in assisting countries in the Central African region, especially during this challenging time of the COVID-19 pandemic. We would also like to pay tribute to the efforts aimed at maintaining peace and security in the region undertaken by the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and all United Nations personnel in various United Nations missions, including the more than 1,600 uniformed personnel from ASEAN countries. Indonesia and Viet Nam will continue their strong advocacy for peace, stability, prosperity and development for the people of Central Africa. As this is the last joint statement of the two ASEAN members in the Council this year, I thank Indonesia for its excellent cooperation in working with Viet Nam to showcase the ASEAN spirit together.
