Mr. Apakan (Turkey): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe and Mr. Boyd for their
comprehensive briefings. We welcome the Secretary-
General's report (S/2009/503).

As we indicated during our deliberations in July,
Somalia is passing through a very delicate period.
Developments on the ground have not yet reached an
irreversible point at which we can say that the
authority of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) in and around the capital has been consolidated.
Turkey fully supports the Transitional Federal
Government as the only legitimate authority in
Somalia. We welcome the outreach policy pursued by
the Government vis-a-vis the opposition groups. We
believe that it is incumbent on us to continuously
appeal to all groups within and outside Somalia and
convince them that there is no military solution to the
Somali question and that the only road towards a
peaceful future is through the Djibouti peace process.

We commend the crucial role played by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We
strongly condemn the attack perpetrated on
17 September against AMISOM. soldiers. We express
once again our condolences to the Governments of
Uganda and Burundi. We encourage African Union
member States to join Uganda and Burundi in
strengthening AMISOM's presence on the ground by
deploying troops. That would undoubtedly help to
extend AMISOM's presence to key areas beyond
Mogadishu.

We also encourage the Department of Field
Support to continue its support for AMISOM, so that it
can effectively implement its mandate. To that end, the
expeditious deployment of the logistical support
package will be vital. We welcome the fact that it is a
high priority for the United Nations to improve the
living conditions of AMISOM. personnel.

Likewise, it is imperative that the funds pledged
to AMISOM. at the Brussels donors conference last
April be transferred without delay. In that context, we
welcome the convening of a follow-up conference
tomorrow. I can say that we have already transferred
half of the funds that we have pledged to AMISOM.
We have also made available part of our other pledge,
for the restructuring of the transitional security
institutions in Somalia. As we have indicated on
several previous occasions, we are prepared to train
AMISOM. peacekeepers and Somali police officers in
Turkey, in cooperation with the United Nations.

Undoubtedly, it is of crucial importance that the
Somali security institutions be strengthened. In that
regard, we welcome the fact that Somalia's Joint
Security Committee has held various meetings since
July. We encourage all Member States to interact with
the Committee with a view to supporting its efforts to
coordinate financial assistance for the private sector,
policy development and the reorganization of Somalia's
security forces.

We are concerned about the deterioration of the
security situation in and beyond Mogadishu, owing to
the continued fighting between the Government and the
insurgents. We would also like to join other members
of the Council in expressing our concern at the
worsening of the humanitarian situation in the country.
The fact that 50 per cent of the population is in need of
humanitarian support makes even more difficult the
work of the Government to consolidate its authority,
restore law and order, deliver administrative and other
basic services, and effectively manage the transition.
The sustained support of the international community
will be essential in that regard.

We are closely following the Secretariat's work
on the plan for a future United Nations peacekeeping
operation to follow AMISOM, subject to a new
decision to be taken by the Security Council. Turkey
fully supports the three-phased approach of the
Secretary-General, as endorsed in Security Council
resolution 1872 (2009). We welcome the United
Nations efforts towards the implementation of that
incremental approach, the second stage of which calls
for the development of a light-footprint United Nations
presence in Mogadishu. We certainly understand the
prudent approach advised by the Secretary-General in
his report as regards the implementation of this phase,
especially when one considers that the security risk
assessed for Mogadishu continues to be high.

Finally, I have to say that we fully agree with our
British and American colleagues on the importance of
fighting against piracy off the coast of Somalia. Turkey
remains committed to contributing to the ongoing
international efforts in that direction.

