Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Mr. Prime Minister, your presence at this
meeting, which your country had the welcome
initiative to convene and for which we express our
gratitude, demonstrates once again Lebanon's
commitment to the fundamental values of dialogue,
tolerance and peace. Intercultural dialogue is
fundamental to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Its daily practice promotes the
development and expansion of relations among peoples
and leads them to a better understanding of and
acquaintance with one another through what is deepest,
truest and most sacred for them.

Promoting cultural diversity and its corollary,
dialogue, is the leitmotiv of the international
community as we celebrate 2010 as the International
Year for the Rapprochement of Cultures. The Security
Council cannot stand of the sidelines of this major
wave that is calling on the peoples and civilizations of
the whole world to come together though intercultural
dialogue.

My delegation attaches great importance to our
meeting today as a means of establishing synergy
between intercultural dialogue and the maintenance of
international peace and security. In an international
environment buffered by numerous currents, especially
those generated by new information and
communications technology, the world is increasingly
becoming a global village, and the need to bring
peoples and cultures together is emerging as an
powerful necessity for building peace in the minds of
humankind. This need has been heightened by new
challenges and threats to international peace and
security such as international terrorism and religious
extremism. In this context, seeking through dialogue
means for compromise among religions, ethnic groups
and civilizations is an indispensable tool for promoting
peace between nations.

The crises and armed conflicts that characterize
much of the current international security environment
are fuelled by our passions, our blind selfishness and
our refusal to listen to others in a spirit of humanism
and humility. It is by setting aside our cultural and
individual differences that we will gradually come to
understand that what unites us as human beings is far
more important than what divides us.

From this standpoint, there is a need for the
Security Council, through its many peacekeeping
missions, to give priority to dialogue and the
reconciliation of peoples and ethnic groups emerging
from conflict. When they are effective, these two tools
contribute significantly to the restoration of social
cohesion and lasting peace. The examples of Rwanda,
Liberia and Sierra Leone illustrate this.

Here, the media also have an important role to
play in promoting intercultural dialogue and bringing
together peoples, communities and races. If there is
one thing we must strive to banish from our hearts and
minds, it is prejudice and misunderstanding among
peoples of different cultures and religions, which are
often the causes of crises and conflicts. The principles
and ideals of the United Nations are founded on the
paradigm of a pluralistic world where intercultural
dialogue drives our common humanity.

We can spare present and future generations from
the sorrows of war, religious intolerance, terrorism and
nuclear threats only if we are able to integrate into our
thoughts and actions the cross-cutting values that,
instead of pitting our differences against one other,
incorporate them lastingly into the body of humanity.

It is through intercultural dialogue that we will
grasp the very essence of true peace: a peace which
unites and does not divide us, which champions and
does not stifle the other, and which, finally, celebrates
and does not destroy the diversity and multiplicity of
our shared heritage.

