Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): After the events of
11 September 2001, it is not possible to realistically
discuss the threat of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) without reference to
terrorism. The global threat of WMD proliferation and
the nexus between WMD proliferation and terrorism
are of real and grave concern. There is ample evidence,
and a growing consensus among terrorism experts, that
it is possible, if not highly probable, that the more
sophisticated terrorist movements such as Al Qaeda
will employ biological, chemical, radiological or
nuclear WMD against their enemies. It is no longer a
question of whether this will be attempted, but of
when.

The nexus between WMD proliferation and
terrorism is of particular concern to a small, densely
populated country like Singapore. Last year, severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) gave several
countries a small foretaste of what a biological or
chemical attack might be like. The threat is real. A
WMD terrorist attack on a small State can mean the
physical end of the country. International terrorist
networks are deeply embedded in Southeast Asia. It
will take many years to root them out. Until they are
rooted out, we will be at risk.

In June 2003, authorities in Thailand intercepted
a man trying to sell radioactive materials that could
have been used to make "dirty bombs". The 70 pounds
of cesium-137, reportedly smuggled out of Russia,
were seized by Thai police after an intelligence tip-off.
The timely sharing of intelligence to find and intercept
such dangerous materials and to stop them from falling
into the wrong hands is a positive development. The
bad news is this confirms terrorists' intentions on the
use of WMD and related weapons.

Singapore is serious about preventing WMD
proliferation. We continue to do what we can in global
counter-proliferation and counter-terrorism efforts.
Nationally, we have tightened our export control
regime. In January 2003, the Strategic Goods (Control)
Act, which is aimed at countering the illicit shipment
of strategic goods, WMD and related materials through
our ports, came into effect. We made an early decision
to participate in the Container Security Initiative,
which intensifies the screening of containers. Last year,
we intercepted several shipments of items that could
have been used in the manufacture of chemical
weapons or missiles. We will ensure that all Singapore
port facilities and Singapore-flagged ships comply with
the requirements of the International Maritime
Organization International Ship and Port Facility
Security Code by 1 July 2004.

No country can deal with terrorism, let alone
WMD terrorism, on its own. We need to act quickly to
close the gap in current national, regional and
international regimes, which today deal primarily with
States, and face up to the new challenges posed by non-
State actors.

Singapore understands many of the concerns
expressed here in this debate by some of the other
delegations. For example, they question whether the
Security Council can assume the role of treaty-making
or of legislating rules for Member States. We agree that
a multilateral treaty regime would be ideal. But
multilateral negotiations could take years, and time is
not on our side. Urgent action is needed. We therefore
support the draft resolution under discussion. We agree
that some of the details, such as the follow-up
mechanisms and the reporting mechanisms, need to be
ironed out. The draft resolution is only a first step. But
we need to take that first step and tighten the current
non-proliferation regime. The longer we take to act, the
more time the terrorists have to plot against us.

We therefore welcome the initiative by the
Security Council to further enhance, through this draft
resolution, the regime against the proliferation of
WMD. We believe that it will help make the world a
safer place. We urge all countries to support it.

