Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I would first of all
like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin for his insightful
statement. We share the sentiments he expressed on
national ownership during the new dispensation and in
the transitional phase. I would also like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General de
Mistura for his comprehensive briefing on recent
developments in Afghanistan.

I will limit my remarks to three issues, namely,
political developments and the elections; security; and
economic development and the situation in the region.

Nigeria welcomes the concrete steps taken by the
Government of Afghanistan towards sustained political
and socio-economic development in the country. In
particular, we welcome the efforts to strengthen the
country's fledgling democratic institutions and
structures. We commend both the Independent Election
Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission
for contributing significantly to those electoral gains.

We also commend the support of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
for those efforts. Through its enhanced collaboration
with other international agencies to provide training
and technical and logistical support for the electoral
system, recent elections witnessed appreciable success
and a historic level of women's participation.
Notwithstanding that achievement, Afghanistan's
political process will benefit from sustained electoral
reforms aimed at making the process more transparent
and credible. Indeed, the political process will bring
lasting benefits if it remains open and participatory and
is owned by the people of Afghanistan. We stress that
genuine implementation of the Afghan-led
reconciliation process should be accorded high priority.

1 1-26621
That will not only inspire much-needed confidence, it
will also strengthen the implementation of the
reintegration programme envisioned by the Afghan
Constitution. In our view, the sustained dialogue
between the parties, which has led to the appointment
of warlords, village elders and women to the High
Peace Council, is a first step in the right direction.

On security, we note that the Secretary-General's
report (S/2011/l20*) once again highlighted the fragile
security situation in Afghanistan, despite recent
improvements in the southern part of the country. It is
troubling that Government officials, aid workers and
civilians associated with the Afghan Government and
the NATO-led forces were the targets and victims of
the recent upsurge in civilian killings. The current
situation undermines the capabilities of Afghan
security forces to assume full local security
responsibility with the imminent drawdown of allied
forces. Therefore, the transition of the first set of
districts and provinces to full Afghan security control
later this month will prove to be a significant test of the
readiness of the Government to exercise sovereignty
within its borders. The Government must strengthen its
state of preparedness and remain resolute in assuming
full law-enforcement responsibilities by 2014.

Nigeria commends the Government's sustained
commitment to the national priority programmes
outlined last year. Implementing those programmes and
meeting the benchmarks set by the Government will
require greater coordination and sustained and timely
international assistance. It will also require efforts by
the Government to improve accountability, implement
good governance, adhere to the rule of law and reform
the judicial system.

Today, there is great potential for growth in a
range of sectors that could provide jobs in the short and
medium terms. The development of infrastructure and
agriculture should be accorded priority, as they will
stimulate employment and ultimately help the Afghan
Government to create a viable and self-sustaining
economy. For greater coherence and efficiency, funds
and other assistance should be channelled through the
Afghan budget system.

On regional cooperation, Nigeria welcomes the
growing cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbours. Such efforts to take advantage of synergies
have led to improvement in combating cross-border

11-2662]
crimes, including drug trafficking, arms smuggling and
human trafficking.

Needless to say, much of the progress in
Afghanistan is attributable to international cooperation
and contributions. In that regard, we welcome the
international conference of foreign ministers scheduled
to take place in Bonn at the end of this year. We
welcome the emphasis placed on Afghan ownership
and management of the process. There are high
expectations that the conference will renew
international commitment to the dual track of security
and effective accountability made at both the London
and the Kabul Conferences.

Nigeria commends the staff of UNAMA for their
dedication to the task of building and consolidating
peace in Afghanistan. We commend Special
Representative of the Secretary-General De Mistura for
his leadership and commitment to the Mission's vital
work in Afghanistan, and we have no hesitation in
supporting the renewal of UNAMA's mandate for
another 12 months.

