Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The draft resolution that we are considering today
is a very timely and important response by the Security
Council to the situation that has arisen as a result of the
nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan. The world
learned with profound concern about the nuclear explosions
that reverberated in the region of southern Asia. The many
years of confrontation and rivalry between India and
Pakistan have taken on a new, extremely dangerous, nuclear
character. Under conditions of a virtually comprehensive
moratorium on nuclear tests, such actions create significant
additional difficulties in further reducing nuclear weapons
and damage the existing regime for the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

The general thrust and specific provisions of the draft
resolution must be a unanimous and appropriate response
by the Security Council to this challenge as it meets its
chief responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security in accordance with the United Nations Charter.

Of great importance in this respect were the results of
the meeting of the Foreign Ministers of Great Britain,
China, Russia, the United States and France, held in
Geneva on 4 June, which were then endorsed by the
Security Council. Having condemned the nuclear tests
carried out by India and Pakistan, the five permanent
members of the Council firmly stated that no threat to
stability should come out of South Asia and the conflict
between India and Pakistan should not develop into a
nuclear scenario. The five Ministers called on both
countries to refrain from carrying out new nuclear tests,
from the deployment of nuclear weapons and nuclear-
capable missiles and from the production of fissile material.
They appealed to Delhi and Islamabad to adhere to the
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, based on the fact that
India and Pakistan, in accordance with these treaties, do not
have the status of nuclear-weapon States. All these ideas
are fully reflected in the draft resolution, for which we are
grateful to the sponsors.

At the same time, we stress our readiness to help India
and Pakistan in their search for reconciliation and
cooperation through direct dialogue. We are convinced that
we can find points of contact in the approaches of Delhi
and Islamabad to resolve their conflicts, and that they can
try to develop mutually acceptable forms which, without
interference in their internal affairs and without attempts to
raise the existing problems to an international level, would
help them to reach agreement.

In this connection, Russia views the adoption of any
type of sanctions against these States unjustified from the
international legal, political and humanitarian points of
view. The draft resolution does not contain the slightest
hint of any type of sanction.

We note with satisfaction the common understanding
of the members of the Security Council of the need to
continue efforts to reduce the danger which has arisen
from the nuclear tests carried out by these two States of
South Asia and aimed at preventing the spread of nuclear
weapons.

The last few years have seen real progress in the
area of nuclear disarmament. The process of reducing
Russian and United States nuclear armaments has become
broad. We hope that soon we will reach a new phase in
negotiations which will result in lowering the ceiling for
the number of nuclear warheads of both powers and in
adherence by other nuclear States to this process.

One of the priority areas in multilateral disarmament
is the task of strengthening the non-proliferation regime
for weapons of mass destruction. We are convinced that
the global non-proliferation regime that has been created
must be strengthened by fresh concrete steps oriented
towards those regions and States that are causing
particular concern in terms of non-proliferation. Russia,
for its part, will continue to do everything it can in order
to strengthen the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and to prevent its undermining or
erosion.

