Mr. Puj alte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I am confident that
the Spanish spirit will lead our efforts to success.
Similarly, I would like to thank Ambassador Lavrov
and his entire team for their work in guiding the
Council's affairs in the month of June.

With regard to the matter before the Council, I
would like to thank Mr. Michael Steiner for his
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2003/675) and for the very interesting information
he has given us today. I would merely like to make a
few points that are of great importance to my
delegation.

As we have stated on previous occasions, Mexico
supports the process of transferring additional
responsibilities to the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government of Kosovo. That process must be carried
out gradually, always bearing in mind the capacity of
the Provisional Institutions. Likewise, it is essential
that the process be carried out in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework.

The Provisional Institutions must be based on the
principle of multi-ethnicity and a culture of
intercommunal tolerance. The political leaders and
elected representatives of all Kosovars, both of the
minorities and of the Albanian majority, have a special
responsibility to help ensure that Kosovo becomes a
democratic, multi-ethnic and tolerant society in which
the rule of law prevails. That means that the elected
representatives of the Albanian majority in both the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and the
Kosovo Assembly, as well as municipal bodies, must
vigorously and unequivocally condemn all ethnically
motivated crimes and acts of violence. They must also
stop putting forward legal initiatives that exceed the
competencies conferred upon the Provisional
Institutions, in particular drafts that run counter to
reconciliation, as was the case with the resolution on
"war values" that was adopted on 15 May. Likewise,
representatives of minorities - in particular Serbs -
should participate in the Provisional Institutions more
actively and continuously. In that regard, it is important
that they take part in the meetings of the Transfer
Council.

The sustained return of displaced persons is
another matter to which my delegation attaches great
importance. We welcome the fact that the number of
minority displaced persons to return to Kosovo in the
first five months of this year exceeded the total number
of returnees last year. However, we know that the
number is still very small as compared to the thousands
of displaced persons who remain outside Kosovo, in
particular Serbs. We therefore welcome the news given
to us today by Mr. Steiner regarding the publication in
Pristina yesterday of a public appeal addressed to
refugees and displaced persons to return to Kosovo.
That is the sort of measure that is most needed at the
moment.

Safety and security are also important elements in
the return of displaced persons. The lack of security, or
at least the perception that exists in that regard, along
with the lack of freedom of movement, continue to be
serious obstacles to the return of displaced persons and
to the ability of minorities in Kosovo to live normal
lives. The murder of a family in the town of Obilic has
fueled the perception of insecurity. My delegation
trusts that the investigation of that case will be
successful and that the crime will not go unpunished.

Of course, as the report that has just been
introduced to us indicates, the economic factor is
another essential element in achieving large-scale
sustainable returns of displaced persons. As Mr. Steiner
has pointed out, the economic situation is still the first
concern of the population. It is therefore important that
the Provisional Institutions support the process of
return with concrete financing measures to be borne by
the consolidated Kosovo budget.

My delegation also attaches great importance to
the participation of women in political processes and in
governmental structures. We are therefore also pleased
to take note of the establishment of an Inter-Ministerial
Working Group on Gender in Kosovo and of the high
level of participation by women in the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government at the central level. It
is important that this trend spread to all levels and that
women from all communities take part.

With regard to the relationship between Belgrade
and Pristina, we have taken note of the intention of
both parties to initiate a dialogue on practical matters
very soon, as was agreed at the Thessaloniki summit.
That dialogue is fundamental to the Kosovo process.
We therefore hope that it will not be delayed any
longer.

As I stated before, we would like additional
information about the privatization process, given the
possible legal implications of legislation on the
conversion of immovable property.

I would like to reiterate the support of my
Government for the policy of "standards before status"
as the only viable way to ensure that Kosovo becomes
a democratic, multi-ethnic and tolerant society in
which the rule of law prevails.

I would also like to reiterate our support and
gratitude to the personnel of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for their
professionalism and dedication. The Mission of
Mexico expresses its special thanks to Mr. Steiner for
the work that he has accomplished at the head of the
Mission and wishes him every success in the next stage
awaiting him in his professional career.

