The President: I will now make a statement in
my national capacity.

Austria too would like to express its thanks to His
Excellency Ambassador Heraldo Mufioz for
introducing the third annual report (S/2009/444) on the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We are
grateful for the hard work undertaken and the excellent
leadership provided by Ambassador Mufioz in the PBC.
We also thank all PBC member States and the Chairs of
the country-specific configurations for their work and
for their collective efforts in preparing this report.

Austria associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union later in this meeting.

Effectively profiting from the window of
opportunity in the immediate aftermath of a conflict is
a crucial investment for long-term peace and stability.
Peacebuilding perspectives must be taken into account
from the very first day after the cessation of a conflict,
and peacebuilding efforts must go hand in hand with
the possible deployment of peacekeeping missions.

The importance of bringing peacekeeping and
peacebuilding closer together has also become evident
to us in our work as a member of the country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for
Sierra Leone. We also felt that the development there
of an Integrated Peacebuilding Office is a very
interesting and important model, and we therefore
welcome the fact that the Security Council has already
mandated other integrated peacebuilding offices.

We believe that it is evident that the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission has a very important
security dimension, especially when it deals with areas
such as security sector reform or the destabilizing
effects of drug trafficking and many other areas that
have to do with stability issues and involvement in the
country. For all those reasons, we believe that
peacebuilding is an area that requires a constructive
and forward-looking dialogue between the General
Assembly and the Security Council.

Austria welcomes the crucial role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in addressing a country's

post-conflict needs by promoting a coherent and
integrated approach highlighting the principles of
national ownership and regional cooperation. The
Peacebuilding Commission provides valuable support
for long-term democratic consolidation and sustained
economic development. It is therefore best placed to
develop a well coordinated, international consensus on
peacebuilding and to bridge the gap between early
stabilization and recovery efforts and long-term
development planning.

In our view, it is essential to pay particular
attention to two aspects: first, the transition, as I
already said, between peacekeeping and peacebuilding;
and secondly, the interface between peacebuilding and
long-term cooperation for sustainable development.
The successful negotiation of both elements is key to
the ultimate success of an international engagement.

In our view, the Peacebuilding Commission is an
extremely important forum to ensure this, along with
the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office. The PBC, in accordance with its mandate,
should advise on the interface between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. This would facilitate timely
consideration by the international community of the
longer-term perspectives on international engagements,
including in the socio-economic area.

Well-functioning State institutions and rule of law
in a post-conflict context are prerequisites for
sustainable and long-term development. We are
convinced that successful peacebuilding can take place
only if all relevant actors are included. We welcome
the PBC's efforts to strengthen its linkages within the
United Nations system as well as with other national,
regional and international actors, the private sector and
civil society.

We attach great importance to building further on
the Commission's accomplishments and look forward
to its further development, as well as that of its
working methods, in the context of the 2010 review.
The review must be carried out in an inclusive way,
with the participation of the entire United Nations
membership, to ensure broader ownership of the
process. Moreover, it should aim at strengthening the
interaction between the Security Council and the PBC
and increase the close coordination with the
Peacebuilding Support Office on all peacebuilding
efforts.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Brazil.

