Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Kingdom of the
Netherlands for convening this very important open
debate. Our thanks also go to the Secretary-General,
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
Ms. Fatimata Toure' for their comprehensive briefings.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Indonesia on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations.

Peacekeeping operations have been playing a
crucial role in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
It is a shared understanding that United Nations
peacekeeping operations need to be reformed to better
respond to unprecedented complex challenges. Allow
me to highlight a few points on what needs to be done
collectively to make peacekeeping operations more
effective and efficient.

First and foremost, it is crucial to clearly define
the mandate of each mission in conformity with the
realities on the ground and to provide missions with
adequate political support and necessary resources so
that they can fulfil their mandates.

Secondly, capacity-building and predeployment
training must be enhanced. This is of the utmost
importance, especially at a time when the safety and
security of United Nations personnel are increasingly
at risk. The recommendations of the Cruz report need
to be taken into serious consideration and implemented
adequately to improve the safety and security of
peacekeepers. At the same time, we stress the need to
prevent and eradicate the sexual exploitation, abuse
and any other misconduct by United Nations personnel
on duty. We strongly support the efforts made by the
Secretary-General in this regard.

Thirdly, the participation of women in United
Nations peacekeeping operations is to be encouraged.
Viet Nam's first-ever woman peacekeeper, who began
her mission in South Sudan earlier this year, is to be
joined by many more women as part of the upcoming
opening of a level-2 hospital.

Fourthly, triangular partnership and consultations
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and the
troop- and police-contributing countries should be
promoted in an inclusive and transparent manner.
More attention should be given to cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations to make use of
their practical experience on the ground. We hope that
the Secretary-General's initiative on the restructuring
of the peace and security pillar will help strengthen
coordination among different United Nations entities,
both at Headquarters and in field missions, and bring
about positive changes on the ground.

It is our principled position that respect for
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
including the principles of non-intervention into the
internal affairs of sovereign States, the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
self-defence or in defence of a mandate, should serve
as the foundation for all United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We share the view that greater focus should
be placed on preventive diplomacy and mediation in the
search for long-term political solutions to conflicts.

Since 2014, Viet Nam has been actively participating
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. At present,
we are in the final stage of the preparation for the
deployment of a level-2 hospital in South Sudan in line
with United Nations standards and requirements.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Viet
Nam will spare no effort to make further contributions
to this noble endeavour.

