Ms. Raskovic-Ivic (Serbia): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
December. It gives me particular pleasure today to
address this body of the world Organization.

Proceeding from a notion that we all share - that
the establishment of lasting peace and security is the
goal to which all people of goodwill are committed -
I would particularly like to emphasize the important
role of the Security Council concerning Kosovo and
Metohija. Its importance is especially great since many
sovereign States View the recent developments in the
western Balkans with increasing alarm, owing to
certain unrealistic assessments with regard to the future
status of Kosovo and Metohija.

Serbia is fully prepared to assume its share of
responsibility in the process of successfully resolving
of the question of Kosovo and Metohija, on the basis of
international law and in line with universally acclaimed
democratic values. We are fully confident that the
Security Council will make a crucial contribution in
the spirit of its previous documents, primarily
resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999, which
unambiguously reaffirms the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of our country.
06-65731
It is absolutely clear that only by the systematic,
responsible and gradual management of the
negotiations on the future status of Kosovo and
Metohija will we be able to reach a long-term
sustainable solution. Such a solution cannot be
achieved in haste and should emerge only through
confidence-building, dialogue and negotiations.
Otherwise, new complications may arise. Confidence
and dialogue are conditions sine qua non for any
coexistence. Nervousness, haste and arrogance will not
help. They will only drive us further from a solution.
We have a saying: "Avoid shortcuts - they might be
the wrong way".

However, I must regrettably inform the Council
about the cruel reality in Kosovo and Metohija, which
testifies to the lack of freedom and security there. From
15 August to 1 December 2006, 75 ethnically
motivated attacks were committed, in which 23 persons
of Serb nationality were injured. The extremists also
targeted members of other communities. The house of
Zecir Zurapi, a member of the ethnic Gorany
community in the village of Gornja Rapca, was blown
up on 1 October 2006. The perpetrators of that terrorist
act, like so many others in the past, have not been
identified. It is significant, however, that immediately
before the attack, Zurapi was involved in plans to have
the Gorany students educated in line with the Serbian
curriculum. As a result, more than 1,000 students in
three schools were not able to attend classes for more
than 30 days.

Over the same period, in the territory of Kosovo
and Metohija, 17 transmitter stations belonging to the
Serbian mobile operator Telekom Srbija were put out
of operation. This is a virtual criminal act that is taking
place before the very eyes of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
because, since 1997, Telekom Srbija has had a valid
licence to operate throughout the entire territory of
Serbia, and has paid all of its taxes to UNMIK and the
Kosovo Provisional Government. That act has further
isolated the Serbian population. It should also be
pointed out that, in the context of all types of
communications, UNMIK has consistently tried, to
varying degrees, to extend its mandate, thus violating
the sovereignty of Serbia. There are many examples of
that in its activities related to the International Civil
Aviation Organization, the International Union of
Railways, the International Committee for Railway
Transport, the Universal Postal Union and the
06-65731

International Telecommunication Union. All of those
activities are aimed at taking away attributes and
symbols through international specialized
organizations, thus prejudging the final status of
Kosovo and Metohija. In that way, preconditions for
cooperation and confidence are naturally further
undermined.

Furthermore, there have been drastic and
selective electricity cuts. Such discrimination reached
its apogee in the Serbian communities of central
Kosovo and the municipality of Strpce, where one hour
of power supply is followed by 10 to 20 hours of
blackouts. Add to that the fact that there have been 260
inter-ethnic incidents since 24 October 2005, in which
all the victims were Serbs, and the trend becomes more
than obvious.

Let me add another sombre detail: even with the
assistance of UNMIK, we have not been able to make
the Albanian side agree - at least at a declaratory
level - to the need to rebuild the houses of Serbs from
Badovac village who were expelled in the riots of
March 2004. At that time, Serbian houses all over
Kosovo were set on fire and destroyed. People were
expelled, and some were killed.

As for the return of expelled and internally
displaced persons, I would like to recall that, from
1999 to date, as many as 250,000 internally displaced
persons (IDPs) have not been in a position to return to
Kosovo and Metohija. According to our data, 2 per
cent have returned; according to UNMIK, the figure is
5 per cent. Major demographic and migratory shifts
have taken place in Kosovo and Metohija. The
population in Pristina, the capital, has increased
threefold, and it is currently estimated at 600,000.
There are no more than some 100 Serbs in Pristina.
Before 1999, there were about 40,000 Serbs in Pristina.

As far as Serbian religious monuments, cultural
heritage and religious freedoms are concerned,
Albanians pay lip service to their protection. Serbian
shrines are in fact looted and desecrated on a daily
basis. The church of the Holy Shroud in the village of
Babin Most near Obilic and the church of Saint Petka
in Gojbulja, in the municipality of Vucitrn, were
broken into and ransacked. The orchards of the Devic
monastery, in the village of Lausa in the municipality
of Srbica, were completely destroyed, even though
they were guarded by KFOR and the Kosovo
5
Protection Service police after having been set on fire
in March 2004.

Illegal construction close to cultural sites within
the proposed protected zones is rampant. At the end of
September, large-scale construction was begun in the
vicinity of the monument honouring the mediaeval
Serbian Kosovo heroes in Gazimestan, near Pristina.
During the same period, in the neighbourhood of the
village of Velika Hoca - a village that has 13 churches
dating from the twelfth to the fifteenth century - an
industrial facility is being built. There are plans to
build a large hotel close to Gorioc monastery. These
so-called construction activities naturally give rise to
serious concern, since they are being carried out in
close proximity to religious and cultural sites, which,
in the negotiations on the future status of the province,
should be granted the status of protected zones where
urbanization and industrial construction are not
allowed.

Those activities are obviously a deliberate
attempt to prevent the preservation of the cultural and
environmental integrity of the sites. The Government
of Serbia and all the members of the Contact Group are
insisting on that, making the negotiations on cultural
heritage one of their priorities.

It should also be pointed out that attempts are
being made by the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government to revise history and to delete all traces of
Serb existence in Kosovo and Metohija. One of the
most flagrant instances of quasi-historical propaganda
by the provisional Ministry of Culture of Kosovo took
place in May 2005 in Paris. The Minister of Culture,
Astrit Haracia, tried to distribute in the UNESCO
building a pamphlet entitled Monuments of Kosova.
The publication makes no mention whatsoever of the
Serbian contribution to the heritage of Kosovo and
Metohija. That publication outraged the participants
and UNESCO officials. Its distribution was stopped by
Soren Jessen-Petersen, who was head of UNMIK at the
time, at the explicit request of our Minister for Foreign
Affairs. Regrettably, the Provisional Ministry of
Culture of Kosovo, even after that unfortunate incident
a year and a half ago, has continued to promote more
or less the same ideas in a different form. On its web
site, www.visitkosova.org, a one-sided historical
version is presented stating that Kosovo and Metohija
has been exclusively the land of the Albanians since
earliest history.

The role of UNMIK is, unfortunately, giving rise
to concern. Although it is unambiguously defined in all
documents as a United Nations transitional
administration with a clear mandate, it often assumes
the role of a condominium by seeking to create a State
for Albanians. Almost as a rule, UNMIK has adopted a
sympathetic attitude and ignored Albanian extremism.

I would like to recall that Ambassador Kai Eide,
in his comprehensive review of the situation in
Kosovo, emphasized that, along with the process of
seeking a solution concerning the future status of
Kosovo and Metohija, it is crucially important to
continue with the standards implementation as the only
way forward. Ambassador Eide also pointed out other
very important and substantial problems.
Unfortunately, for the time being, there are no serious
signs that anyone is willing to recognize at least some
of those perfectly adequate and constructive
recommendations. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, said a fortnight ago that
compromise was impossible and stupid. That statement
cast a shadow on the constructive efforts being made,
especially given that compromise is one of the
important principles endorsed by the Contact Group at
its meeting in January 2006.

Anyone can see that organized crime, human
trafficking and corruption are rampant in Kosovo and
Metohija. The drug and arms trade and smuggling
provide a lifeline for the criminal and terrorist
business, before the very eyes of the international
community, the police and the military. Mafia-style
Albanian clans are currently flourishing. The most
recent and alarming incident occurred 10 days ago,
when an Albanian terrorist paramilitary formation in
Kosovo and Metohija began to intercept vehicles,
asking for identification papers and intimidating
passengers. Also, several days ago, on 8 December,
barely a few minutes before a train was scheduled to
arrive, unidentified terrorists blew up railway tracks in
the vicinity of Mijalic village, in the municipality of
Vucitrn. The only passengers in the train were Serbs,
who travel regularly from Priluzje, Plemetine and
Zvecan on this line. The blowing up of the tracks was
yet another horrific terrorist attack against the Serbs.

Difficult as it may be, the situation and the events
in Kosovo and Metohija should be looked at in a
realistic, responsible and objective fashion. Any
precipitous solution would cost the region, the
province itself and the international community dearly;

06-6573]
instead of achieving a sustainable solution, they would
have to deal with an even more difficult and complex
situation in Kosovo and Metohija. A hasty solution
would set a precedent that would open up a Pandora's
box.

I must emphasize once again here that the entire
strategy adopted by the Albanian side in the past
actually boils down to not engaging in the status
negotiations. The Kosovo Albanians are idly waiting to
be given yet another Albanian State in the Balkans
within the internationally recognized borders of Serbia.
From the point of view of the interests of the
international community at large, such an outcome is
unacceptable; we cannot but take into account the
facts.

I would like to stress that the solution has to be a
compromise reached in the interests of peace and
lasting stability. It has to be sought, on an agreed basis,
by the two negotiating parties - Serbian and Albanian.
Belgrade, the Government of Serbia and the Serbs of
Kosovo in particular are seeking to reach an agreement
that guarantees a durable solution with respect to their
coexistence in a modern, democratic and decentralized
State.

The Serbian side therefore sees the solution to the
Kosovo problem as based on the implementation of the
principles and specific solutions contained in the
platform of the Serbian negotiating team on the future
status of Kosovo and Metohija. It remains the best way
to resolve the current horrific situation in the province.
A different outcome would create unlawfulness, and
unlawfulness breeds more unlawfulness.

The international community should support, and
demonstrate such support by its deeds, its commitment
to a stable and safe region. That can be achieved only
by taking steps to introduce the rule of law, punish
criminals and terrorists, and create the security and
other conditions necessary to a normal and dignified
life. A life of dignity is not only defined by the
fundamental documents of international law, but is also
embodied in European standards recognizing the
respect of human rights and freedoms.

Of course, my country relies primarily on the
law- domestic law, international law, democratic
principles, agreements and treaties - but first and
foremost on the inviolable principle of justice. We
firmly believe that there is a way out of this situation.
A sustainable solution can be based only on giving up

extreme demands and embracing a rational approach
and compromise. In practice, that means substantial
autonomy for Kosovo - the kind of autonomy that no
European or other State has granted to their region so
far. It is there that, despite the obvious difficulties,
there is manoeuvring space for agreement and
compromise. There is manoeuvring space to find a
solution. The talks held so far have not borne fruit,
largely due to the lack of engagement and the
insufficient number of meetings. We propose that the
Vienna talks be immediately resumed in order to define
modalities for the broadest possible autonomy of
Kosovo Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija, with the
participation of the European Union. The talks should
be intensive so as to enable us to obtain results soon.

The threat of violence that is being heard more or
less openly from the Albanian side cannot be accepted
as a rational argument. Perhaps today violence is a
consequence of a conjuncture, but a conjuncture is a
variable. Constants are always better than variables,
and, in this instance, a constant means dialogue,
compromise and rejection of the use of violence.

Serbia voiced its position on Kosovo and
Metohija just a month and a half ago in a fully
legitimate and very powerful fashion. More than half
of registered voters with the right to vote opted in
favour of the new Constitution of Serbia. Its preamble
incorporates the fundamental principles of international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). That constitutional
provision has been practically based on the Charter of
the United Nations, on which this body which I have
the honour to address today is also based. By adopting
the Constitution of their country in a referendum, an
absolute majority of the citizens of Serbia reaffirmed
their commitment to the principle of the inviolability of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of democratic
States and to the inviolability of the borders of the
Republic of Serbia, and thus to the United Nations and
the Security Council.

