Mr. Antonio (African Union) (spoke in French):
On behalf of Ms. Nkosazana Diamini-Zuma, the
President of the African Union Commission, who,
owing to circumstances beyond her control, is unable
to be here with us today, I would first like to thank
the Rwandan presidency of the Security Council for
taking the initiative to hold this important debate on
the United Nations and its regional partnerships in
peacekeeping. In so doing, the Government of Rwanda
has once again demonstrated its untiring commitment
to strengthening the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations, as well as to promoting
the continent's goals and positions alongside the two
other African Union members of the Security Council,
Nigeria and Chad. We greatly appreciate Rwanda's
invaluable contribution to the operations that help to
support the maintenance of peace in Africa.

Today's timely debate, which is taking place in a
context characterized by an increasing commitment
on the part of the African Union and its regional
mechanisms to preventing, managing and settling
conflicts, unquestionably gives us an opportunity to
take stock of our joint efforts and to agree on practical
measures for strengthening our collective capacity to
deal with the challenges we face in the area of peace
and security. In this debate we should draw on previous
Security Council deliberations on the partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the funding of operations conducted by the
African Union, which were initiated in particular by
South Africa when it was a member of this body. This
is an opportunity for me to commend the continuity of
African efforts within the Security Council, which are
certainly proof both of effectiveness and of strengthened
coordination between the Council's current three
African members in the framework of what we call the
A-3.

We should also draw on the wealth of experience
acquired over the past few years. From the Darfur
region of the Sudan to Mali, through the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia and the Central African
Republic, there are now many examples that illustrate
the advantages and potential of a flexible approach to
addressing the challenges to peace and security on the
continent, as well as the importance of maximizing
the complementarity between the United Nations and
regional structures, particularly the African Union.
I would also like to express our appreciation to the
Security Council for the continued attention it has
paid to promoting peace and security in Africa and the
support it has given to African efforts. The renewal
of the logistical support package to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the deployment of
several peacekeeping operations on the continent, as
well as many other initiatives, are eloquent expressions
of that support.

I would also like to reiterate the African Union's
thanks to the Secretary-General for his tireless
commitment to peace, security and stability in Africa.
I am pleased to note the continued strengthening of the
partnership between the United Nations Secretariat and
the African Union Commission within the framework
of the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, particularly those in Chapter VIII, as well as
the directions indicated by the decision-making bodies
involved, that is, the Security Council and the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union.

Over the past few years, the African Union and its
regional mechanisms have proved their determination
to play their full part in promoting peace, security and
stability on the continent. There is no better illustration
of this than the deployment of several operations
supporting peace in various regions of Africa, enabling
Africa not only to put into effect the relevant positions
of the protocol that established the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, but also to contribute an
approach to collective security that complements that
of the United Nations, as envisioned in the Charter.

Most of the peacekeeping support operations in
Africa have been aimed at establishing the conditions
that would subsequently enable the United Nations to
deploy multidimensional peacekeeping operations in
support of the long-term stabilization and socioeconomic
recovery of the countries in question. They occur in
unstable environments where peace has not been fully
established. Their success obviously involves taking
significant risks and using, where necessary, coercive
measures in helping to establish conditions conducive
to the deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
missions.

It was in that spirit that the African Union deployed
its mission in Darfur before it was transformed into the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). Based on ajudicious and innovative
combination of the respective comparative advantages
of the African Union and the United Nations, that
operation, by its very nature, has demonstrated an
unquestionable capacity to adapt to the situation. I
would like to pay tribute to UNAMID and its leadership
for the remarkable work it has done on the ground in
conditions rendered even more difficult by the number
of armed groups that, despite the continuing efforts of
the Joint Chief Mediator and other international actors,
have not yet joined the peace process.

I note that the African Union and its regional
mechanisms, such as the Economic Community of
West African States and the Economic Community of
Central African States, have deployed operations in
Mali, through the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali (AFISMA), and in the Central African
Republic, through the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA). In
the first case, the United Nations has already taken
over, through the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, and it is
preparing to do the same by incorporating MISCA
into the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic. It
is clear that AFISMA and MISCA's initial stabilization
efforts and the sacrifices made by their personnel
have greatly facilitated the task of the United Nations.
I would also like to commend the commitment and
determination of the countries that have contributed
troops and police to them.

Finally, the African Union Mission in Somalia
has also operated in that spirit. Clearly, in seven years
of deployment, AMISOM. and the Somalian security
forces have recorded remarkable successes in the
fight against the terrorist group Al-Shabaab and in
extending the State's authority. These results are due
in particular to the Mission personnel's courage and
enormous sacrifices made in the region through the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
troop- and police-contributing countries. I would like
to express the African Union's gratitude for this. At
the same time, we should recognize that much remains
to be done in order to create the kind of conditions
that will enable us to make an even more sustained
international commitment, including through a classic
United Nations peacekeeping operation.

All these examples point clearly to the close
complementarity that exists between the efforts of the
African Union and the United Nations, both of which
work to promote collective security, as envisioned
in the Charter. They show clearly that, in the face of
the increasingly complex nature of the challenges to
peace and security that confront the continent, success
is founded on how coherent our goals are, the wise
and flexible use of available resources, our combined
efforts and the coordination of our actions on the
ground. For some years, based on that conviction
the African Union has been advocating a dynamic
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations. That partnership would be based on a
flexible and innovative interpretation of the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
When the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union met in New York last September, it reiterated the
importance of that approach and recalled the principles
that should underpin it.

The fact is that significant progress has been
made. As I stressed earlier, coordination between
the Secretariat and the African Union Commission is
constantly being bolstered. Specifically with regard
to peacekeeping operations, we are very pleased with
the crucial support by the Secretariat in the area of
planning, implementation and support to missions, as
clearly illustrated by both the examples of AFISMA
and MISCA. The Security Council and the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union are also
endeavouring to strengthen their partnership and
to further enhance the synergy between the United
Nations and the African Union. From that perspective,
the Security Council's decision to authorize putting in
place a logistical support cell to help AMISOM. speaks
volumes.

It is clear that the results obtained owe much to
this support and to the contributions of other partners,
both bilateral and multilateral partners, specifically
the African Union, the European Union and the United
States of America. More recently, the establishment
with bolstered mandates of an Intervention Brigade
within the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
a protection force within the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, whose troops are provided by African
countries, is another illustration of the advantages
arising from an innovative partnership between African
actors and the United Nations.

While welcoming that progress, the African Union
is convinced of the need to go further and to innovate
even more, as it is true that our capacity for action and
our efficiency would be considerably bolstered if we
did so. In that regard, I would like to stress in particular
the issue of the financing of African peacekeeping
operations. The experience of the past few years has
amply illustrated that one of the greatest constraints
facing the African Union and its regional mechanisms
relate to the issue offlexible, sustainable and predictable
financing of their operations. It is crucial that a lasting
solution be found on this matter.

The recommendations of the Prodi report (see S/2008/813), based on an in-depth analysis of the
evolution of peacekeeping and the related challenges,
remain more than ever current. The case of Somalia
through AMISOM. clearly showed that a wise
combination of financing through United Nations
assessed contributions and voluntary contributions by
the European Union and other partners offer the surest
means to promote our common goals. We would urge
the Security Council to take the expected decisions on
this financing matter bearing in mind that by taking
the initiative to deploy operations on the ground, the
African Union and regional mechanisms are acting on
behalf of the Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for peacekeeping and international
security.

By calling upon the Security Council to help find a
lasting solution to the issue of financing peacekeeping
operations conducted by Africa, I am ofcourse not losing
sight of the responsibilities that fall on the continent
itself. From that point of View, there is very little
doubt that African countries, in addition to supplying
troops and necessary police staff for operations on
the ground - and we can never underscore this
enough - the enormous sacrifices agreed to in this
context have significantly increased African countries'
contributions to the financing of such operations. The
resources supplied by African countries during fund-
raising conferences organized by the African Union
for both AFISMA and MISCA are a testament to this
renewed commitment. Efforts undertaken will be
continued in the broader context of the mobilization
of the resources acquired at the continent-level for
financing the African Union on a more sustainable
basis. However, it is understood that this effort cannot
replace the responsibility of the Security Council in
international peacekeeping and security.

I would like to take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to our international partners that support our
operations. The financing provided by the European
Union through the African Peace Facility (APF) and by
other partners, as well as the logistical support from
the United States, has greatly facilitated our actions.
In parallel to deploying peacekeeping operations, the
African Union is also working to bolster its long-term
capacity through the operationalization of the African
Standby Force. That will make it possible to find more
ideal responses to some of the gaps that have been
discovered in the operations in question led by the
African Union, be they related to planning, mobilizing
forces, command, monitoring or to support for missions.
On the basis of the Gambari report recommendations
assessing the African Standby Force and its rapid
deployment capacity, a number of measures are being
taken. The goal of these measures is to the attain full
operational capacity by 2015 at the latest.

We welcome the renewed commitment of the
United Nations to support us along that path, based
on the recommendations and the consultative mission
that visited Addis Ababa towards end of May 2014.
In the meantime, the bolstering of the immediate
response capacity of the African Union to crises should
significantly strengthen both our speed of reaction to
emergency situations and our robustness.

In conclusion, it is my hope that this Council
meeting will mark a new phase in the strengthening
of the partnership between the United Nations and
regional organizations, especially the African Union.
The complexity of the challenges before us more
than ever demand a greater synergy of actions and
greater flexibility in the interpretation of the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, and
greater flexibility in the use of the tools available to us.
In that regard, beyond the issue of financing African
peacekeeping operations, we need to pay increased
attention to the handover modality from an African
Union operation to a United Nations operation. We
await with interest the feedback exercise that the United
Nations Secretariat must undertake in consultation with
the African Union regarding the transition between
MISMA and the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Mali, and also the upcoming transition between
MISCA and MINUSCA.

This exercise should provide us with an opportunity
for an open and constructive debate on the best modalities
to ensure the successful handover of an African Union
operation to a United Nations operation. We must not
avoid dealing with any of the issues at stake, which
relate, inter alia, to timelines for a transition, bearing
in mind that the creation of conditions conducive to a
successful handover to countries by the United Nations
requires time, a political role on the part of the African
Union and its regional mechanisms in the pre-transition
period, and also the appointment of the leadership for
the new mission.

To conclude, I would like to wish all Muslims a
happy holiday.

