Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Saddam
Hussain's repeated non-compliance over the past 12
years with his obligation to eliminate his weapons of
mass destruction - as set forth in many resolutions of
the Security Council and most recently in resolution
1441 (2002), which gave Iraq one last chance to
disarm- has compelled an international coalition,
which includes my country, to take enforcement action
to achieve that disarmament.

Spain and other members of the Security Council
used to the maximum all available diplomatic resources
to achieve the disarmament of Iraq by peaceful means.
Resolution 1441 (2002) and its reference to others
adopted by this Council supported the legality of the
action undertaken by the coalition. We want military
operations to end as soon as possible, with a minimum
loss of human life.

Spain fully agrees with the conclusions of the
recent Council of Europe, which highlighted its
commitment to maintaining the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Iraq, respect for human rights and the
rights of minorities, and disarmament. The conclusions
also emphasized the primary role of the United
Nations. We also defend the indisputable right of the
Iraqis to determine their political future and to control
and dispose of their natural resources.

The highest priority for Spain at this time is the
Iraqi population and the provision of humanitarian
assistance as a matter of the utmost urgency. Spain has
offered assistance to alleviate the consequences of the
situation in Iraq, valued at €34 million and earmarked
for United Nations programmes, the Red Cross, other
non-governmental organizations and the countries
neighbouring Iraq to ease the situation of refugees.

Moreover, Spain feels that the Security Council
must adopt a pragmatic approach by allowing the
United Nations and its Secretary-General the broadest
possible room for manoeuvring in meeting the
humanitarian needs that arise and, to that end, by
making the oil for food programme flexible. In any
case, humanitarian assistance must reach those to
whom it is provided as soon as possible. This is a
matter of urgency.

It would be incomprehensible if, because of
differences in the Security Council arising from
political considerations of one kind or another, we were
to deprive hundreds of thousands of human beings of
aid that in many cases is vital to their survival. The
spectacle of a Council bogged down for days by some
political nuance would not be understood, nor would it
be very edifying or contribute to the prestige of this
organ or the United Nations. Humanitarian assistance
cannot wait.

After the divergences of recent months, the
Council should now recover its unity on this pressing
question. But the Security Council and the United
Nations have before them other outstanding challenges
of extraordinary importance that must be promptly
addressed once the current crisis is overcome. I am
referring to the question of the Middle East - a tragic,
anguishing and unsustainable situation which, through
the accusations of double standards, fuels
misunderstanding and the understandable frustration of
the population of that area. The serious implementation
of the road map is a necessary and urgent step for
achieving the establishment of two viable, respected
States living in peace.

