Mr. Vedrine (France) (interpretation from French):
Our Council has regularly convened to discuss Africa, but
all too often we are urgently looking for solutions to
crises. So it is an excellent idea to have a substantive
debate on the problems of peace and development on the
African continent. No other international body can do so
with the same legitimacy or with the same
responsibilities.

First of all, which Africa are we discussing?

 

Since 1995, the African continent has seen renewed
growth, higher than its rate of demographic expansion, yet
that growth is unevenly distributed. Some States have been
able to take advantage of favourable economic conditions
by moving towards both democratization and bold
economic reforms at the same time. But for a good many
countries, growth is still not in the cards, and the regional
context is particularly important.

Furthermore, while Africa as a whole is enjoying
renewed growth, sub-Saharan Africa's overall share of
world trade has fallen steadily for the past 25 years, to the
point that it now accounts for only 1.5 per cent. This
highlights how difficult it is for Africa to fall in with the
current process of globalization.

The debt burden, in spite of repeated programmes to
cancel or reschedule debt, is still a major handicap for
Africa at a time when it is looking for ways to achieve a
new dynamism.

Added to these serious constraints is the trend towards
reducing official development assistance. With the end of
the cold war, part of the aid that Africa enjoyed has been
directed elsewhere. Above all, certain major countries have
drastically slashed their development aid budgets. In some
cases, the reduction was more than 30 per cent in 1995 and
1996 alone.

The aid cutbacks came just when Africa was engaged
in courageous structural adjustment processes. African
Governments thus found they had less external financing
just as they were making great demands on their
populations.

Continuing the reduction of international aid flows, I
want to emphasize here, would raise the spectre of
increased tension and further crises in Africa. We drew the
attention of our European partners to this in 1995 in
connection with the replenishment of the European
Development Fund, and we pleaded this cause at the G-7
Summit in Lyon in 1996. This has been a French
commitment for decades, and for a long time France was
alone in recalling this issue. It will continue to do so.

This is the background we must bear in mind when we
address questions of security in Africa even if, in each
crisis, local and subregional political factors, often ethnic
factors, also play a leading role.

The tragedies in some countries these past few years
have produced tremendous human suffering and massive
displacements of civilians to countries that are themselves
beset by serious problems. These streams of refugees
have destabilized entire regions, in spite of the remarkable
efforts made by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.
These populations, sometimes held hostage by armed
groups bent on genocide - for which an international
criminal court has been set up - have in turn been
massacred in circumstances that need to be brought to
light so that a different future can be forged.

Signs of hope are beginning to appear. First of all,
for several years Africa has daily offered growing proof
of its determination to work actively towards preventing
and settling the conflicts it faces. The Organization of
African Unity is playing an increasing and positive role
in many sensitive situations. For the first time, in the
course of the last 12 months, the Secretaries-General of
the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
appointed a joint Special Representative in the Great
Lakes region in the person of Ambassador Sahnoun.
France welcomes the closer ties between the two
organizations. I wish to add that I approve what the
Secretary-General of the OAU said concerning the appeal
made by President Bongo with regard to the Republic of
the Congo.

Some subregional organizations, in southern African,
West Africa and the Horn of Africa, are asserting their
strengths and are already a stabilizing factor that should
be encouraged. Preventive diplomacy by heads of State is
making a useful contribution to solving many disputes.

In certain situations, Africa, despite limited means,
has taken the initiative in peacekeeping operations. In this
respect, the action taken by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) in Liberia was a positive experience. The
mission to monitor the Bangui Agreements in the Central
African Republic is proving to be a success for the
African countries that comprise it. The Security Council
recognized that success recently by approving the
continuation of those operations.

This positive development should be encouraged.
But, because we believe that this encouragement should
not be limited merely to words, mechanisms must be put
in place to enable the international community as a whole
to coordinate its assistance to African States and
organizations so as to strengthen their peacekeeping
capabilities. In this spirit France, the United Kingdom and

 

the United States recently agreed to cooperate to strengthen
the peacekeeping capabilities of the African countries under
the auspices of the United Nations and in liaison with the
OAU.

But helping Africa to become more involved in the
resolution of its crises does not in any way, in our view,
mean that the international community should relinquish its
responsibilities with regard to the African continent. On the
contrary, it must become involved by going beyond
declarations of intent, and intervene effectively in crisis
situations as soon as conditions allow for an effective
presence.

For its part, France, conscious of its special
responsibilities as a permanent member of the Security
Council, and aware of the importance of respect for
Security Council decisions, is working tirelessly to help
prevent crises, increasingly favouring a multilateral
approach to questions of security on the African continent.
While maintaining the defence agreements linking it to
certain countries, France has signalled its refusal to be
drawn into internal conflicts or to interfere in the internal
affairs of its African partners.

My country has clearly chosen its policy: support for
the building of democratic States based on the rule of law,
support for good governance, support for development -
the key to stability and peace in Africa - and the
construction of a partnership that looks to the future. It
shares this policy with the other members of the European
Union, which, through the European Development Fund,
the Lome Convention and bilateral assistance, is by far the
African continent's principal partner. France is adopting and
modernizing its African policy to take account of present-
day realities, but it will not disengage. On the contrary, it
will continue to uphold this policy while working alongside
you, Madam President, the Secretary-General and the
Ministers present today.

