Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. We also
welcome the Secretary-General's recent written report
(S/2019/251) on the implementation of Security Council

resolution 2334 (2016).

At the moment the international consensus on
taking forward the Middle East peace process is facing
challenges, and the efforts to facilitate the Palestinian-
Israeli peace talks have shown no signs of progress.
China is deeply worried. In the meantime, the conflict
and confrontation in the Gaza Strip are escalating and
the construction of settlements in the West Bank has
continued. The incendiary rhetoric and violent acts
from the parties concerned are more frequent, and the
way the situation is evolving is extremely worrying.

We call on the Israelis and Palestinians to keep in
mind the big picture of the need to ensure the safety and
security of the population in the region and regional
peace and stability, maintain calm and exercise
restraint, move in the same direction, halt military
actions and work to help ease tensions effectively. The
Security Council and other stakeholders with influence
in the Middle East must remain united and work hard
to create the conditions needed for the stabilization of
the Palestinian-Israeli situation and a resumption of
dialogue. China appreciates the efforts that countries
such as Egypt and Russia are making to facilitate
internal Palestinian reconciliation.

The question ofPalestine is at the core ofthe Middle
East issue and bears on the region's long-term stability
and development. China wants to stress once again that
a two-State solution is the fundamental way to resolve
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The international
community must build on the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative, and must scale up its efforts to facilitate
a resumption of talks so as to achieve a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Palestinian question.
Any new initiative should contribute to the realization
of a two-State solution. Resolution 2334 (2016) should
be implemented effectively. All settlement activities
in the occupied territories should cease immediately,
as should the demolition of Palestinian homes and
the destruction of Palestinian property, and measures
should be taken to prevent violence against civilians.

The final status of Jerusalem is a complex and
sensitive issue that underpins the settlement of the
Palestinian question and has an underlying impact on
regional peace and tranquillity. The recent conflict at
the Al-Aqsa Mosque is worrying. All parties should
act with caution and support the principle of respecting
the city's diverse history, upholding fairness and
justice, implementing the international consensus and
achieving peaceful coexistence. They should work in
accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions
and international consensus to reach a balanced solution
through negotiations, taking the interests of all sides
into account.

The Golan Heights is internationally recognized as
an occupied territory. The Security Council has adopted
several resolutions calling for Israel's withdrawal
from the area. China opposes any unilateral action to
alter those facts and does not wish to see any further
escalation of regional tensions.
