The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like at the outset of the meeting to apologize to everyone
for the delay in starting the meeting, and to acknowledge
the presence at the Council table of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Italy, His Excellency Mr. Antonio
Martino. On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to him.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Letter dated 4 January 1995 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (5/1995/6)

The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Egypt, Malaysia, Pakistan and Turkey, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Muhamed
Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina) and Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took places at the Council table;
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Thanarajasingam
(Malaysia), Mr. Marker (Pakistan) and Mr. Batu
(Turkey) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council Chamber.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): I have
received a request dated 12 January 1995 from Ambassador
Dragomir Djokic to address the Council. With the consent
of the Council, I would propose to invite him to address the
Council in the course of the discussion of the item before
it.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 4 January 1995 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the report of the Co-Chairmen of the Steering
Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia, document S/ 1995/6.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1995/21, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland.

Members of the Security Council have received
copies of a letter dated 11 January 1995 addressed by the
Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United
Nations, in which he transmits a note by the Contact
Group of the Organization of the Islamic Conference. The
letter and its annex will be issued as Security Council
document S/ 1995/30.

The first speaker is the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, on whom I now call.


