Ms. Bird (Australia): Armed conflict takes
a devastating toll on children. The physical and
psychological wounds of war, including the resulting
displacement and disrupted education, illustrate why we
must act. Australia commends the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba. The recent
work of her Office to strengthen local child protection
systems and advocate for the effective reintegration
of children deserves high praise. We also applaud the
Special Representative's concerted efforts to engage with
non-State armed groups and to commit those groups to
action plans. That is critical because - as the Secretary-
General's report (S/2018/465) demonstrates - those
groups are responsible for the majority of violations
against children. Within peacekeeping missions
and United Nations country teams, child protection
specialists are key to identifying grave violations and
taking preventive action. Together, those efforts reduce
the risk of intergenerational harm.

The Secretary-General's report highlights some
positive developments, such as the release of children
in South Sudan and the Central African Republic.
Nevertheless, the overall trend of increasing grave
violations against children should alarm us all.
Unlawful attacks on schools and hospitals, including
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq and
Syria, have had particularly grievous impacts on
children. Impeding the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, instances of which are highlighted in the
Secretary-General's report, is having an inordinate and
unacceptable impact on children.

We welcome efforts to ensure a longer-term
approach is taken to the reintegration of children affected
by armed conflict. When designing reintegration
programmes, the needs of girls must be taken into
account, including to prevent the re-recruitment of
former child soldiers. There is strong evidence that
gender-sensitive programming delivers better outcomes
for girls, women and their communities.

Opportunities must also be taken to support
the participation of youth in peacebuilding and
peace processes. By increasing their participation,
we contribute to the protection of their rights as
well as setting a strong foundation for an inclusive,
sustainable peace. It is critical - for this and for future
generations - that we redouble our efforts to protect
children and prevent grave violations.

