Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I wish to extend warm
greetings to His Excellency Mr. Jawed Ludin, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, who is
with us today. We welcome the insightful and
comprehensive statement he has made. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous
for his insightful briefing. We take note of the valuable
observations expressed in the report (S/2011/772*) of
the Secretary-General.

Before I proceed, let me also express our sincere
appreciation to outgoing Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura for his strong
leadership and dedication during a very critical time in
Afghanistan. Our Embassy in Kabul and our authorities
enjoyed excellent cooperation with him and his able
team. We look forward to continuing our close
collaboration with him in his new capacity.

I would also like to extend a warm welcome to
Mr. Jan Kubis. We are confident that his wealth of
knowledge and experience will be an important asset
for Afghanistan and for the whole international
community as Afghanistan goes through another
important phase in its history. We look forward to
working in close cooperation with Mr. Kubis in the
coming weeks.

Afghanistan has achieved significant progress in
the past 10 years. In spite of remaining challenges,

Afghanistan today continues to invest in a better future
for its people. In that respect, we welcome the
announcement of the second tranche for the transfer of
security responsibilities to the Afghan National
Security Forces. We expect that, by the end of February
2012, half of the Afghan population will be under the
security responsibility of the Afghan National Security
Forces.

As Afghans assume more responsibility for the
security of their country, we should equally focus our
energies on the sustainable development and
institutional and civilian capacity-building of the
country. The development needs of Afghanistan are
immense. The continued assistance of the international
community will be required over the long term. We
believe that a strong focus on education is imperative if
we seek to achieve prosperity for the country. We
should therefore concentrate on educating future
generations of Afghan boys and girls. Likewise, we
should intensify our efforts to empower Afghan
women. We must also continue to strengthen
institutional capacity-building to enable Afghan forces
to combat terrorism and drug trafficking.

Turkey considers regional ownership and
cooperation as an essential element for lasting peace,
stability and prosperity, not only in Afghanistan but
also in the region as a whole. With that understanding,
Turkey hosted the Istanbul Conference for Afghanistan
on 2 November. The immediate and extended
neighbours, convened in Istanbul under the
chairmanship of Turkish and Afghan Foreign Ministers,
reaffirmed their strong commitment for a secure, stable
and prosperous Afghanistan in the region.
Recognizing the central role of the United
Nations, the parties in Istanbul welcomed
Afghanistan's willingness and determination to use its
regional and historical position to do its part to
promote security and peaceful economic cooperation in
the region. Mindful that the region and the
international community are not separated, they
emphasized their stake in the security and stability of
the region.

By launching the Istanbul Process, the Heart of
Asia countries announced a new vision and their
determination to own, lead and develop the efforts for
enhanced cooperation. We now look forward to the
ministerial-level follow-up meeting that will take place
in Kabul in June 2012. We believe that the Kabul
meeting will be an important opportunity to build on
the momentum achieved by the Istanbul Process.

As we move on with the transition period, with
the eventual withdrawal of international military
forces, it has become much more essential for the
international community to continue its active and
strong support to the Afghan Government in order to
prevent the country from once again sliding into
instability, as well as to avoid setbacks in the ongoing
process of reconstruction.

We are therefore pleased with the successful
conclusion of the Bonn Conference, which reaffirmed
the international community's commitment to
Afghanistan beyond the transition decade. The
transformation decade defined in Bonn, in which the
Afghan people will be in full charge of their future, is
an opportunity for us all to concentrate our efforts on
the long-term sustainable development of Afghanistan.

Success in Afghanistan requires our long-term
commitment. We want to reiterate that Afghan
ownership and leadership should be the key in our
collective efforts. Let me assure our Afghan brothers
that our commitment to Afghanistan is long-term. We
will continue to stand by them as long as they require.

