Mr. Teo (Singapore): Singapore aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

We express our appreciation to Japan for its long
and consistent leadership on this important topic. It was
under Japan's chairmanship of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Matters in 2006 that presidential note S/2006/507
was first issued. Note 507 was updated in 2010, again
under Japan's chairmanship. The tenth anniversary of
note 507 is a fitting time to consider the progress we
have made.

However, progress is a relative concept. The
number of steps taken forward must also be measured
against the length of the journey, and how far we have
come from the starting point. On this, my delegation
is pleased to note that there has been good progress in
transparency, aided by developments in technology.
There have been an increasing number of open debates
and informal briefings on the work of the Council to the
wider United Nations membership since note 507 was
first issued, 10 years ago. More meetings are webcast.
More information is disseminated now through the
Council's website, The Journal of the United Nations
and on social media platforms.

Nevertheless, transparency is not an end in itself. It
is a means to promote accountability and more effective
action by the Council. In that context, more visibility
does not necessarily lead to greater credibility. Formulaic
statements at open debates, where known positions are
regurgitated, do little to effect improvements on the
ground. We therefore appreciate Japan's commitment to
taking on board views expressed today, and encourage
the Council to engage more meaningfully with the
wider United Nations membership, especially affected
countries and regional organizations, during informal
briefings and Arria Formula meetings. That would
enhance the quality of discussions and strengthen
substantive engagement between the Council and the
General Assembly, which would represent a major step
towards true transparency and accountability. There
are a number of other areas of concern to us that are
not specifically listed in note 507 that we wish to raise.

First, a practical step that the Council could
consider to increase transparency and accountability is
to adopt its rules ofprocedure. Today marks a little over
70 years that the Council first adopted its provisional
rules of procedure. In other words, they have been
provisionally applied for far longer than most of
diplomats who sit on the Council have been in service.
Surely it is time for the Council to finally adopt its own
rules of procedure. That would be a small, but vital,
step towards demonstrating the Council's commitment
to transparency and accountability.

Secondly, in terms of effectiveness, there have been
examples of how the Council has managed to respond,
or not, to critical developments. The record has been
mixed. Too often in the past, the veto has been used
to prevent action to address crimes of atrocity, at the
cost of many innocent lives. We are therefore happy
to note that there is growing support and movement
in favour of limiting the use of the veto in cases of
mass atrocities. Approximately 100 countries have
supported the French-Mexican initiative calling on the
five permanent members of the Security Council to
voluntarily and collectively pledge not to use the veto
in cases of recognized mass atrocities. An even greater
number of 112 countries, including my own delegation
and eight members of the Security Council, including
two permanent members, have also supported the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group's
initiative on a code of conduct on Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity
or war crimes. Singapore reiterates its call to the
permanent members of the Council to refrain from
using a veto to block Council action aimed at preventing
or ending genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. If they have to, they should explain to the
wider United Nations membership why they cannot
support initiatives aimed at preventing or ending mass
atrocities. Such a requirement will serve to make the
Council more accountable to the wider membership and
the international community for its action, or inaction.

Finally, it is our hope that further steps will be
taken towards promoting inclusiveness in the Council's
work. We are encouraged by the conduct to date, under
the leadership of the President of the General Assembly,
of the process of selecting the next Secretary-General.
We hope that the Council will work with the President
of the General Assembly to maintain the strong spirit
of transparency and inclusiveness in the process that
we have seen thus far. In that regard, we note that the
Council will soon conduct its first informal straw poll to
select the next Secretary-General. However, we regret
to hear from the President of the General Assembly that
the outcome of the straw poll will not be communicated
to the wider United Nations membership.

We therefore join the President of the General
Assembly and other Member States in urging the
Council to communicate more openly with the General
Assembly on that very important issue, in line with the
new standard of openness and transparency introduced
into the process by the President of the General
Assembly. Singapore welcomes such opportunities
as this open debate to discuss the important issue of
the working methods of the Security Council. Under
Japan's leadership, we look forward to a meaningful
outcome that will help to strengthen the Council's
effectiveness and credibility, as well as its engagement
with the broader United Nations membership.

