Mr. Apakan (Turkey): As many colleagues have
pointed out, historic events are sweeping the Middle
East and North Africa. These major developments
rightfully deserve the attention of the international
community.

Meanwhile, the Palestinian issue is rapidly
approaching a critical stage. Turkey continues to
believe firmly that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict lies
at the heart of many disputes in the region and beyond
and therefore merits our special attention. That is why
the quest for a lasting and comprehensive settlement
should not take a back seat to developments in the
region. On the contrary, it must once again be our
priority.

Despite the current impasse in the peace process
due to Israel's unabated settlement activities in
occupied East Jerusalem and the West Bank, we see no
alternative to a negotiated settlement. The lack of a
solution serves only to perpetuate insecurity and
suffering. Turkey attributes importance to the work of
the Quartet and hopes that it will meet soon to lay out
the parameters of direct negotiations.

The Palestinians have been working hard for the
past two years to lay the institutional groundwork of
their future State. As evidenced at the recent meeting
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC),
they are ready. Through its State-building efforts, the
Palestinian Authority has proved to all skeptics that the
Palestinians deserve to attain their decades-long target
of internationally recognized statehood, even though
they continue to suffer under occupation.

Needless to say, the progress on the ground as
reflected in economic figures can be sustainable only if
the political process proceeds in parallel with it. In
other words, efforts in good faith should not be
confined to so-called "economic peace" but should
reinforce the political dimension of the peace process
and materialize in the form of Palestinian statehood.
The time has come to show solidarity with the
Palestinians and help them to live in peace and dignity.

In that context, Turkey believes that if the
Palestinians are objectively ready to be accepted as a
fully fledged State member of the international
community, with all the relevant rights and
responsibilities - and it is clear that they are on the
verge of that momentous step - then the international
community cannot and must not turn a blind eye to
their just and legitimate appeal.

On the other hand, the plight of Palestinians in
the Gaza Strip should urgently be alleviated, and the
reconstruction and rehabilitation requirements of the
Gaza Strip must urgently be addressed. Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) must be implemented
as a whole. The current humanitarian and human rights
conditions of the civilian population in Gaza are
unsustainable, unacceptable and, ultimately, not in the
interests of any of those concerned. The recent
escalation of tensions among the parties is clear proof
that the situation is tenuous at best. Minimalist
approaches aimed at public diplomacy will not work.
Israel must lift its illegal blockade of Gaza
immediately.

Meanwhile, achieving national reconciliation
among Palestinians also remains an urgent priority.
Turkey calls on the Palestinian groups to once and for
all end their disunity, embracing a future in their own
State, living side by side with Israel in peace and
security. In that respect, the international community
should extend a helping hand, in an unequivocal
manner, to the Palestinians.

Eleven months have passed since the deadly
attack by Israeli forces on a humanitarian aid convoy
sailing to Gaza, which resulted in nine civilian deaths
and many injuries. That was an international incident
with ramifications for international peace and security,
which is why the Council issued a very firm
presidential statement immediately following the
event.

Moreover, that tragic episode was also the result
of numerous and successive blatant violations of
international law by Israel, beginning with the
imposition of an unlawful blockade and continuing
with the torture and murder of passengers on the
international humanitarian aid convoy. Turkey at first
tried to prevent this incident; then, once tragedy had
struck, it referred the matter to the relevant
international bodies. Turkey, for its part, has strictly
abided by all the parameters established for the
international inquiry process under the auspices of the
United Nations, while refraining from unilateral acts
and inflammatory statements.

We continue to make every contribution to the
inquiry process under the auspices of the United
Nations, with the expectation that a fair and just
conclusion will be reached. But there should be no
question about our resolve with respect to this issue.
We will pursue this matter and explore every avenue
available in the international system until we are
convinced that justice has been done. No member of
the international community is above international law.

Accountability is the key to stability and security. It
should also be borne in mind that the phenomenon of
humanitarian convoys to Gaza cannot simply be
explained away as unilateral provocations. If the
current pattern of Israeli policies towards Gaza, which
target the entire population in a disproportionate
manner, can be reversed, then the root cause of such
reactions will also have been eliminated.

In conclusion, let me reiterate once more
Turkey's unwavering support for and determination to
assist our Palestinian brothers and sisters in the process
of reaching their long-delayed target of a viable,
peaceful and prosperous Palestinian State.

