Mr. Sedwill (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate
today. I also thank the Secretary-General, Committee
Chairs and the Secretary General of INTERPOL for
their briefings.

As a diplomat now running an interior ministry, I
particularly welcome this initiative to use the convening
power of the United Nations to address vital issues of
domestic as well as international security.

At September's summit on foreign terrorist fighters
(see S/PV.7272), my Prime Minister highlighted the
mortal threat that we face from the rise of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which has killed
hundreds of civilians, most of them Muslim, who have
refused to take an oath of allegiance to its extremist
worldview. They have recruited people from across
the world, not only to become foreign terrorist fighters
but to become citizens of their so-called caliphate.
As we heard in Ambassador Van Bohemen's briefing,
there are now 25,000 foreign fighters, from over half
the Members of the United Nations - and as many,
who have not travelled, have also been radicalized and
inspired to commit acts of terrorism within their own
countries. This is a serious threat that affects all of us
all.

As you reminded us in your national statement,
Mr. President, we must ensure that our response is
collective, comprehensive and consistent, at home
and abroad. In national security there is no longer a
distinction between the domestic and the international.
Secretary Johnson highlighted how together we
should take concrete acctions to deal with foreign
terrorist fighters. The United Kingdom agrees. We are
implementing resolution 2178 (2014) and offering our
experience to any partners who wish to benefit from it.
Let me set out some of that.

We have strengthened border security. We prosecute
individuals for recruiting, financing, and travelling for
terrorist-related purposes. We can control and prevent
travel by cancelling passports, revoking nationality,
seizing travel documents at ports and operating a
no-fly scheme. Our national border-targeting centre
uses advanced passanger information and passanger
name records. We hope that our European partners
will follow suit and agree on effective implementation
of the former within, as as well as into, the European
Union. We have linked to the Schengen Information

System to exchange data on foreign fighters. And we
provide details on stolen and lost travel documents to
INTERPOL in order to aid partners around the world.

Furthermore, we aim not only to tackle the
symptoms but also the root causes of terrorism.
Therefore, 2 million public servants in thousands of
public authorities in the United Kingdom now have a
legal duty to seek to prevent people from being drawn
into terrorism and extremism. And we will introduce
additional legislation later this year.

We all need to do more on this. We should inspire
young people to make choices based on reality, not
ISIL's gangster fantasies. In today's world, this reality
has to extend into the virtual territory of the Internet,
as our Malaysian colleague said in his remarks. The
Internet and social media empower people throughout
the world through new technology - breaking down
barriers between people and peoples, empowering the
individual citizen and strengthening the democratic
process. Socially responsible companies should not
wait for Governments to regulate and re-regulate as new
technologies develop. Just as we expect banks to ensure
that their facilities are not used to for money laundering,
Internet compaines must ensure their services are not
used by criminals and terrorists to exchange videos
of children being abused, to launder money through
virtual currencies, to buy or build weapons, to plan
attacks or to radicalzse the vulnerable. In the United
Kingdom our own Counterterrorism Internet Referrals
Unit, working with many of those companies to remove
offensive or extremist material that breaches their
terms and conditions, not just the criminal law. We
welcome the new Europol Internet Referrals Unit, to be
in place in July; and we encourage other Member States
to develop their own such capabilities.

As several colleagues have said, we must also
counter the ISIL narrative - wherever it is - with
courage, conviction and a renewed energy, while
promoting our core universal values, the values of the
United Nations, to people from across the globe who
abhor the terrorists' barbarism towards Sunni and Shia
Muslims, Yazidis, Christians, minority communities
and women and girls of all faiths. We must counter their
false claims of success, statehood, moral supremacy
and religious authority and reach those vulnerable to
terrorist and extremist propaganda. We must give a
voice to those best placed to expose their myths and to
the victims, whose pain reveals their real agenda. We
must confront not just violent extremism but extremism
of all kinds in which violence breeds.

The United Kingdom welcomes the role the United
Nations has played in providing a global analysis of
this threat and of Member States' responses and in
coordinating those responses. We call on all Member
States to implement resolution 2178 (2014) and, as I
have said, offer our experience to those who would find
it useful. Like us, Member States must ensure that any
measure taken to counter terrorism complies with all
their obligations under international law.

The United Kingdom also supports the efforts of
the United Nations - and especially the Secretary-
General - to achieve political settlements in Syria, Iraq,
Yemen, Libya and elsewhere. We urge the development
community to redouble its efforts to tackle not just
conflict itself, but the drivers of conflict from which
terrorism, extremism, sectarianism, violence, crime
and abuse spills out. We must re-energize and refocus
these efforts as we finalize the sustainable development
goals later this year.

Let us remind ourselves of the overall picture.
Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham, ISIL,
Daesh or whatever the next mutation turns out to be
are not Islamic, and they are not a State. They are a
death cult devoted to mayhem and destruction. So from
today's session and the work that follows, they must hear
a united message from these United Nations. We will
not tolerate their intolerance. We will not compromise
our values. We will contain them, challenge them and
disrupt them. We will stand united, and united we will
defeat them.

