Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Bulgaria and Romania, and the European
Free Trade Association countries Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.

In common with other speakers, we welcome the
presence at this meeting of the Secretary-General. We
also warmly appreciate the presence of Foreign
Minister Vuk Draskovic of Serbia and Montenegro.

I would like to express our appreciation for the
presence here today of Mr. Holkeri and we welcome
the opportunity to hear a briefing on the situation in
Kosovo. The European Union has expressed its full
support for the efforts of Special Representative Harri
Holkeri, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) to stabilize the situation and to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and the
policy of "standards before status".

In our statement to the Council on 13 April, the
European Union strongly condemned the recent
ethnically motivated violence in Kosovo that resulted
in many dead and wounded, the destruction of personal
property and the destruction of Serbian Orthodox
churches and monasteries, which form part of the
common religious and cultural heritage of all
Europeans. The EU also strongly condemned the
attacks on the troops of KFOR and on the personnel
and sites of UNMIK. Extremism and intolerance are
contrary to European values. The European Union
urges the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
to take concrete steps to fulfil their commitment to
rebuilding multi-ethnicity and reconciliation
throughout Kosovo.

The Secretary-General's report clearly sets out
the background to the recent violence, and also notes
the need for concrete action by the leaders and people
of Kosovo to ensure that the violence is not repeated.

The European Union emphasizes its full support
for the policy of "standards before status", and we note
that the presentation of the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan on 31 March in Pristina is a step
forward in the standards process. We urge the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to
demonstrate their responsibility for, and commitment
to, achieving concrete progress on the implementation
of the standards.
We also stress the importance of reconciliation
between the communities in Kosovo and urge the
parties to resume the direct dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade in order to address critical issues of
common interest. The European Union stands ready to
support that dialogue.

The European Union has reaffirmed its strong
commitment to a secure, democratic, multi-ethnic and
prosperous Kosovo. The recent violence has been a
setback for Kosovo and has endangered the progress
made in recent years. The European Union believes
that in the aftermath of the violence the immediate
priorities must be to ensure security, to facilitate the
return of displaced persons, to reconstruct destroyed
property and religious sites and to bring those
responsible to justice. Progress by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in meeting the
standards will be assessed periodically, and progress
towards a process to determine the future status of
Kosovo, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), is
conditional on the positive outcome of a
comprehensive review.

The European Union urges all political leaders in
Kosovo, in particular the Kosovo Albanian leadership,
to work closely with the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) to address the many challenges
that lie ahead, including economic development. The
European Union welcomes the presidential statement
adopted by the Security Council on 30 April
(S/PRST/2004/l3), which outlined the need to allow
for more effective local government through
devolution and to ensure the physical security and the
full protection of the rights of members of all
communities in Kosovo.

