Mrs. Craft (United States of America): "It's like the end of the world" - The New York Times; "Breaking point'; babies freezing to death amid Idlib push" - Al Jazeera; "These people are begging the world to listen to their plight" - CNN; "Turkey-Russia standoff in Syria leaves millions of refugees caught in chaos" - Wall Street Journal. Nearly | million Syrians have been forced to flee their homes in the past 90 days - 1 million people in 90 days. And so I ask, how much longer will we tolerate these headlines? The unyielding military campaign of the regime, Russia, Iran and Hizbullah amounts to a wholesale rejection of United Nations and Security Council efforts to facilitate a political process in Syria. Speaking candidly, it is a marvel to me that our Russian colleagues can speak of ceasefires and political solutions in this Chamber with a straight face when their own warplanes have struck hospitals and the homes of children. Indeed, every passing day without a real ceasefire further dims the prospect of a United Nations- facilitated political solution. The Al-Assad regime is already declaring a military victory and has promised to continue its assault in north-western Syria, this while children are freezing to death in the fields in Idlib. The Council cannot allow Syria, Russia and Iran to continue pursuing the subjugation of Syrian civilians, as failure to end the Al-Assad regime's assault through a United Nations-brokered ceasefire risks the lives of millions of internally displaced persons, most of them women and children. Further military actions aim to sideline the Security Council and prevent it from implementing resolution 2254 (2015), a resolution aimed at just and lasting peace and endorsed by the Russian Federation. President Trump and the United States of America strongly desire to see Russia end its support for the Al-Assad regime's atrocities in Syria and instead commit to a political resolution of the conflict. The outcome of the conflict will have a significant bearing on the credibility and moral authority of the Council. If we do not abide by the unanimously adopted commitments set out in resolution 2254 (2015), and if we do not restore the former Idlib de-escalation zone, then what can we be trusted with? What kind of precedent are we setting? It is at best a deeply troubling one. The United States supports the legitimate interest of our NATO ally, Turkey, which has done more than any other country to assist Syrian refugees. We understand its concern about additional refugee flows as a result of ongoing hostilities. We unequivocally reject statements by Russian officials in Moscow that falsely blame Turkey for the escalation of violence in north-western Syria, and there is no doubt that the Al-Assad regime and Russia - not Turkey - are responsible for orchestrating and executing this military offensive. As our Special Representative for Syria Engagement, Jim Jeffrey, stated last week in Ankara, the United States will continue to coordinate with Turkey on diplomatic approaches to restore a ceasefire to the Idlib de-escalation zone and achieve a pullback of Al-Assad regime forces to the 2018 Sochi ceasefire lines. On that note, for too long, we have outsourced the work of establishing ceasefires to Russia and its Astana format. It was not clear before but it is certainly no longer appropriate to trust the Astana group to end theviolence. The clearest path we see to an immediate end to violence in north-west Syria is for the United Nations to take full charge of a new ceasefire initiative. This should be the most urgent priority of the Secretary- General and of United Nations Special Envoy Pedersen. Let me close by taking a moment to address the men, women and children in the Idlib province. Today, they will likely hear the Russian Federation and those officials who claimed to represent them dismiss their suffering as insignificant and even imagined, or perhaps the Russian Federation and the officials who say they represent Idlib province will acknowledge the suffering of the people of Idlib but claim that it is unrelated to the campaign of the terror they have waged against these innocent people. This is falsification in pure form, and it is a disgrace. The people of Idlib deserve far better from those who claimed authority over them, but I want to ask them not to give up hope - not yet. In the days ahead, the United States will not spare any effort, including working with allies, to isolate the Al-Assad regime diplomatically and economically and to deliver the relief, the resources and ultimately the peace that has been kept from the people of Idlib province for far too long. The questions I ask before the Council today, then, are: what will tomorrow's headline be, and what are we going to do about it?
