Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by expressing my delegation's appreciation for the
convening of this debate on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban. I thank the
Chairman of the Committee, Ambassador Munoz, for
his very comprehensive report on the Committee's
work and on the activities of the Monitoring Team
established to assist the Committee in the fulfilment of
its mandate.

Despite international efforts, the threat posed by
Al Qaeda and the Taliban and the groups clearly
associated with them remains as real today as it has
been in the recent past. The hostage-taking in the
Russian city of Beslan, perpetrated against civilians -
particularly shocking for its targeting of children -
and the bombing of the Australian embassy in Jakarta a
few days ago demonstrate the need for the international
community to further address the fight against
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

By adopting the regime of sanctions against Al
Qaeda and the Taliban, the Security Council took the
unprecedented step of bringing into force legislation
binding on all States on the issue of combating
terrorism. Such sanctions lay a strong foundation for
halting the flow of money to terrorists associated with
the Al Qaeda network as well as for preventing the
direct or indirect supply, sale or transfer of arms and
military equipment.

Despite progress achieved so far, particularly in
the field of financial sanctions - judging by the levels
of Al Qaeda activity - it appears that the sanctions
regime imposed by the Security Council has only had a
limited impact in effectively reducing the threat of
terrorism. The current situation should lead to
recognition of the need to strengthen the sanctions
regime and, in this, we are in full agreement with
Ambassador Munoz and the set of measures he has
proposed. The Committees should find additional ways
of assessing the effectiveness of the implementation by
Member States of the sanctions regime imposed on Al
Qaeda and the Taliban and its impact, and of ensuring
that credible reports of sanctions evasion result in a
proactive response by the Security Council.

The implementation of financial sanctions is an
important aspect of the international campaign against
terrorism. We share the views expressed in the report
of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team on that critical aspect. The Committee should
continue to focus on alternative remittance systems,
since the application of financial restrictions is an
obligation for both the public and private sectors. The
Committee should also focus its efforts on developing
efficient public-private partnerships, including through
the implementation of arms embargoes and travel bans.
Partnerships have the potential to both complement the
Committee's efforts to achieve its objectives and to
contribute to its greater efficiency by introducing new
working methods as required for the effectiveness of
the sanctions implementation, which depends on the
real and sustained support of the entire international
community.

The Consolidated List, as rightly pointed out in
the report, is an important tool for meeting the
objectives of Security Council resolutions, especially
those aimed at preventing the financing of terrorism or
the enforcement of travel bans. Member States should
be encouraged to submit names for inclusion on the
Consolidated List in order to maintain its relevance.
The Committee, for its part, should consider
procedures for delisting, whenever required. States and
the Committee should strengthen their cooperation,
ensuring that the credibility and usefulness of the
Consolidated List will have a positive impact on
Committee activities.

Considering the important role entrusted to
regional and subregional organizations, cooperation
with intelligence services clearly needs to be
strengthened. The creation, on both a regional and a
subregional basis, of an electronic database containing
all relevant data concerning persons, groups and
entities subject to United Nations financial sanctions
would provide a useful tool in the fight against
terrorism. Terrorism is no longer a localized problem
that can be fought by domestic action only. Measures
to combat terrorism must be based on the broadest
international cooperation, and in that regard we stress
the importance of Security Council resolution 1526
(2004) for its emphasis on the need for further
cooperation between the Committee's member States.

To conclude, my delegation would like to take
this opportunity to commend the role played by the
Monitoring Team in furthering the work of the
Committee and in monitoring compliance with the
relevant Council resolutions. We also support the
programme of work of the Committee, especially those
activities regarding cooperation with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the need for permanent
assessment of how sanctions are being applied on the
ground, particularly through missions by the Chairman
to the areas concerned.

