Ms. Rice (United States of America): On behalf
of the United States, let me thank France for its
leadership in drawing attention to these important
issues. I also want to thank the Secretary-General for
his commitment and his presence here today, as well as
Executive Director Costa for his customarily candid
and thoughtful briefing and for his continued work
with this Council.

Not so long ago, the topic that we turn to today
might not have made it onto the agenda of the Security
Council, but organized crime and drug trafficking and
the terrible consequences that follow in the wake of
such large-scale crime and corruption are precisely the
type of threat to global security and stability that this
Council must confront in today's interconnected world.
We face an extraordinary array of global challenges,
including drug trafficking, that no more stop at national
borders than a gale force wind stops from house to
house. Drug trafficking, like global terrorism,
pandemic disease and climate change, is a
transnational security threat that, by definition, cannot
be tackled by any one country alone. The work we do
together in the Security Council to shore up fragile
States and build up their capacity to provide for their
people is essential to fighting these twenty-first century
threats.

States wracked by poverty and rattled by conflict
often struggle to control their own territory, provide for
their citizens' basic needs, and extend the rule of law.
That leaves them more vulnerable to exploitation by
terrorist and criminal networks, which strengthens
these transnational predators and in turn undermines
global security for all of us. The nexus here is
inescapable. Where development falters, security
suffers.

This dynamic is particularly clear when it comes
to the scourge of illegal narcotics. The menace of
international organized crime and drug traffickers is
magnified by conflict, chaos, poverty and instability,
and it magnifies all those ills in return. As Executive
Director Costa rightly notes, we face a vicious cycle in
all too many States. He said that "vulnerability attracts
crime, and crime, in turn, deepens vulnerability".
All too often, States that lack the capacity to provide
basic services for their citizens also lack the strength to
fend off the vultures of global crime.

Drugs and drug trafficking do more than just
threaten political stability; they also undermine the rule
of law, overload prisons, strain public health systems,
waste lives and devastate communities. They also stall
and stifle the development efforts that can bring lasting
prosperity, peace and security. They pave the road back
again towards poverty, chaos and conflict, and by
bringing misery and despair to the daily lives of
citizens of other nations they threaten the security of
all nations.

The direct economic costs are bad enough.
International observers, including the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), have calculated
that transnational organized crime and corruption may
siphon off as much as 15 per cent of the world's gross
domestic product. But today, the security costs of this
dangerous form of organized crime may be even more
grave, because even beyond the corrosion and
corruption that drug cartels inflict upon all too many
States, drug traffickers have increasingly well-
documented links to terrorist and insurgent groups that
further endanger political security and economic
development. Criminal syndicates now help terrorist
groups to slip across borders, smuggle weapons and
forge documents. Meanwhile, terrorist groups are also
often turning to organized criminal activity to extend
their reach. They now often use extortion, drug-dealing
and even credit-card fraud and insurance scams to
finance their activities.

The growing interdependence among terrorist
groups and organized crime makes it much more
difficult to staunch the flow of terrorist financing. As
terrorist groups increasingly mimic the tactics of
organized crime, our international response must

include tools used by traditional law enforcement. And
so the United States is working with our international
partners to identify and attempt to dismantle these
terrorist criminal linkages wherever they exist; better
yet, we are working to strengthen criminal justice and
law enforcement institutions so they can thwart such
linkages before they are forged.

This brings us to a new global template for
international law enforcement cooperation, created by
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime - the Palermo Convention - and
the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
These accords, along with the three United Nations
conventions against illegal drugs, form the spine of a
common multilateral framework to better protect our
nations from the linked threats of crime, drugs and
corruption.

It will not in any way be easy to meet these
challenges. In the years since the conventions were
adopted, criminal networks have taken advantage of
the Internet, electronic financial transactions, rising
trade and other technologies associated with
globalization to expand their grasp and cover their
tracks. Such criminal activity is particularly hard to
trace and prevent in regions still struggling with deep
poverty or recovering from conflict, so we must work
together to better use the tools with which the
conventions provide us and work to short-circuit the
destabilizing syndrome of transnational crime.

Having discussed the overall nature of the
challenges, I should like to say a few words about the
role that the United States is working play to tackle
them, as underscored by our efforts to help
Governments to take responsibility as equal partners in
this shared challenge.

From 2008 through 2009, the United States
provided approximately $36 million to support
UNODC activities. We are committed to continuing
that support, and we recognize that the efforts of
UNODC and other international and regional
organizations act as an important force multiplier. For
2010, the State Department has allocated
approximately $2 billion to high-priority programmes
to support three interrelated objectives: first, to
institutionalize the rule of law by developing partner
countries' criminal justice systems to strengthen law
enforcement, increase judicial effectiveness, foster
cooperation in legal affairs and advance respect for
human rights; secondly, to disrupt the overseas
production and trafficking of illicit drugs through
targeted counter-narcotics efforts, institution-building
assistance and stronger coordination with other
Governments and international organizations; and
thirdly, to minimize the harm that transnational crime
and criminal networks inflict on the United States and
others through enhanced international cooperation and
foreign assistance.

Let me also say a word about the related and
appalling problem of human trafficking. As we all
know, one of the key components of the Palermo
Convention is its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and
Children. The trafficking of persons strikes at our
common humanity and tears the social fabric of
communities around the world. During these times of
economic turmoil, people desperate for work can be
especially vulnerable to trafficking organizations and
crime cartels, particularly in impoverished, fragile or
post-conflict States.

It is not enough simply to enact an
anti-trafficking law or announce a national plan of
action; we must act globally and firmly to implement
trafficking laws and to ensure that these statutes help
victims even while we prosecute those who prey on
them. Simply put, this is a modern form of slavery. The
suffering is vast and the victims should not have to
wait.

In conclusion, let me turn back to the realities of
our interconnected age and the nexus between
development and global security. Drug trafficking and
other transnational threats gravely undermine post-
conflict States, whose criminal justice sectors may
have been destroyed or even hijacked by criminal
organizations. When States suffer, so do their
neighbours. Regions wracked by conflict, want and
instability are often breeding grounds for drug
traffickers, terrorists and other nefarious actors, who in
turn undermine reconstruction activities and threaten
the security of States in the region and around the
world.

Unfortunately, we will all have to grapple with
the threat of international drug trafficking for years to
come. Given the threat that drug cartels and organized
criminals often pose to development and reconstruction
efforts, this Council should consider how best to
develop judicial and law enforcement capacities when

creating or reviewing mandates for peacekeeping
operations in areas where such criminals threaten
international peace and stability.

In the twenty-first century, a threat to
development anywhere can soon be a threat to security
everywhere. It is for that reason that we are pleased to
support the presidential statement to be adopted today.

