Kenya commends the Permanent Mission of the Federal Republic of Germany to the United Nations for bringing the global reality of pandemics and their implications on security, including health security, before the Security Council for its consideration. We also welcome the Council's unanimous adoption on | July 2020 of resolution 2532 (2020), on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), and thank France and Tunisia for their tireless efforts aimed at bringing about this outcome following protracted negotiations. As the COVID-19 pandemic persists, Governments across the globe are taking measures to address the unprecedented political and socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic on their populations. For most countries, the challenges are multifaceted. Additionally, efforts aimed at flattening the curve are being undertaken amidst diverse realities in the peace-conflict continuum. The multiplicity of these challenges is indeed a test on international crisis management. We need to act fast and act together. The various briefings by the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Social Affairs, Ms. Amira Elfadil Mohammed Elfadil, have further demonstrated that pandemics have multifaceted implications for peace and security, causing humanitarian needs to spike and triggering the reversal of the progress previously made in peacebuilding and development. Pandemics cannot therefore be addressed solely as health concerns, particularly in conflict-affected regions and in countries emerging from conflict. My delegation also welcomes the African Union update, which underscored its policy of acting together and working in solidarity with ongoing mitigation efforts through the African Centres for Disease Control and Prevention in order to ensure that Africa is not left behind when it comes to production of vaccines and essential equipment. Existing fragility and conflict situations are some of the triggers that can transform a health crisis into a security threat. The pandemic's impact in fragile and conflict-affected countries, for example in the Sahel, the Horn of Africa and other regions that are in protracted conflict situations, is proof that pandemics can be an evolving threat to peace. This health crisis also has the potential to create a platform where violent extremism and terrorism can further thrive. As noted by the Secretary- General, the pandemic has also caused interruptions in ongoing negotiations in the Juba peace process and in talks with Al-Shabaab on its terrorist activities in the Horn of Africa. In this regard, Kenya stands behind the Secretary-General's 23 March call for silencing the guns globally. We also fully align ourselves with the call on 8 April by AU Commission Chair Moussa Faki Mahamat for all of us to focus on collectively fighting COVID-19 as a united global community. Climate change and environmental challenges have also proved to be additional hurdles that countries must overcome during the pandemic. Kenya and other countries in the Horn and Central African regions are addressing the pandemic amidst other competing emergencies, including floods and locust infestations. The COVID-19 pandemic is also having an enormous impact on peace operations in mission settings. Similarly, ongoing peace negotiations between warring parties and humanitarian aid flows have been negatively affected, particularly in refugee and internally displaced persons camps. In this regard, my delegation wishes to acknowledge the sacrifices being made by peacekeepers, local peacebuilders, community leaders, women's and youth organizations, civil society, and health personnel in Africa and globally. Implementation ofa global ceasefire will ensure that peace operations continue to deliver on their mandates in times of health crisis. National and regional policies that include transparency and accountability measures during pandemics will further ensure the safety of all personnel, including the free flow of humanitarian aid to the most vulnerable. We have also witnessed the essential contribution of women in peace operations, as well as the contributions of women as community leaders and as front- line health responders. However, women and girls have also been disproportionately hit by the health, economic and social impacts of the pandemic. The security situation triggered by the pandemic has created an important opportunity to broaden and hasten the implementation of the existing recommendations contained in the resolutions on women and youth and peace and security, particularly in terms of the pillars of participation, protection, prevention and partnership, within the pandemic framework. In addition, upon request by national stakeholders, the international community can rally around fragile countries and offer support in building resilient critical governance infrastructure, particularly health-care systems, personnel training and the provision of essential equipment. Access to functioning health-care facilities can mitigate the risk posed by the health-and-insecurity nexus. The pandemic has also put a tremendous strain on national health- care systems and economies across the globe, no matter the level of a country's development. Consequently, the health crisis also has the potential of exacerbating underdevelopment as a trigger to instability, particularly in already weak economies. Sustainable funding is also essential for the sustainability of essential infrastructure. An interdisciplinary approach is needed to harmonize medical, public and political responses to pandemics. Given the significant impact of COVID-19 on the global economy, there is even a larger possibility of setbacks to the gains that have been achieved in ensuring food security, poverty eradication, growth of domestic industry, and regional integration. We observed significant setbacks during the Ebola crisis in West Africa in 2014 and 2015. There is therefore a need to prioritize, invest and identify new security partners, including health and technology experts, in order to build resilient infrastructure. The Council also needs to start looking ahead in terms of what a post- COVID-19 world will look like for women and children and displaced, marginalized and vulnerable populations in conflict-affected and fragile countries and regions. Working in partnership with other United Nations bodies, funds and agencies, it will be critical for us to start building on and centralizing the findings and reports of national, regional and international stakeholders with respect to the health- peace dynamic, including in terms of the gendered and disproportionate impact of COVID-19, in order to develop informed and context-appropriate guidelines and recommendations moving forward.
