Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Lithuania voted
in favour of resolution 2216 (2015), which was just
adopted and sends a strong and much-needed signal
from the international community that all parties in
Yemen should quickly come back to the negotiating
table, relaunch the transition process as per the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and the outcomes of
the National Dialogue Conference, and thus spare the
lives and livelihoods of the hundreds of thousands of
Yemenis affected by the fighting.

As we all know, the humanitarian situation in
Yemen is dire: 16 million people, almost a third of the
population, are in need of humanitarian assistance. Due
to the conflict, hundreds of civilians have been killed or
wounded, and 100,000 civilians have fled their homes.

Lithuania underscores the call of the resolution on
all sides to strictly observe international humanitarian
and human rights law. Humanitarian aid must be allowed
to reach those in need without delay. The Council has a
responsibility to do everything in its power to prevent
Yemen from falling into a disastrous spiral of civil war,
sectarian division and disintegration. The Council's
message should be united and clear: a political solution
can be found, violence is not the answer, and those
who continue their spoiling acts will face serious
consequences. We believe that an arms embargo
against the spoilers and their associates, as well as the
designation of the Houthi leader, Abdulmalik al-Houthi,
and the former head of the Republican Guard, Ahmed
Saleh, will send a strong signal that the use of violence
against peaceful transition, in defiance of Security
Council resolutions, will not be tolerated.

At the same time, the Council must now make sure
that both existing and new sanctions are vigorously and
fully implemented by all. The United Nations has been
able to pull Yemen away from the brink before through
its good offices and mediation. We must not forget that
the role of the United Nations remains vital if a return
to sustainable peace in Yemen is to stand a chance.

