We thank the Permanent Mission of Estonia for convening this meeting on ensuring transparency, efficiency and effectiveness in the work of the Security Council. We appreciate the briefings provided by Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, and by Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director of Security Council Report. As new developments and threats emerge, the Council's work continues to grow, demanding its attention, resources and energy. It is therefore timely to review its working methods to ensure that they adjust to both substantive and administrative developments. The Philippines welcomes the progress made by the Informal Working Group towards improving the working methods of the Security Council. We are particularly pleased by the comprehensive compilation of these measures, facilitated under Japan's 2017 chairmanship, to enhance its efficiency, transparency and interactivity. I would like to focus on three areas: greater participation and transparency, improvement in the Council's working methods and its positive impact on the Council's efficiency and effectiveness, and agility and consensus-building. We welcome the increase in public Council meetings, which we believe is contributing to greater transparency and accountability. The increased participation of non-members sends the important message that the Council recognizes their contribution and promotes inclusiveness, which puts unilateralism in check. We therefore support the holding of as many meetings as possible in a public format. Our delegation also highlights the importance of adapting the working methods of the Council's subsidiary bodies, with an emphasis on greater transparency, consistency and clarity, and of the periodic review of such methods. Given the vital role of groups and regional organizations in dealing with matters of international peace and security, my delegation believes that they should be allowed greater participation in the Council's decision-making processes. In that regard, we welcome the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Secretary-General's first-ever briefing to the Security Council in January (see S/PV.8711) to highlight the Association's role in the maintenance of regional peace and security. While conflict prevention remains primarily a State responsibility, the Philippines endorses the intent of resolution 2171 (2014), which stresses the important role of women and civil society in that regard. It is important to further enhance the participation of women and civil society in discussions on the prevention and resolution of conflict, the maintenance of peace and security and post-conflict peacebuilding. While bearing in mind the need to address cross-cutting issues, the Council's working methods must promote a clear focus on its core mandate - promoting and maintaining international peace and security. That focus would facilitate improved, effective and efficient working methods. Improving its working methods is an important component of comprehensive and timely Security Council reform, which should lead to the expansion of the Council and the concomitant review of certain working methods. In addition, the issue of the veto is intrinsically connected to that of the working methods. We reiterate the view that veto power has no place in a twenty-first-century Security Council, but in the interim, gradual steps may be taken to minimize its use. We believe that the Council's working methods ought not be decided by the Council alone. The wider membership must be able to take part in the process - not just in a token or perfunctory manner, but in a meaningful way. That is in line with Article 24, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations, which states that the Security Council acts on behalf of the wider membership in carrying out its duties. With regard to peacekeeping in particular, mechanisms like the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, which guarantees open, active and transparent dialogue between the Missions of troop- and police-contributing countries and the Security Council, should be maintained and strengthened. The Philippines recognizes the extraordinary circumstances and unprecedented challenges brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic. It is indeed necessary for the Security Council to nurture its agility by maintaining a state of readiness to meet and make decisions during unique situations while ensuring effectiveness, efficiency and transparency. During the pandemic, we saw how the Council - for the first time in history - held video-teleconferences (VTCs) and voted in written procedures. However, new ways of doing things, such as the use of VTCs in lieu of in-person meetings and modified voting procedures, can pose a significant challenge to ensuring the inclusiveness and transparency of the Council's work, because it takes away the core nature of negotiations and consultations, whereby delegations can immediately clarify their respective national positions and appreciate each other's views. Such earnest negotiations, conducted in good faith and in a face-to-face setting, represent the central tenets of multilateralism, which promotes the building of consensus around a shared vision or goal. We should always promote and nurture that spirit. We should make full use of technology and systems, as well as build mutual trust, if we are to ensure agility in the Council's work. We should invest in the development of appropriate and secure technologies - both hardware and software - to further our goals. During normal times, we should always anticipate and pave the way for new platforms, work modes and arrangements to provide us with fast, efficient and secure tools during extraordinary times. The Philippines reiterates its commitment to preserving the principles of transparency, efficiency and effectiveness even as we go through this extraordinary crisis. The Philippines stands ready to cooperate with and support the Security Council in finding the optimal way to ensure that our working methods promote the important principles of multilateralism and diplomacy, on which the United Nations was built.
