Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): For centuries, the
peoples of the Middle East and North Africa lived
together in peace and harmony regardless of race,
religion, language, sect or ethnicity. They did so and
flourished politically, economically, socially and
intellectually - always with a sense of shared destiny
and all the while embracing their differences as a
perpetual source of wealth, and not weakness.

Today's reality differs dramatically from that
history, and the region is confronted with many complex
challenges. Sectarian and divisive policies, brutal
oppression of legitimate demands for democracy and
unresolved conflicts resulting in mass displacements,
coupled with feelings of resentment due to growing
discrimination and xenophobia in other parts of the
world, have combined to create a breeding ground for
violent extremism and terrorism.

We should be clear on two points. First, terrorism
and extremism are not a Middle Eastern/North African
phenomenon. Terrorism cannot and should not be
associated with any religion, nationality, ethnic group
or geographic region. Secondly, no region in the
world is immune from violence today. Terrorism is a
global and transnational phenomenon that needs to be
addressed through effective bilateral and multilateral
cooperation.

Terrorist groups such as Daesh cannot be defeated
without addressing the root causes that created it.
Daesh is an overriding national security threat for
Turkey, together with other terrorist organizations like
the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) and Revolutionary
People's Liberation Party-Front (DHKP-C), which
operate in the same environment. Since its creation,
while many other partners struggle to understand the
threat, Turkish authorities spared no effort to counter
Daesh. Currently, we have been carrying out joint
air operations against terrorist targets as part of the
international coalition that brings together more than
60 countries.

While fighting Daesh, we should harbour no
illusions about the conditions that led to its rise. Daesh
did not suddenly spontaneously appear out of nowhere
and spread like a cancer on its own. It was aided and
abetted by the politically defunct totalitarian Al-Assad
regime, which, in its desperate drive to retain power
at all costs, has deployed any means available to it,
including chemical weapons and barrel bombs, to kill,
maim, oppress and otherwise terrorize its own people
into submission.
The suppression of the democratic aspirations of
the Syrian people, divisive sectarian policies and the
war crimes and massive violations of human rights that
have been committed with impunity by the Al-Assad
regime have combined to create fertile ground for
radicalization, extremism and the recruitment of foreign
terrorist fighters by Daesh. In fact, it was the tactical
cooperation and operational air support by the terrorist
Al-Assad regime and its sectarian collaborators that
enabled Daesh's rapid expansion in Syria.

The reprehensible methods and actions of Daesh
should not confuse us about what we should prioritize
as we move forward. The international community and
the Security Council need to address the root cause of
the problem in Syria through resolute action. Here are
the main parameters of a comprehensive strategy for a
way forward.

First, we must do all we can to downgrade and
defeat terrorist organizations like Daesh, the PKK,
the DHKP-C and their kind. There can be no room for
moral relativism in the fight against terror.

Secondly, we need to create safe areas in Syria
that have been cleared from Daesh, where protection
will also be provided to the civilian population against
attacks from the air. Such zones, if implemented with
determination, can keep Syrians in Syria, lead to the
voluntary return of refugees and encourage people to
believe again in a stable future for their country.

Thirdly, we should all work for a solution to
the conflict that meets the legitimate demands and
aspirations of the Syrian people and ensures a managed
and orderly transition to real political change. The
political process we should vitalize would lead to a
united, democratic, secular, non-sectarian, multicultural
Syria without Al-Assad. An outcome based on those
principles will be the best guarantee to reverse the tide
of extremism and eradicate once and for all the terrorist
threat that Syria has become home to.

In Iraq, the Government needs to be supported with
the challenges it faces, and the Iraqi Government must
effectively embrace all segments of society. In Libya,
national reconciliation and the formation of a national
unity government would be the most effective response
to terrorism and all other scourges.

We cannot ignore the plight of the Palestinians
who are living under occupation. We need to keep in
mind that the historical injustice perpetrated against
the Palestinian people is fueling hatred, alienation and
radicalism across the region. It is time for a resolution
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict based on the two-
State vision, without further delay.

Despite all challenges, we are confident that the
proud peoples of the Middle East and North Africa will
succeed in their efforts to revitalize their deep-rooted
culture of tolerance and peaceful coexistence.

