Major General Ngondi: I wish to say how
humbled I am and thankful for all the kind comments
and gratitude expressed to our troops, which I promise
I will pass on.

I addressed the need for in-mission assessment of
pre-deployment training conducted and administered
by troop-contributing countries. To make my point
clear, the gap that exists in force headquarters - and not
necessarily mine alone, but all force headquarters - is
in the ability of the Commander to understand or know
the standard of operational readiness of the troops
because he or she does not have the capacity to check
that standard.

The performance of the troops basically involves
three areas: the ability to conduct essential mission
tasks which are well covered and documented, the
staff functions, and the sustenance of the contingents.
If a Force Commander is in a position to know that
all of those areas are going well, then he or she can
be confident when it comes to detailing the troops to
undertake various tasks.

With regard to the question of whether such
evaluation should be carried out even before troops
deploy, I would say yes. It would be even better if,
before the troops deployed to the mission area, their
training could be validated to establish, in particular
for the Force Commander, that they are ready for
operations. However, I addressed this topic only within
my area of responsibility.

With regard to the issue of which criteria should
be used, let me say that as of today there are manuals
and documents, and more continue to be produced;
they are shared between the United Nations and troop-
contributing countries, including guides on what
pre-deployment training activities should be provided.
Those same activities are to be applied in the field.
Where new trends and challenges emerge, the new
component I have called an "evolution team" will be
on hand to analyse what is going on and formulate
appropriate training plans and directives to ensure
that troops received appropriate training within the
mission to deal with an emerging situation. We cannot
wait for them to go back to their countries to be trained
there. There should be an opportunity to train troops
to address emerging issues; otherwise such emerging
issues could throw the mission off completely.

I also wanted to respond to the question regarding
what the United Nations can do to end the cycle of
violence. I do not know who should be responsible, but
my own view is that, in my own experience, violent
conflict is the result of exclusion within a country.
Therefore, if it is possible to focus on the need to create
inclusive political and economic institutions within the
country, where everyone feels a sense of ownership and
enjoys the fruits of the country, then perhaps we will
see the end of such cycles of violence. But as long as
extractive and non-inclusive institutions exist within a
country, it is just a matter of time until grievances will
grow into violence. That is my opinion.

