Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation wishes to express its appreciation to you,
Mr. President, at the end of your presidency of the
Security Council. During the past month, we have had
before us topics of the utmost importance to
humankind and to the maintenance of international
peace and security. We hope that we have worked to
address them in accordance with what our conscience
dictates.

Since the beginning of its membership of the
Security Council, my delegation has been, and
continues to be, keen to address all issues while
working in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law and positively taking
political considerations into account. That is true with
2

regard to the Sudan, which initiated the request for
assistance from the United Nations to address some
internal issues that need constructive and transparent
support from the international community.

No one can deny that the Sudan has taken many
positive steps in partnership with the United Nations
and the African Union, as was underscored by the
statement to the press by the President of the Security
Council on 16 April 2007. All that is needed now is
assistance, provided in a manner based on
encouragement and mutual respect, in order to preserve
what has been achieved, build upon it and protect it
from any negative impact.

The purpose of the draft resolution we are about
to adopt is to renew the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), which was established
pursuant to resolution 1590 (2005), regarding the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in the Sudan. We
would like to thank our colleagues who submitted this
draft resolution. We expressed our comments and
reservations to them after having considered the first
version. We believed that the draft resolution exceeded
its intended purpose and dealt with various issues for
which there are other mechanisms. We also noted that
the language of the draft resolution was not consistent
with the recent positive developments in the
relationship between the Sudan and the United Nations,
which we are very eager to develop.

The divergence of views during the discussion of
the draft resolution in its initial form caused the
Council to fail to reach consensus as the expiration
date of the mandate of UNMIS was approaching. The
delegation of Qatar therefore decided to put forward a
draft resolution calling for a specific technical renewal
of the mandate of UNMIS as an alternative at the
disposal of the Council if necessary. However, in the
very last hours we sensed that there was understanding
and a constructive response from the sponsor of the
draft resolution now before us. We commend that
responsiveness, which has led to a convergence of
views and a settlement that helped us to agree to the
adoption of the draft resolution before us.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to stress that
it attaches great importance to collective action on the
basis of dealing with each case within its limits,
without combining it with other issues and in
accordance with the principles of professionalism and
transparency. That is the best way to serve humankind
07-32354
and to strengthen the role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

