Mr. Lasso Menzoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like, at the outset, to recognize the presence
of Ms. Sandra Honore, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I would
also like to express my gratitude to the Secretary-
General for his report on MINUSTAH (S/2014/6l7).

My country assigns the utmost priority to the
situation in Haiti and has, over the years, offered all its
available support to help that brother country overcome
adversity, both through bilateral channels as well as
multilateral ones such as MINUSTAH, for example,
without mentioning the assistance that has been
provided by the Union of South American Nations.

The situation in Haiti is a priority for all of Latin
America. Haiti's recovery constitutes a unifying
element and grounds for Latin American solidarity. In
that context, it is understandable that our region should
contribute more than 75 per cent of MINUSTAH's
military contingents.

The development of Latin America in recent
years, at every level, has allowed the Heads of State
and Government of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States to proclaim the region of Latin
America a zone of peace. In that sense, I would like
to express my country's hope that we will one day be
able to refer to MINUSTAH as the last peacekeeping
operation that was established in the zone of peace
known as Latin America. To that end, it is is essential
to preserve its successful management and proper
administration in the present so as to ensure the success
of its final phase.

In this context, the decisions that are carried out
around MINUSTAH with a View to its legacy should
ensure the sustainability of the progress achieved,
which will require a strategy of gradual, progressive
and responsible withdrawal that responds to the
changing conditions on the ground and not just to
budgetary factors. Considerations made on the basis
of information not gathered from the situation on the
ground could have undesirable consequences for Haiti
and the United Nations.

More specifically, my delegation believes that
the assessment of conditions on the ground of a
multidimensional mission like MINUSTAH must take
into consideration, in addition to the humanitarian
and security situation, issues that are critical to the
future stability of Haiti, such as the development of
the capacities of the Haitian National Police and to the
electoral processes of 2014 and 2015.

In this context, while recognizing and appreciating
the work of the strategic assessment mission to
Haiti, my delegation considers it relevant to recall
the importance of maintaining the limits originally
proposed and contained in the strategic plan 2013-2016,
unless field data allow us to act differently. However,
we are concerned that the Security Council could
decide to accelerate the consolidation of MINUSTAH
while uncertainty persists about the electoral process
in 2014 and the necessary amendments to the electoral
law, as reported by the head of MINUSTAH. We are
also concerned by talk of a speedy consolidation in
circumstances in which we still have a long way to go
to reach the recommended minimum number of police
personnel, as stated in the report of the Secretary-
General.

In light of the foregoing, we believe that the
decision or decisions to be made by the Security
Council on strengthening MINUSTAH must also, as
always in such cases, be taken with a sense of caution,
as the information available continues to be the cause
of some troubling uncertainty and prevents us from
forming a clear picture of the feasibility of another year
of consolidation of MINUSTAH.

Finally, I wish to pay due tribute to the men and
women of MINUSTAH, whose selfless work deserves
our ongoing appreciation and gratitude.

