Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to commend Mr. Ghassan Salamee, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and thank him for his very important briefing. I also commend his presence at the Brazzaville meeting to ensure further concerted efforts to help the brotherly Libyan people to soon restore stability. I welcome my brother His Excellency Ambassador Elsonni, the new Permanent Representative of Libya to the United Nations, to his first Security Council meeting. Recent events in Libya prove that military options are far from the appropriate way to overcome the crisis and meet the legitimate demands of the Libyan people to enjoy freedom, democracy, the rule of law, development and reforms. The chaos, instability and military confrontations witnessed over the past years have exacerbated the suffering of the Libyan people, increasing their frustration and loss of hope. In addition, that has complicated the crisis, hindered the settlement track and threatened Libya's unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity. Tunisia has long-standing historical and social links with Libya, and we are determined to assist our Libyan brothers in overcoming their differences and ensuring the security, stability and sovereignty of Libya so that it can resume its role in the region and the world. I would therefore like to stress the following seven points. First, we reiterate our call to all Libyan parties to respect the truce and transfer it to a permanent ceasefire without delay. That would cease the Libyan bloodshed. There is no military solution to the Libyan crisis; rather, the solution must be through constructive dialogue and negotiations among Libyans, without any exclusion or marginalization, in the context of a comprehensive national reconciliation process. Second, we emphasize the importance of the Berlin conference and we once again welcome its outcomes. We appreciate the efforts of the German Government and all parties to pave the way for the conference, especially the Moscow meeting. We must continue our efforts to establish operational mechanisms for the implementation of the outcomes of the Berlin conference. Negotiations must continue on the draft resolution in that regard. That would enable the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities. In that vein, we welcome the efforts of the United Kingdom and Germany. Third, it is important to respect the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of countries. We therefore reiterate our rejection of any external interference in the internal affairs of Libya or any acts that would further fuel the conflict. We are deeply concerned about the reports that Mr. Salame shared with us this morning in that regard. Fourth, Tunisia fully supports the efforts of the United Nations and Special Representative Mr. Ghassan Salame, particularly his three-step initiative towards a political settlement of the crisis. We commend the roles played by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the neighbouring countries, the League of Arab States and the African Union in supporting the political process. In that regard, we commend the meeting of the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya convened in Brazzaville today, and we look forward to the Libyan reconciliation conference to be held in Addis Ababa this spring. We would like to stress once again the need for concerted efforts to help Libyans to overcome their differences and resume dialogue towards a national consensus. That will pave the way for the rebuilding of State institutions under a civil regime that would preserve the unity and sovereignty of Libya. That would also meet the aspirations of the brotherly Libyan people. The Tunis communique for peace is an example of our continued efforts at the highest level to urge Libyans to communicate and reach a consensus formula that would ensure a way out of the current crisis through a political agreement, respect for international legitimacy and the subsequent move from such legitimacy to a Libyan legitimacy of the people. Fifth, we must respect all the relevant Security Council resolutions on Libya, the most recent of which is resolution 2486 (2019). That resolution called onall relevant parties to abide by a permanent ceasefire. It urged all Member States to commit to the arms embargo and called on the Libyan parties to exercise self-restraint, protect civilians and work constructively towards unifying Libyan military and economic institutions Sixth, we welcome all the developments that advance the economic process in Libya. Tunisia hosted the first round in that regard. We encourage the Libyan parties to continue on that path in order to surmount any obstacles faced by the Libyan economy in the current critical circumstances. It is important to remove any barriers to the production of petroleum in Libya and ensure access to it by all brotherly Libyan people, in addition to avoiding further deterioration of the humanitarian and economic situations in the country. Seventh, we underscore the need to respect international humanitarian law and _ international human rights law in Libya. We call for all necessary efforts to be made to clarify information regarding the fate of missing persons in Libya, such as MP Siham Sergewa; the two Tunisian journalists Nazir Lactari and Sufyan al-Sharaby, who were abducted in Libya in September 2014; and the Libyan citizen Walid Ksiksi, who worked at the Embassy of Tunisia in Tripoli and has been missing since 13 October 2014. To conclude, we reiterate the importance of preserving the current momentum resulting from the Berlin conference. We must work to prevent any further worsening of the situation. We should focus efforts on reaching a political settlement, countering terrorism and preventing terrorist organizations from abusing the current situation to extend their control in Libya and the entire region, thereby threatening their security and stability. Let us focus on the Libyan people, who have high hopes. They count on the unity of the Council. It is our responsibility to act accordingly and to not disappoint them.
