Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the
delegation of Peru for including today's important
debate on the agenda of its presidency. I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for her
detailed and informative briefing. We also welcome the
presence of the delegation of Israel, as well as the other
delegations that have inscribed their names on the list
of speakers today.
The situation in the Middle East has always been a
matter of great concern for the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea. We regret that, despite the various initiatives put
forth, the major financial support offered and the series
of peacekeeping operations deployed to the region, the
United Nations and the international community have
not been able to achieve a sustainable solution to the
political problems caused by the conflicts and wars in
various parts of the region. This decade is coming to
an end, and the future of the people of Syria, Yemen
and Libya remains uncertain. Millions of people in
these countries and other parts of the region are living
under the threat of weapons, awaiting the day when
the differences among their politicians will dissolve
and a sustainable solution that enables the positive
coexistence and the development of their respective
populations will be found.

With regard to the issue facing Israelis and
Palestinians, with clear consequences for the entire
region, my delegation regrets that there has been no
significant change or progress recently. Last year
was quite incendiary, starting with the Great March
of Return, and this dynamic of insecurity continued
into the first half of this year, aggravated mainly by
the acts of insurgency in Gaza, led by Hamas, and by
concrete political measures taken by Israel early in this
year with respect to such issues as the non-renewal of
the Temporary International Presence in Hebron and
the withholding of taxes and tariffs for the Palestinian
National Authority. All of that has only exacerbated
hatred and encouraged violence between the parties.

As we enter the second half of the year, we call on
the parties to refrain from taking unilateral actions that
incite violence. As we have said on other occasions,
the conflict has gone through worse times, with very
bloody and destructive scenes. But this horrific history
has not succeeded in guaranteeing the security desired
by Israelis, nor has it facilitated the establishment of
a Palestinian State recognized by Israel. Violence
is therefore not and never will be the best option for
resolving that dispute between the two parties.

As of 2016, according to a study conducted by the
Israel Democracy Institute and the Palestinian Center
for Policy and Survey Research, a majority of Israelis
and Palestinians would prefer two States as a means of
resolving the conflict over any other solution. Moreover,
a considerable majority of the Jewish population
believes that the Palestinian demand for the creation of
an independent State is just and that Israel can accept
the establishment of such a State.

Most Palestinians and Israelis see the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip as the ideal place for a hypothetical
Palestinian State in a two-State solution. However, there
are important areas of disagreement over the form of a
final agreement, as well as over the level of credibility
that each side sees in the other.

The results of that scientific exploration coincide
with the vision of the United Nations on the issue. My
delegation has always shown its commitment to the
decisions of this Organization. The resolutions of both
the Security Council and the General Assembly must
be the point of reference for Israelis and Palestinians,
as well as for any other international actor that wishes
to contribute to finding ajust solution to the conflict.

Equatorial Guinea therefore advocates for the two-

State solution to be negotiated directly between the
Israelis and the Palestinians within the framework of
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. A just solution
through dialogue may mean that neither of the parties
will have all their aspirations and claims met, which
is indeed one of the essential components of dialogue.
The definitive status of Jerusalem must be resolved in
such negotiations.

Equatorial Guinea believes the historical claims
of the Palestinians to be just, in accordance with the
various pronouncements of the African Union on the
matter. But we also think that Israel has every right to
live in peace and security. Both Palestine and Israel
must therefore respect each other's right to existence
and avoid any action that could further aggravate
the situation.

I cannot conclude without expressing our concern
for the 2 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip
whose living conditions still require the return of
the Palestinian National Authority to that enclave.
The delegation of Equatorial Guinea underscores
in that regard the importance of the international
community continuing to support the efforts of Egypt
and the United Nations in support of intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. The countries with influence in the
region must exercise that influence in the quest for a
just and lasting solution.

We call on the international community to continue
to fund the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the economic
situation of which still needs strengthening, so that it
can better perform its vital role.
