Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
congratulating China on its assumption ofthe presidency
of the Security Council for the month of June. I also
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. Allow me also to express our sincere thanks
to the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos, Assistant Secretary-General Ivan
Simonovic' and the Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Philip Spoerri, for their briefings this
morning.

I welcome the Secretary-General's latest report on
the protection ofcivilians in armed conflict contained in
document S/2012/376. The Secretary-General provided
five recommendations, namely, enhancing compliance
with international law, enhancing compliance by
non-State armed groups, the protection of civilians
by United Nations peacekeeping and other missions,
humanitarian access and accountability.

The concept of the protection of civilians is founded
in the universally accepted rules of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, which are
set out in a range of international legal instruments,
in particular the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their
1977 Additional Protocols, containing specific rules to
protect civilians. In situations that are not covered by
those international agreements, in particular internal
disturbances, civilians are protected by the fundamental
principles of humanitarian law, by most religious values
and ethics and by human rights law. Ironically, however,
a large number of civilians continue to be exposed to
the atrocities of conflict.

My delegation condemns all violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law. In
many situations, women and children especially continue
to be subject to various forms of violence. Attacks and
other interference against health-care facilities and
providers are of serious concern in several conflicts,
despite the special protection afforded by international
humanitarian law to medical staff and transport,
hospitals, clinics and the like. We stress the need to
combat impunity, safeguard access for humanitarian
assistance and protect the safety of humanitarian aid
workers. For example, the total disregard and rejection
of humanitarian and international laws and values
demonstrated for years by occupation forces in the
occupied territories of Palestine are a disgrace for
humankind.

It is a welcome step that the Security Council
established two new peacekeeping operations in 2011
with protection-of-civilians mandates, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, while
terminating another one, the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan. At present, eight out of a total of 16 United
Nations peacekeeping operations have mandates to
protect civilians under imminent threat of physical
violence. Three of those eight peacekeeping missions
with a protection mandate - the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur - have developed
comprehensive protection-of-civilians strategies,
whereas one mission, UNMISS, is in the process of
drafting such a strategy as requested by the Council in
resolution 1894 (2009).

With regard to the Secretary-General's reporting
on the protection of civilians, we see that the Secretariat
has yet to finalize new guidance for United Nations
operations and other relevant missions on protection
reporting, with a view to streamlining such reporting
and enhancing the Council's monitoring and oversight,
as requested by the Council. It appears that work on
developing such guidance is still ongoing, and I hope it
would be finalized soon.

To ensure the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, my delegation would like to highlight a few
issues.

First, special attention should be given so that
there is minimum misuse of the protection-of-civilians
mandate.

Second, protection relates to prevention and the
building of a culture of peace. The preventive capacity
of the United Nations must be enhanced, and Member
States need to take steps to inculcate the values of
peace, tolerance and harmony, which contribute to
long-term prevention.

Third, the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, which are among the important
tools available to the United Nations to protect civilians
in armed conflict, should be enhanced. AS one of the
largest troop-contributing countries, we believe that
there needs to be a closer dialogue between the Council
and troop-contributing countries, as they can provide
valuable information about the situation on the ground.
We also feel that in peacekeeping missions, the issue of
resource gaps should be adequately addressed, so that
there is motivation and commitment on the job.

Similarly, it should also be kept in mind that United
Nations Blue Helmets cannot be seen as the only
instrument for protecting civilians in such situations.
The host country has the primary responsibility for
protecting its civilians. I will also add here that the
presence of uniformed female personnel may also play
a pivotal role in a State's ability to protect its citizens.
I take this opportunity to refer to the efforts of the
all-female Bangladeshi formed police units working
in peacekeeping missions in Haiti and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Fourth, there should be strengthened protection
mandates and compliance by United Nations
peacekeepers.

Fifth, compliance with international legal
obligations by parties to a conflict needs to be enhanced,
and accountability mechanisms should be strengthened.

Sixth, international efforts that include the use
of force should be deployed as a last resort, while
respecting the relevant provisions of the United Nations
Charter. If peaceful means and the use of mediation
have been exhausted, force could be used with proper
authorization by the Security Council or, in exceptional
circumstances, by the General Assembly, in line with
resolution 377 (V).

Seventh, considering that all civilians affected by
armed conflict deserve help, enhanced humanitarian
access by the States and parties concerned should be
ensured.

Eighth, it should be recalled that, in assigning such
a mandate, adequate provisions should be made for the
security and safety of peacekeepers.

Finally, my delegation urges all parties to conflicts
to comply with the letter and spirit of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, and
to ensure the protection of the lives and property of
civilians and unimpeded access to humanitarian aid. We
call on parties to conflicts to strengthen the protection
of civilians through heightened awareness at all levels,
particularly through training, orders and instructions
issued to armed forces.
