Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Zannier for his briefing. I welcome Mr. Vuk
Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
thank him for his statement. I also thank Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj for his statement.

Allow me to make the following remarks. We
express our support for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
welcome its efforts to promote security and stability
and to facilitate dialogue and reconciliation in Kosovo
and its participation in international and regional
forums. We call on all parties to provide the support to
necessary for UNMIK to carry out its mandate. We also
welcome the ongoing coordination between UNMIK
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in

ll-33372
Kosovo within the status-neutral framework stipulated
in resolution 1244 (1999).

We express our satisfaction over the continued
relative calm of the security situation in Kosovo,
although some incidents in the north have exacerbated
tensions. It is therefore important for all parties to
refrain from provocative acts and to maintain
communication between the various communities. We
also believe that UNMIK must continue to play a
positive role in facilitating communication and
coordination between the various communities.

We also welcome the launch of dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, and commend the efforts of the
European Union in that regard. We are encouraged by
the fact that the dialogue is addressing a large number
of significant practical issues, which will help to build
confidence between the parties and pave the way for
measures that will have a positive effect on the day-to-
day lives of the people. In that regard, we welcome the
positive role in support of the dialogue being played by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
We hope that it will promote reconciliation between the
various communities of Kosovo.

We note the importance of fighting organized
crime. A neutral and independent investigation must be
undertaken into the allegations of inhuman treatment
and illegal trafficking in human organs in Kosovo that
took place in 1999. The investigation must be carried
out without being politicized and on the basis of the
principle of accountability in order to achieve justice
for the families of the victims. Accountability must be
upheld as a principal foundation and pillar of
sustainable peace.

