Ms. Spehar: Since Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe's briefing to the Council on developments in
Georgia on 21 August, President Medvedev of the
Russian Federation signed decrees on 26 August on the
recognition by the Russian Federation of South Ossetia
and Abkhazia as independent States.

Regarding the situation on the ground, yesterday,
the United Nations country team reported that 18
checkpoints of the Russian forces remain north of Gori.
According to media reports, Russian checkpoints
continue to be in place in other areas of Georgia, such
as around the port town of Poti.

On 25 and 26 August, military monitors of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) conducted four patrols to the eastern fringes of
South Ossetia. The OSCE mission has reported that on
26 August a meeting took place between representatives
of the South Ossetian and Georgian sides near Akhalgori.
After that meeting, the Georgian side reportedly pulled
back its police presence from the village of Mosabruni,
located within the boundaries of South Ossetia. The
security situation in Akhalgori was described to the OSCE
monitors as stable but tense, and some estimated 80 to
90 per cent of the town's inhabitants were said to have
left.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, United
Nations sources have reported that spontaneous and
organized returns continue to take place, while new
displacements from villages north of Gori have
occurred. The United Nations Resident Coordinator in
Georgia yesterday reported on humanitarian efforts,
stating that the Government of Georgia has been
facilitating the return of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) from Tbilisi to Gori and surrounding areas,
including the identification of 18 kindergartens as
accommodation for those without shelter in Gori. With
the support of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), a small tented
camp that can hold up to 400 of those newly displaced
was set up on the edge of the town on 26 August.

UNHCR has expressed concern over reports of
new forcible displacement caused by marauding
militias north of Gori near the boundary line with
South Ossetia. Recent reports indicate that another
08-49297
some 1,000 civilians from ethnic Georgian populated
areas of South Ossetia have sought refuge in Gori. The
newly displaced persons who arrived in Gori have
reported incidents of intimidation, physical violence
and looting.

Of equal concern are villages north of Gori and in
the surrounding areas that are not accessible to
humanitarian organizations. As of yesterday, the
International Committee of the Red Cross remained the
only international organization with access to South
Ossetia. Therefore, reports on the humanitarian
situation there remain scarce.

Commercial transporters are now available to
take cargo between Poti and Tbilisi. However, they are
reportedly reluctant to travel north of Gori and in the
surrounding areas owing to concerns of insecurity if
they are not part of a United Nations convoy.
Humanitarian partners have been advised of security
threats related to cluster bomb sub-munitions and
abandoned ammunition. As of yesterday, food
assistance from the World Food Programme had
reached 137,100 people. Yesterday, food was provided
to 12,600 IDPs and to the local population in conflict-
affected areas.

According to information from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, as of 27 August,
the total funding directed specifically at projects in the
flash appeal, issued on 20 August, stands at $9.8 million
contributed or committed, with a further $14.1 million in
uncommitted pledges.

