Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Yesterday, I had the opportunity to greet you,
Mr. President, in my capacity as the Acting Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People. It is now my pleasure
to greet you once again, on behalf of Cuba.

This is the fifth time that the Security Council has
held a public debate on the escalation of violence in the
occupied Palestinian territories - including East
Jerusalem - since the provocative visit by the Israeli
Prime Minister to Al-Haram Al-Sharif on 28

September 2000. It is increasingly clear that the causes
of the current escalation are to be found in the ongoing
occupation by Israel of Palestinian territory and in the
non-compliance with the agreements adopted as part of
the peace process, including resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). As long as this situation persists, the cycle
of Violence will inevitably continue.

The recent occupation of Orient House and the
incursion of troops and equipment into the town of
Jenin, among other examples, are also serious actions
that run contrary to the Oslo agreements.

Despite the widespread condemnation of the
international community, Israel continues to carry out
so-called extrajudicial killings as a matter of policy, in
violation of the most fundamental norms of
international law.

Cuba considers the heroic struggle of the
Palestinian people against Israel's occupation and
aggression to be legitimate and unquestionable. We
heartily support the intifada. We condemn suicide
bomb attacks against innocent Israeli civilians, acts
which have clearly been rejected by the Palestinian
National Authority. At the same time, we oppose the
manipulation of such isolated acts to question the
exercise of self-defence by the Palestinian people.

The resolutions that the Security Council has
managed to adopt on this issue- the most recent
being resolution 1322 (2000), which was adopted on 7
October 2000 - have been flagrantly ignored by
Israel, without the Council taking any action. Despite
the fact that debates in the Council have made it very
clear that it is the wish of the international community
that this body assume its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations, the Council has virtually
taken no practical steps - although in other situations
it acts surprisingly fast.

While innocent civilians, including children, die,
are wounded and oppressed on a daily basis and the
provisions of the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War are violated, the United States has blocked every
effort that has been made to send an international force
to protect Palestinian civilians.

The most recent example occurred on 27 March,
when after countless delaying tactics, the United States
vetoed a draft resolution submitted by the Non-Aligned
Movement caucus in the Council, which, among other
things, called for an immediate cessation of violence
and the return to the positions and agreements existing
before September 2000 and presented a formula that
would eventually make it possible to establish some
machinery to protect Palestinian civilians.

But there are many other examples. A total of 23
vetoes have been imposed by the United States on draft
resolutions submitted in the Security Council on the
question of Palestine since 1973, and everything
suggests that the list will continue to grow.

Moreover, tanks, missiles, aircraft and all kinds
of weapons are provided by the United States to Israel,
means that are then used for action against innocent
Palestinian people.

Accordingly, a permanent member has become a
de facto accomplice to the escalation of violence and
killing in the world's most massive, flagrant and
systematic violation of human rights today, which is
occurring in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, without that member's
suffering any consequences whatsoever.

There is no justification for the continued delay
in the establishment by the United Nations of a
protection force or other similar impartial machinery
that could protect innocent Palestinian people and
monitor the situation on the ground. The least that the
Security Council could do today in the critical
circumstances in the Middle East is to adopt the draft
resolution that has been prepared.

