I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this virtual open debate. We also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Gamba, the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Fore, and the other briefers for sharing their valuable insights. We appreciate the efforts of the Council's monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict and the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. The participation of children and dialogue with parties to the conflict throughout the conflict cycle hold the key. Reintegration and curbing recruitment can be sustainable only by building social acceptance and awareness in the broader context of conflict prevention and development. The Security Council should be able to utilize their political outreach vehicles, such as the Peacebuilding Commission and special political missions, to create space for the monitoring and reporting mechanism to better manoeuvre. United Nations system-wide efforts need to be backed by adequate and sustained funding and break the silos across the humanitarian-development-peace nexus. When schools are too dangerous to attend, some innovative, alternative education arrangements, such as community-based learning or virtual schooling, would be useful. This cannot be more relevant than during this pandemic. Our peacekeepers in the field are working hard to prevent the recruitment of children by parties to conflicts and keeping schools safe from military use. As the current President of the Executive Board of UNICEF, we are also working closely with the UNICEF leadership, particularly Ms. Fore, to overcome key challenges to protecting children in armed conflicts. We believe that UNICEF can further leverage its comparative advantage of a widespread field presence and vast network of partners. We have taken note of the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/525) and its recommendations. The report highlights the grim realities about violations of child rights and protection in many parts of the world. We would like to draw the Council's attention to the Myanmar situation, where "a threefold increase of child casualties" due to intensified fighting in Myanmar's Rakhine state is reported (S/2020/525, para.7). Notably, 25 per cent of those casualties were caused by explosive remnants of war, improvised explosive devices and anti-personnel mines. This only signifies Myanmar's blatant disregard for international humanitarian law and human rights law. We cannot agree more with the report's inclusion of the Tatmadaw in the list under section A of annex I. Out of the 1.1 million Rohingyas we are hosting, about 60 per cent are children, and each of them has a story to tell. There cannot be a stronger proof of the Tatmadaw's wrongdoing. However, we are dismayed and concerned that the Tatmadaw has been delisted as an entity from the category of violation of recruitment and use. In our view, it can at best be an illusion that the Tatmadaw's violations in that regard have subsided in Rakhine state. Recent reports point to the contrary. It is imperative that the pressure be kept up on it. Delisting sends the wrong message. We therefore urge that the Tatmadaw be relisted immediately. We must be extremely careful that our actions are not used to hide or downplay the Tatmadaw's serious crimes or to exculpate it from the responsibility of justice and accountability for the Rohingya children. Meanwhile, along with our humanitarian partners, we have continued our efforts to provide these Rohingya children the protection and assistance that they need, particularly during the coronavirus disease pandemic. We have partnered with UNICEF to introduce the Myanmar curriculum for Rohingya children in the camps, but more than anything else these children would like to realize their inalienable right to return to their homes. We urge the Council to act decisively in that direction. The international community must not fail them.
