Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first of all, to welcome and thank
Mr. Mariano Fernandez, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, for his briefing and for his
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/128) before the Council today. I would also
like to thank him for the welcome and guidance that he
provided to Council members during our recent visit to
Haiti. In that regard, I also welcome the briefing on
28 February (S/PV.6724) by Ambassador Susan Rice,
which presented the opinions and analysis of all
Council members.

The purpose of the Council's visit was to reassert
its commitment to help and support the Haitian people
in building peace, stability, democratic governance and
the rule of law, as well as in promoting recovery and
sustainable development.

Given the report of the Secretary-General and the
meetings and visits carried out during the Council's
mission, I should like to make several comments. First,
we were able to witness first-hand the weak political
relations between the Executive and the Parliament, the
challenges and expectations as well as the increased
divisions, which, as we know, led to the resignation of
the Prime Minister a few days after our visit.

We learned subsequently that President Martelly
had proposed to Parliament that his Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Laurent Lamothe, become the new
Prime Minister. We trust that the problem will be
resolved in line with a settled political environment
that will enable all political persuasions to join
together for the good of the nation in addressing the
major challenges facing the nation. In that respect, all
possible assistance must be welcomed, and provided to
those endeavouring to bring about national unity, if we
are asked for such help. The Secretary-General and
Special Representative Fernandez should also continue
to strengthen efforts to that end.

Secondly, it is only right to acknowledge that the
country, under the helm of the President, has started to
deal with the major challenges of education, job
creation and the protection of the environment. But
much remains to be done. I am very concerned about
the reference made by the Director of the World Food
Programme to the risk of the school meals programme
in Haiti coming to an end in June, due to a lack of
funding. It would be shameful for that to happen, given
that 1 million children partake of those daily meals -
a fact that has indirectly enabled them to remain at
school. They can expect to rely on international
support to continue that programme. Given that
situation, the programme requires food and financial
aid, as well as support at meetings of the Organization
aimed at preserving the programme.

The third aspect I wish to address has to do with
the relationship between the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the
Haitian people, referred to in detail by Mr. Fernandez.

While the efforts of MINUSTAH are acknowledged -
as we ourselves personally witnessed, as in the case of
the work of the military engineers on reconstruction
and damage repair, as well as on security - there is
concern with regard to the reports of violence and
sexual abuse on the part of some members of the
Mission and the alleged responsibility for the
introduction of the cholera epidemic.

In that regard, we must reiterate the commitment
of the United Nations to ensure the achievement of its
zero-tolerance policy in the context of sexual abuse
related to its peacekeeping operations and the
commitment to investigate and punish such conduct, as
well as the positive attitude of Governments in the
investigation of such cases. Situations of this kind
cannot continue to occur within MINUSTAH, or in any
other United Nations mission. The Security Council
must be absolutely firm on this issue. We fully support
the remarks of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in that regard.

As far as we are concerned, given the stated need
to re-establish the Haitian army as a key element in
MINUSTAH's eventual withdrawal, which will have to
take place, although that remains a sovereign matter for
each country, we must nonetheless bear in mind the
importance of ensuring that the process encompasses
the necessary reform, strengthening and consolidation
of the Haitian police as a viable, safe force capable of
providing stability and security. While security during
the period covered in the Secretary-General's report
was relatively stable and fragile - and the figures we
were offered today show significant progress -
MINUSTAH's work in that context remains vital. Any
reduction in numbers must not discount that important
vision in the future.

Two other important aspects that I would like to
emphasize concern the judicial system and correctional
issues. In our view, the lack of across-the-board
institutionality creates difficulties in access to prompt
justice, which in turn gives rise to disputes and
conflicts among groups of the population. The same
may be said of the Court of Cassation, which should be
the guarantor of last resort in judicial proceedings. We
need to reinforce international efforts to consolidate a
broader, more robust presence of the judicial system,
including more humane prisons, which we have seen
are overcrowded and in precarious condition.
9

With the dissolution of the Provisional Electoral
Council last December, it will no longer be possible to
hold the elections originally scheduled for ay. We
therefore urge the Government to swiftly establish an
electoral authority that will guarantee the timely issue
of a schedule allowing the population to express its
views through a democratic process.

Last but not least, we are concerned that, despite
the considerable efforts of the Haitian people and the
international community, the impact of the earthquake
is still clearly visible in the streets and buildings,
revealing the magnitude of the damage. It is also
evident in the refugee camps, where more than 500,000
people are still living in 700 separate locations, the
majority of them on the outskirts of Port-au-Prince.
International support, including that of MINUSTAH's
corps of engineers, should be maintained to enable
them to surmount their precarious living conditions and
to offer new alternatives for living.

As a final word of conclusion, I would like to
emphasize the importance and necessity of achieving
solid institutionality and the rule of law, which are
essential conditions for advancing on the path towards
economic and social prosperity and for guaranteeing
the security of the Haitian people.

