Ms. Safi: I thank you, Madam President, for giving
me the opportunity to address the Security Council
today. I should like to thank the Netherlands, as the
President of the Council this month, for inviting me to
share my perspectives on the Afghan peace process.

Today, in my capacity as a peacebuilder and
member of the research community in Afghanistan, I
would like to touch on the current trends, conditions on
the ground and key issues relating to the Afghan peace
process. The perspectives I will be sharing with the
Council today have been deeply informed by a decade
of consultations I have led as part of our efforts at the
Organization for Policy Research and Development
Studies with diverse sectors, community members and
the brave and resilient women of Afghanistan.

Afghanistan has witnessed great progress since
2001. This is reflected in the emergence of a bright
and vibrant new generation of youth, the representation
of women in all sectors of Afghan society and the
strengthening of a promising democratic system of
governance. Seventeen years ago, hope replaced despair
as Afghans embarked on the path towards a peaceful
and stable future where conflict would become a distant
memory. We welcomed international investment and
commitment to supporting that hope.

But as I speak here, Imust tell Council members that
this hope is fading. The theater of conflict is becoming
more confusing, complicated and lethal. In 2001, we
were fighting one group; we are now fighting over 20
regional and international terrorist organizations. Safe
zones have now become battlefields that extend from
rural to urban areas. The Taliban, its affiliated group
the Haqqani Network, and fighters affiliated with the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant are now targeting
civilians, including women and children.

In 2009, 285 women were killed as a result of the
ongoing conflict. As mentioned earlier, that number
rose to 1,224 in 2017. That is extremely alarming. Let us
not forget last year's killing of 9-year-old Shukria, who,
while travelling with her family from Ghazni province
to Quetta, was stopped by insurgents, held captive and
later beheaded. That incident prompted nationwide
protests and made it very clear that Afghans would not
tolerate impunity for those targeting civilians.

Despite the Taliban committing to a code of conduct
on the protection of civilians, the group continues to
carry out attacks in densely populated areas, showing
no regard for civilian lives. I implore the Security
Council and the international community to ensure that
transitional justice is not compromised in the pursuit of
peace and reconciliation. The peace deal with Hizb-i
Islami, signed in September 2016, showed us that peace
is possible in Afghanistan. However, it also showed how
easily actors could sideline the need for community
healing, exclude women and civil society engagement
and take steps that reinforce a culture of impunity in
the pursuit of achieving peace.

While security challenges remain the predominant
source of concern, it is not the only cause of despair
among Afghans. Our recent findings indicate that
insecurity and political instability go hand in hand,
and are the two primary drivers for Afghans fleeing.
For the first time in Afghanistan's history, we are now
witnessing young, single Afghan women making up a
significant portion of those undertaking the dangerous
journey out of the country.

As Ms. Sarabi just described, the second round
of the Kabul Process culminated last week with the
Afghan Government presenting a detailed offer of
peace to the Taliban for the first time. While there
has long been national consensus on the need for
peace among Afghans, there still remain serious and
diverging concerns on the best way forward for peace
to unfold. Fundamental questions remain on whether
the time is right for such negotiations. What are the red
lines for negotiations? What would justice look like in
an eventual settlement? How will the rights of women
be upheld and protected? How will the participation of
women at all levels be guaranteed in the implementation
and monitoring of any agreement reached? What is
the way forward after a peace agreement is reached,
and what will that peace mean to different sectors of
Afghan society?

For women, it is imperative for the State to define
the type of peace that would ensue from reconciliation.
Our findings show that women believe that the future
of their rights is intricately tied to the outcomes of
the peace process. Habiba from Kunduz province
told us that the gains of the past 17 years in women's
empowerment, freedom of speech, human rights and
civil values should not be open for negotiation. On
the question of reintegrating ex-combatants, women,
particularly those living in rural areas, expressed fear
of an escalation of violence and further suppression of
women. How those reintegrated would be monitored
after a peace agreement is also a significant source
of concern.

The Afghan Government's launch of the national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, in 2015 offered great possibilities
for the promotion of women's involvement in all
areas related to peace and security. However, its
implementation continues to suffer setbacks, rendering
women's voices as symbolic at decision-making levels.
For example, while gender units have been created
within most ministries in legal structures, they lack the
necessary tools and budget required to carry out the
mandate of resolution 1325 (2000). The time has come
to expand women's roles from one of mere presence
to active engagement, consultation and inclusion. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, the
Afghan Government and civil society organizations
must work together towards identifying where the
bottlenecks lie and adopt concrete and genuine measures
to address those gaps. Only then can we create spaces
where women, both formally and informally, are able to
realize their agency.

There is also a great disconnect between the
rhetoric of local ownership and how it is actually
implemented. The selective nature with which the High
Peace Council chooses the narratives it incorporates
into its peace agenda, the civil society actors it decides
to engage with and the priorities it chooses to focus on
have led many to question its legitimacy, credibility
and objectivity.

Real and meaningful progress notwithstanding,
the Afghan Government remains weak, with financial,
security and internal strife mounting. We must
therefore be cognizant that any proposed changes to the
Constitution as a result of a peace agreement must not
erode the rights and freedoms of all Afghan citizens.
I appeal to the Security Council to closely monitor
any amendments to the Constitution, ensure that the
sequencing of peace-making activities and overtures
are supported with confidence-building measures from
the Taliban and, lastly, facilitate greater engagement
between the High Peace Council and diverse actors
of Afghan society to ensure that all narratives are
represented and supported through national consensus.

In conclusion, past experiences show us that
supporting an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process is not enough to prevent and combat terrorism.
When we asked women at the rural level what they
saw as an obstacle to achieving peace in Afghanistan,
almost all highlighted regional interference. The
Security Council and the international community
must persuade Pakistan to engage constructively in all
efforts to curb the threat of terrorism and support an
intra-Afghan dialogue for peace.

Afghanistan's international partners have
repeatedly expressed their intention and will to stand
behind the people of Afghanistan to bring about lasting
peace, security and stability. Today, I urge those present
to stand beside us, and not behind us.

