Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): It
gives me pleasure, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May. I wish you all success as you carry
out your duties. My appreciation goes also to your

 

predecessor for the fine way in which he guided the work
of the Council last month.

Ethnic cleansing, the expulsion of citizens and the
destruction of property in Kosovo and the stripping away of
the rights of its people bring shame upon all humanity. This
goes against human rights, international law and divine
principles, and violates international conventions relating to
human rights and to the rights of refugees. It is therefore
necessary for the international community to make a
concerted effort to end this humanitarian crisis and to
coordinate humanitarian relief efforts in order to ease the
plight of the refugees and displaced persons.

The Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
expresses its great distress and deep concern at the
suffering of the people of Kosovo caused by the scourge of
acts of barbarism against children, women and old people,
as well as at the confiscation of their rights and their
property. My Government states its unswerving support for
the right of the refugees to return to their homeland and to
live in peace and security. It further calls upon the entire
world earnestly to support the helpless, peace-loving people
of Kosovo, which is the victim of the worst kind of ethnic
cleansing and persecution at the hands of the Serb
aggressors. The result of such action has been horrific
suffering for the people of Kosovo both within and outside
its territory. It has also resulted in great shortages of food,
medicine, clothing and other basic human necessities.

The Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has
been forthcoming in providing humanitarian assistance to
the people of Kosovo. It has steadily sent urgent medical
and food assistance to displaced Kosovars and a hospital
has been established in Albania in that connection. A
central committee has been set up to collect assistance for
the Muslims of Kosovo. This committee includes a number
of Saudi relief organizations including the Saudi Red
Crescent. It coordinates its work with international
organizations such as the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia joined in sponsoring
this evening's resolution because of its conviction that the
people of Kosovo must be enabled to return to their
homeland and to exercise their legitimate rights. The
haemorrhage of refugees must be stanched. The genocidal
practices of the Serbs must end. The Serbs must withdraw
immediately from Kosovo. War criminals must be brought
to justice.

I thank the Security Council; with the adoption of
this resolution, it has shown that it stands for right, justice
and peace.

