Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay believes that, as an elected member of the
Security Council, it is part of its duty to share with
the overall membership its views on the various items
considered by the Council.

I thank Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
comprehensive briefing today, which was generally in
line with various views of my delegation.

We regret to note that the situation in Mali
continues to deteriorate more and more. We resolutely
condemn the cowardly suicide attack today that left a
toll of dozens of killed or injured.

I find it pertinent to focus on setting out our
positions on some practical aspects as to what we
should do.

First of all, Uruguay wishes to reiterate the crucial
importance of implementing the peace Agreement
in order to arrive at a lasting political solution to the
conflict and achieve peace and stability in Mali,
for ultimately political primacy falls to the national
authorities. The United Nations and other international
bodies can only support and facilitate the national
commitment to peace. The main task in any undertaking
for peace is to provide support to national stakeholders
in order to restore peace. However, in no circumstance
can that support take on the responsibilities that fall on
countries as sovereign States.

It is imperative that the parties to the Agreement
for peace and reconciliation in Mali be urged to honour
their political commitments. It is necessary that there
be willingness among the signatory parties to abide by
the Agreement' provisions and meet the timelines that
have been established. Until what was agreed between
the Government, the Coordination des mouvements de
l'Azawad and the Platform is fully implemented, it will
be impossible to move forward in any other area that
could yield peace dividends for Mali's population.

Uruguay joins the Secretary-General in congratulating

the Government of Mali on having held the first local
elections since 2009, while also not overlooking the
difficulties encountered in some regions where the
process could not be completed. We are aware that
there are challenges and that regional elections and the
constitutional referendum are approaching. It will be
important that the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the international community provide the necessary
support to the Government of Mali so that those polls
can take place successfully.

Secondly, also in line with the previous point, the
security situation will improve only when progress is
made with regard to the extension of State authority
throughout the country's territory. All of us here have
seen how the terrorism threat spreads and thrives in
places where State authority is lax or non-existent.
As long as the parties continue to face off and do not
meet their commitments, terrorist groups will find a
conducive space to continue to expand - at the cost
of suffering for peacekeepers and Mali's armed forces,
as well, even worse, at the cost of the lives of a large
number of civilians.

Thirdly, we would like to refer to the possibility
of taking coercive measures in the face of this reality.
In resolution 2295 (2016) the Council expressed its
readiness to consider imposing targeted sanctions
against those who take steps to hinder or jeopardize
the implementation of the Agreement, renew hostilities
or violate the ceasefire, attack or make efforts to
undermine MINUSMA and other international
presences or support such attacks and actions. The
Secretary-General himself has asked the Security
Council to consider adopting such measures. In that
regard, it will be up to the Council to evaluate the real
impact of such measures on the ground as their eventual
contribution to achieve the effective implementation of
the peace Agreement.

In conclusion, Uruguay reiterates once again that
the current mandate of MINUSMA exceeds what was
envisaged for the running of a peacekeeping operation
to include the carrying out of activities to fight
terrorism. Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 2295
(2016) because it believed that Mali's security situation
was extraordinary, but that this type of activity should
not be replicated in future peacekeeping operations.

