Mr. Vale de Almeida: I would like to share with
the Security Council the conclusions reached by the
European Union (EU).

The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to its perspective on Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a single, united and sovereign country.
Following the elections on 7 October and recalling
the conclusions reached in June, the European Union
expects all leaders to engage constructively on the
formation of Government at all levels, which is in the
interests of all citizens. The European Union recalls that
it expects the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
prioritize taking forward the reforms that are needed
for the country to advance along its EU path, while
ensuring the full and effective implementation of the
reform agenda.

In that context, the European Union welcomes the
continued presence of Operation Althea, which, in the
follow-up of the 2017 strategic review, has refocused
on its core mandate, while retaining the elements of
capacity-building and training that are deemed still
necessary and phasing out the other elements that are
no longer relevant. In that context, as part of the overall
EU strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina, the European
Union confirms its readiness at this stage to continue
the executive military mandate of Operation Althea to
support Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities in order
to maintain the safe and secure environment under a
renewed United Nations mandate.

The European Union looks forward to the
presentation of the next strategic review in 2019 as a
basis for discussion with member States on the tasks of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force and options
for the future of Operation Althea, while also bearing
in mind the need to support Bosnia and Herzegovina's
progress in its EU integration process and taking into
account the security situation on the ground. The
European Union recognizes the importance of the
continued coordination of the European Union-led
Operation Althea with other international actors on the
ground. The European Union at the same time continues
to urge the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
with the support of the international community, to
accelerate its efforts to address the disposal of excess
ammunition, weapons and explosive devices, as well as
demining and other outstanding issues.

