Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We commend the Rwandan presidency for convening
this open debate and and appreciate the concept note
it has prepared (S/2014/478, annex). We would also
like to thank Secretary-General and the observers of
the African Union and the European Union for their
briefings.

As we have stated before, my country believes that
collective action is essential to addressing traditional
and emerging threats to international peace and
security. The involvement of regional and subregional
organizations is highly relevant to that end. That is how
my country interprets Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations with a view to promoting efficient
multilateralism. Resolution 2167 (2014), adopted today,
is a reflection of the recognition of this contribution
and of the need to strengthen the capacity of collective
responses, thereby renewing the commitment of this
Council to the aforementioned Chapter VIII.

The resolution adopted today takes stock of the
growing role of regional and subregional organizations
in recent years as significant actors in the international
system, especially in terms of their contribution to
maintaining international peace and security. By
fostering the participation of regional and subregional
organizations, we are also promoting the collaboration
and cooperation in peacebuilding efforts, which
represent the flipside of peacekeeping. In that regard,
cooperation between the United Nations and these
organizations promotes good governance, democracy,
respect for human rights and enhances justice,
reconciliation and development.

The decentralization and devolution of the efforts
of the international community makes it possible to
delegate certain elements of peacekeeping mandates
to regional and subregional organizations. This has the
potential to promote regional participation, but, more
importantly, it can generate consensus and deepen
trust in the management of international issues. In that
regard, and acknowleding the pre-eminence of African
issues on the agenda of the Council, we welcome the
efforts and work carried out by and with the African
Union. The United Nations and the Security Council
in particular should continue to work to deepen the
strategic relationship with the African Union, in
particular with its Peace and Security Council, as well
as with other subregional organizations.

In addition to these efforts, we recognize those
carried out by our region and others in maintaining
international peace and security. In particular, we
highlight the commitment of the countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, which is the only
peacekeeping mission on our continent. Through the
contribution of troops and police contingents, the
countries of the region have supported Haiti on its path
to stabilization, sustainable peace and development.
In addition to bilateral efforts, we note those of the
Organization of American States, the Union of South
American Nations and the Carribean Community,
which, guided by the principle of national ownership,
have contributed to the institutional strengthening of
the Haitian State.

My delegation wishes to highlight the preventive role
of regional and subregional organizations in identifying
and managing the escalation of local conflicts, thereby
obviating the need for the Council to be seized thereof.
To that end, it is vital to create and establish early
warning mechanisms for regional developments that
have the potential to affect international peace and
security. Their geographical proximity, as well as
better understanding of the regional situation and the
causes of armed conflicts, are a comparative advantage
that the Council and the United Nations must recognize
and exploit. This will make it possible to ensure due
complementarity and a better use of existing resources
and capabilities.

With regard to the generation of forces for
peacekeeping operations, regional and subregional
organizations should ensure that their personnel have
the necessary training and skills, in accordance with
the standards established by the United Nations.
Training and military capabilities should go hand
in hand with proper preparation and training in
human rights and international humanitarian law;
the protection of civilians, particularly women and
children; the prevention of sexual and gender violence;
the rule of law and post-conflict reconstruction, among
others. In that context, in accordance with resolution
1325 (2000), we appeal to the regional and subregional
organizations to pay special attention to ensuring
the full mainstreaming of women and the gender
perspective into all the activities related to peace and
security that they undertake, developing the capacities
and skills necessary for their full participation.

We acknowledge the advice and support that the
United Nations provides in developing these skills and
in conducting such training, with special emphasis on
good practices and lessons learned. However, it should
not end there. Regional and subregional organizations
should deepen cooperation with their peers, taking
advantage of South-South cooperation to make use of
available mechanisms.

Some institutions in countries of the South have
training capacity that has been recognized by the
United Nations. In 2002, for example, my country
established the Chilean Joint Peacekeeping Operations
Centre, which is in charge of preparing and training
personnel of the armed forces, police and civil forces in
planning, implementating and evaluating peacekeeping
operations. In this way, we strengthen capacities and
knowledge of civilian, military and police work in an
integrated way. The Centre currently has an exchange
of instructors from the region and Europe, thereby
strengthening its domestic and foreign contingent.

Along the same lines, we highlight the
establishment in 2006 of the Argentine-Chilean Joint
Peacekeeping Force known as Southern Cross, which
in 2012 was made available by both Governments to
the United Nations for deployment in peacekeeping
operations. Moreover, in 2013 my country signed a
crisis management framework agreement with the
European Union, which provides a legal basis for the
participation of Chile in civilian and military crisis
management operations led by the Union. Currently
Chilean forces are deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina
under this framework.

The Council has recognized that regional and
subregional organizations are in a good position to
understand the causes of armed conflicts, given their
knowledge of the region. This could help efforts to help
prevent or resolve such conflicts. That is why we firmly
appeal for a deepening of this partnership and for its
comparative advantages to be put to use with a view
to ensuring that collective action reflects an efficient
multilateralism, in the spirit of Chapter VIII and the
principles underlying our Organization.

