Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting. I also thank all the briefers: Mr. Lacroix,
Lieutenant General Gyllensporre and Ms. Novosseloff.

I would like to address the topic of today's meeting,
which is strengthening triangular cooperation, by
highlighting three basic aspects. In fact, some speakers
who preceded me focused on the same aspects that I will
mention now but I would like to deal with them from a
different perspective. They are procedural issues, the
subsidiary bodies and best practices.

On procedural issues, resolution 1353 (2001)
regulated the mechanism governing the meetings of the
Security Council with troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs) as we know them today.
Presidential note S/2017/507, issued in 2017, presented
some requests and advice to promote the Council's
ability to adopt effective resolutions, including making
the Secretary-General's reports available to the
countries concerned for enough time before discussing
them in the meetings. Consequently, engaging the
stakeholders, be they contributing or host countries,
as much as possible is a practical request. As stated
in note 507, cooperation must not be limited to the
meetings held before the conclusion of a peacekeeping
operation's mandate but must also include all those held
after the issuance of the Secretary-General's reports.

Taking note 507 as a guideline is a great step
towards holding honest and interactive discussions.
The Council can also go back to what many States said
regarding today's topic during the two debates held by
the Council under Kuwait's presidency, in February
2018 (see S/PV.8175) and last month (see S/PV.8552),
on developing triangular cooperation to ensure synergy
between TCC experiences and the peacekeeping
reforms at the United Nations.

On the subsidiary bodies, the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations is one of the most inclusive
subsidiary bodies. Its meetings are held with the
participation of TCCs and on an equal footing with
Council members. That makes the Working Group
one of the Council's most inclusive tools for working
with TCCs.

The cooperation of the Working Group with the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
known as C-34, provides the Council with the
opportunity to take into account the concerns of TCCs
and PCCs as well as all the remaining members of the
United Nations, since the Special Committee is the sole
body mandated to tackle all peacekeeping issues. In
that regard, we thank the United Kingdom and Pakistan
for their non-paper of 2017, which is still valuable and
of relevance to our debate today in terms of benefiting
from formal and informal meetings as well as enjoying
flexibility in calling for meetings while preparing
for them.

On best practices, we believe that the engagement of
stakeholders must not be limited to the formal meetings
of the Council and its subsidiary bodies. It would be
better if it included all our practices encompassing
informal consultations of penholders with TCCs as
well as with the host countries. That is a good and
commendable practice that we hope to encompass all
peacekeeping operations, including in cases where
the course of a mandate is altered following official
meetings in order to give stakeholders the opportunity
to express their opinion on new developments.

Holding those meetings early and regularly,
as far as possible, stresses that the responsibility
of the Security Council to maintain international
peace and security does not mean monopolizing the
decision-making process. Instead, it means taking into
account the advice and concerns of those most affected
by its resolutions, especially since they sacrifice the
most to maintain peace. The Council must also consult
with the host countries where peacekeeping operations
are deployed for the sake of their present and future.
We refer in that regard to the transitional stages in Haiti
and Darfur, since they provide a good opportunity to
adopt best practices.

In addition, we would also like to commend the
contributing countries Indonesia, Morocco, Pakistan,
China and Egypt for holding the first meeting of its
kind on triangular cooperation last March. We also
commend the Cairo Roadmap, which developed the
concept of triangular cooperation into four-party
consultations by adding a fourth side representing the
host countries.

The presidential statement S/PRST/2019/4
recognizes that the mandate of a peacekeeping
operation is defined according to the need of the country
concerned. Moreover, previous practices and initiatives
are an important foundation on which to build and pave
the way for more future development.

