We would like to thank Jean-Pierre Lacroix as well as the three Force Commanders for their insights into the additional challenges that peacekeeping is facing during these unusual times. I would like to begin by honouring the peacekeepers on the ground for their courage and resilience as they face this pandemic. Today our sincere thoughts are with the victims in the missions, including the victims of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Belgium contributes troops to three missions. Together with the other States members of the European Union, we committed at the beginning of the crisis to continuing to support peacekeeping by not withdrawing our troops because of COVID-19. I would like to ask the Force Commanders several questions. First, with respect to the impact of the pandemic on the operations that they command, engagement with local communities is critical to the protection of civilians and the prevention of attacks. The events of last week in the centre of Mali are worrisome, and so are the number of COVID-19 cases in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). What is the impact of social distancing on that engagement? How is it impacting their situational awareness, and how do they adapt their working methods to this new reality? Both Lieutenant General Tinaikar and Special Representative of the Secretary- General Shearer have promoted the "hub and spoke" model to project the capacity to protect civilians also outside protection-of-civilians sites and near established bases. Given the COVID-19-related restrictions on mobility, what are the consequences for the "hub and spoke" approach, and therefore on the protection of civilians in more remote areas? Let me turn to other peacekeeping-related challenges. Unfortunately, those are not going away at this time of COVID-19, and we recognize the efforts of all, both at Headquarters and in the missions, to ensure business continuity. Performance is at the heart of their action, and we know how critical the integration of the various components is to the success of a mission. Could Lieutenant General Tinaikar, of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), update us on the implementation of the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System (CPAS) within UNMISS? What are, in his opinion, the biggest benefits of that tool? Does CPAS serve as a catalyst to improve integrated planning among the military, police and civilian components of the Mission? Going back to MINUSMA, we support the force adaptation plan on the basis of the general principles that have been shared with Member States. Access to a higher level of detail, including on troop availability, could be useful for planning purposes. We hear that some critical assets, including air assets and intelligence capacity, remain unavailable as of yet. These assets are key to the success of the adaptation plan. How do they see the impact on the implementation of the plan? I would like to finish with a more open, maybe even philosophical question to our three guests from the field. What is, from their perspective, the main challenge that peacekeeping will have to face in the next few years? How can the Security Council better help them to be fit for purpose for that challenge? In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our support to the peace missions in those difficult circumstances.
