Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to express my appreciation to New Zealand
for having organized this debate on the situation in
Afghanistan. My thanks also go to the Ambassador of
Afghanistan for his statement. I would like to welcome
and thank Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing and for presenting the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/768).

Unfortunately, security and instability remain the
major challenges for Afghanistan. The report refers to
a 24 per cent increase in the number of armed clashes
compared with the same period last year, while last
year was reported as the highest number recorded since
2001 in terms of the intensity of armed clashes. This
continuing deterioration of the security situation in the
country indicates that Afghanistan and the region are
no safer more than a decade after its invasion.

On peace talks between the Afghan Government
and the Taliban, uncertainty prevails as concerns any
prospect of making peace with them. Iran reiterates its
support for any Afghan-led peace process; at the same
time, we condemn all violent attacks committed by the
Taliban and all other terrorist groups as well as any
cooperation with them, since we believe that this will
encourage them in their odious behaviour and thus be
counterproductive to establishing peace in Afghanistan.

In my previous statement in June (see S/PV.7722), I
warned about the emergence of Da'esh and its offshoots
in Afghanistan. During the same period, we witnessed
the so-called Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant-
Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP) claiming responsibility
for the terrorist attack against a demonstration by ethnic
Hazaras on 23 July, which was the deadliest single
incident recorded by the United Nations in Afghanistan
since 2001. That is just another indication of the
threat. ISIL-KP, along with a range of other terrorist
and extremist groups, such as the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan, in the north, and the East Turkestan
Islamic Movement, appears as an emerging security
threat in Afghanistan. Today, the Afghan National
Unity Government is at the forefront of combating
terrorism, but there is an increased need for the
international community to provide sustained support
to the Government in its fight against terrorism and
extremism, as well as to address its security, economic
and political challenges.

Strengthening our regional cooperation with
Afghanistan is a priority and a major pathway to
consolidating peace and economic growth in the
region. During the past decade, Iran has spent millions
of dollars to help Afghanistan to complete nearly 300
projects in areas ranging from infrastructure to training
and capacity-building in human resources, especially
through the hundreds of scholarships we offer each year.

Afghanistan and Iran continue to cooperate in
those areas, following the 23 May trilateral agreement
with India focused on the Iranian port of Chabahar.
Coordination meetings at the level of the Governors of
the border provinces were held on 25 and 26 July to
discuss security and new trade opportunities involving
the port. The Afghan Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
visited Tehran on 3 August for discussions on trade,
infrastructure and the presence of Afghan nationals in
Iran, and the Afghan National Security Adviser visited
Iran on 6 and 7 August to discuss border security and
countering violent extremism. The fifth meeting of the
Afghanistan-Iran Joint Economic Commission was
held on 10 August in Tehran, following a four-year
interval. Iran and Afghanistan are also committed to
increasing their connectivity with emphasis on the
Khaf-Herat railway, a 78-mile railroad project in Farah,
and a second bridge over the Hirmand River.

Iran continues to provide its full support for the
promotion of security, stability and comprehensive and
sustainable development in Afghanistan, as we consider
security in Afghanistan to be the security of our own
borders and of the region as a whole. We support
UNAMA and United Nations agencies in their efforts
to provide development and reconstruction assistance
to Afghanistan through the Organization's genuine
commitment to a sustained partnership with the country,
as set forth in final report of the Tripartite Review
Commission on the United Nations in Afghanistan.
The UNAMA mandate and its good offices should be
used to strengthen national institutions and capacities
in priority areas, as requested by the Government.

