The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

Bulgaria supports the statement that will be
delivered by the representative of Denmark on behalf
of the European Union. I would like to make a few
additional comments. Bulgaria stands up indignantly
against this new cycle of violence in the Middle East.
We unambiguously condemn the acts of terror and
violence that have caused the death of innocent
civilians and the destruction of homes and other
property.

Bulgaria condemns terrorist acts in Israel, in
particular those that took place in Jerusalem and Tel
Aviv. At the same time, we deplore the decision taken
by the Israeli Government to isolate President Arafat.
These acts are causing a crisis in the Middle East and
leading to a new vicious circle whose hostages are both
the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. We insist that those
acts of violence, including the killing of innocent
civilians, cease immediately. Bulgaria appeals to the
Palestinian Authority to redouble its efforts to stop all
terrorist acts and suicide bombings. They are directed
against the national interests of the Palestinian people,
the establishment of the Palestinian State and peace.
The fight against terrorism and security measures must
be aimed at establishing lasting peace, rather than at
encouraging another cycle in this conflict.

What the Israeli army is doing in Ramallah and at
President Arafat's headquarters is unacceptable. Those
acts and policies do not help put an end to terrorism. In
fact, they encourage extremists and impede reform of
the Palestinian Authority and the establishment of
lasting peace in the Middle East. Therefore, we call
upon Israel to end the siege immediately. What is
important now is to create a true atmosphere of
security in the region that could promote direct
contacts between the parties. From that standpoint, we
are encouraged by information we have received in the
past few hours reporting direct contact between Israelis
and Palestinians.

Bulgaria welcomes in particular the statement
made by Mr. Hani al-Hasan, a member of the Fatah
Central Committee, stating that Palestine is seeking
peace with Israel and that "the Palestinians seek
peaceful coexistence and partnership and are prepared
to create mutual security".

We welcome with satisfaction the Fatah pledge to
prevent attacks against Israeli civilians and we call on
the other Palestinian groups to speak out in favour of
that initiative. At the same time, we believe that
Fatah's appeal for a strike in Gaza to show solidarity
with the besieged does not foster a climate of
partnership to help create a climate of security. This is
the right time to emphasize the importance Bulgaria
attaches to resolving the humanitarian crisis that the
Palestinian people are experiencing. We support
unreservedly the conclusions reached by Ms. Bertini in
her report and consider it a matter of urgency that the
right balance be struck between Israel's security
requirements, on one hand, and, on the other hand, the
need to put an end to the ongoing humanitarian crisis in
the occupied territories.

My country calls on both parties to sit down at
the negotiating table, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1397 (2002), which envisages
peaceful coexistence between two States, Israel and
Palestine.

This morning, the Secretary-General, Kofi
Annan, has rightly spoken of the absence of hope in the
Middle East. The absence of hope is real on the Israeli
side, where the Israelis feel their security continuously
threatened, and on the Palestinian side, where the
Palestinians do not see an end to occupation. In that
context, the Quartet and its adopted road map, a real
peace plan, provides a real hope. Bulgaria supports
unreservedly the Quartet's New York statement of 17
September 2002, and we insist that both parties work
together to achieve a lasting and peaceful solution
before 2005.

I conclude by reiterating my country's appeal for
greater political judgement and greater compromise by
both sides. We reaffirm our determination to give our
full support to all those who seek peace and security in
the Middle East.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

