Mr. Skraeic' (Croatia): Allow me to welcome for
the first time to the Council the newly appointed
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, and to wish him every success
in his future work, in which we assure him of our full
support. I would also like to join others in welcoming
the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Serbia,
Mr. Vuk Jeremie, as well as the Foreign Minister of
Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni, to the Council.

I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the people and the Government of the
Republic of Kosovo on ensuring the peaceful and
stable transition from rule under the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to the independent self-governance of a newly
established republic. My delegation is pleased to note
the positive assessments, in most instances, that were
made in report on UNMIK (S/2008/458). By ensuring
this smooth transition, the people and the Government
of Kosovo have once again proven their democratic
maturity and their readiness to build a country that can
rightly join others in the united family of European
nations. We believe that the success of the recent
donors conference will definitely help in achieving that
goal.

In addition, in order to ensure this positive trend,
it is important to offer and guarantee continuous
support for the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) and its deployment throughout the entire
territory of Kosovo, as well as the work of UNMIK,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), NATO and other organizations that
are helping the people of Kosovo uphold and
implement the high standards contained in their new
Constitution and related laws and to transform Kosovo
into a safe and prosperous European country that will
offer a bright future to all of its people and become a
valuable and dependable partner to the countries in its
region and beyond.

My delegation would like to commend the
Secretary-General once again for providing determined
leadership and clear guidance that helped in the
preservation of stability in Kosovo, and we offer our
full support for the reconfiguration of UNMIK, which
has enable the European Union to take an increasing
role in the rule of law sector, operating under
resolution 1244 (1999) and the United Nations
umbrella.

Again, we reiterate our strong support for the
efforts of the international community to continue
bringing peace dividends to the people of Kosovo and
call on both Belgrade and Pristina to continue offering
their support for those efforts. As good as the
intermediary efforts of the international community can
be, the result can only be sustainable and long-lasting
if there is genuine support from all sides on the ground
to see these goals advanced.

Finally, in an issue that is not directly related to
this report, but that also plays an overarching role in
the South-East European post-Yugoslav reality, we
commend the authorities of Serbia for arresting one of
the most wanted indictees and fugitives of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), Radovan Karadzic, on 21 July, and
look forward to his early transfer to The Hague. We
hope that the Republic of Serbia and the Republika
Srpska in Bosnia and Herzegovina will redouble their
efforts and intensify their cooperation with the ICTY,
in order to bring the remaining indictees at large, Ratko
Mladic and Goran Hadzic, to The Hague as soon as
possible. That is an important step towards ending
impunity for those indicted for serious violations of
international humanitarian law during the conflict in
the former Yugoslavia, but also an essential element in
realizing the ICTY completion strategy.

