Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
The success of transitions from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding is crucial to maintaining lasting stability
and security around the world. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his leadership on peacebuilding
initiatives and for the valuable perspectives that he
presented earlier today. I would also like to thank
Minister Trujillo Garcia, Franck Bousquet and Yero
Baldeh for their important contributions to this
important debate today. We also welcome the Ministers
from Haiti and Timor-Leste.

The United Nations has 14 active peacekeeping
missions and 11 active special political missions.
The goal for each of these missions is to draw down
and conclude, as we have recently achieved in Cote
d'Ivoire and Liberia, and previously in Timor-
Leste. As experience has shown us, managing the
transition process efficiently and effectively can be a
significant challenge.

I will discuss three points today: key ingredients to
successful nationally owned transitions, the importance
of the role of women in these transitions, and the case
of Haiti.

A transition owned by the host country, with the
full support and partnership of Member States, regional
organizations and the United Nations itself, is most
likely to result in lasting peace and security. Planning
and communication, along with distinct and achievable
benchmarks, are also key elements of the process.
Successful transitions require significant advance
planning and communication among all stakeholders,
including the host Government, the Security Council,
regional actors, the Secretariat and civil society. For
this reason, the United States maintains as one of its
peacekeeping principles that every mission must have
a clear exit strategy. Ongoing engagement on the exit
strategy during the life cycle of a mission ensures
that transition planning is considered, discussed and
negotiated as early as possible.

Benchmarks during transitions serve as a critical
metric to ensure that all stakeholders, including the
host country, are meeting obligations that will help
to ensure lasting peace and security. Distinct and
achievable benchmarks provide the transparency and
accountability necessary to ensure that the host nation
is fully capable of standing on its own without the
support of the United Nations.

Women must also play a more meaningful role
in transitions, from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
Supporting women peace and security experts is a
good place to start. In 2018, the Department of Peace
Operations and UN-Women piloted efforts to include
gender in conflict-analysis work in missions to inform
transitions and drawdowns in Liberia, Haiti and Darfur,
which helped the host nations and the United Nations
to better understand the needs of women as missions
shift from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. Benchmarks
for United Nations transitions and exits should ensure
that they incorporate stand-alone measures on women,
peace and security and gender equality, in line with
the mission mandates. The United States will continue
to advocate for mandates that prioritize strategic
assessments that include experts evaluating the needs
of women.

In October, the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti will replace the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti. The conclusion of the United
Nations peacekeeping presence in Haiti, after more
than 15 years, and the transition to a special political
mission is an important milestone for the country. Once
complete, we hope to be able to hold Haiti up as an
example of a successfully nationally owned transition.

As the Security Council has repeatedly stated,
it is the primary responsibility of the Government of
Haiti to address the underlying drivers of instability
in the country. A successful transition will depend, in
large part, on progress from the Haitian Government
on a range of issues, including holding free and fair
elections, the continued professionalization of the
Haitian National Police, the reduction of community
and gang violence, the protection of human rights and
justice-sector reform.

The United States remains committed to Haiti's
future, and it is essential for the Government of Haiti to
seize the opportunity that the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti represents. In addition to engaging all
Haitian stakeholders, including the full and effective
participation of women, the Government of Haiti must
continue to work closely with the United Nations and
international partners. By doing so, Haiti can lay the
groundwork for a prosperous and successful future.

Transitions are, by nature, a time of flux and
instability. However, through careful planning and
communication, clear benchmarks and the meaningful
participation of women, we can advance the cause of
peace, security and stability.

