Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): We appreciate the
initiative to hold this open meeting to review the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
concerning the Balkans, and Kosovo in particular. We
thank the Secretariat and Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for the important briefing given to us this
morning.

A number of very significant changes have taken
place in the region during the past year. We have noted,
above all, the successful democratization process in
Yugoslavia, starting with the presidential election,
which has brought about a change in the political set-
up in Belgrade. With the election of Mr. Kostunica as
the new President, Yugoslavia undoubtedly is moving
towards stability and normalcy. The recent successful
parliamentary election in the country is further
evidence that the people of Yugoslavia are determined
to close the tragic recent chapter of their history and
chart a new and better future for themselves. We are
particularly pleased that Yugoslavia has now resumed
its membership in the United Nations. These positive
developments will undoubtedly have a salutary impact
all over the Balkans.

We also welcome the recent successful holding of
municipal elections in Kosovo as an important step
towards the establishment of a representative authority
that should ultimately take charge of the administrative
machinery, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

The United Nations Interim Administration in
Kosovo (UNMIK) has done a valiant job in difficult
circumstances in carrying out the mandate of resolution
1244 (1999). The out-going head of UNMIK, Mr.
Bernard Kouchner, must be commended highly for this.
We have no doubt that his successor, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, will do equally well in addressing the
enormous challenges Kosovo presents to UNMIK, as
he mentioned this morning. We assure him of our full
support.

With regard to the people of Kosovo, we note
with concern that an ethnic divide still persists and that
many citizens of the two major communities are unable
to return home and resume normal lives out of fear for
their security. We know that wounds take time to heal,
whether they be physical or emotional. But these are
the same people who have in the past lived as good
neighbours in multi-ethnic communities. We believe
that is still possible, with a spirit of forgiving and
forgetting on the part of all the people of Kosovo.
There is hardly any nation today that is not multi-
ethnic and where diverse communities share a common
destiny in peace and harmony. There is no reason why
Kosovo cannot do the same, provided it guards against
falling into the trap of misguided political ventures.

Presently UNMIK and the Kosovo Force are
serving as vital lifelines for the people of Kosovo by
providing an essential administrative machinery and by
promoting peace and reconciliation. We must not be
oblivious of the fact that there has to be a lasting and
peaceful solution to the present stalemate and that it is
in the interest of all the people of Yugoslavia, including
Kosovo, to create the atmosphere for constructive
dialogue to take place among them so as to determine
the course they wish to take to ensure a better, peaceful
and prosperous future for themselves. The international
community must do all it can to encourage this process.

Finally, as members who have spoken before me
have done, I wish to express concern about the possible
presence of depleted uranium in various areas of
Kosovo and the hazard that represents to people there.
We encourage UNMIK to continue to address that issue
very seriously.

