Mr. Strommen (Norway): I thank Mr. Hedi
Annabi for, as always, a very useful briefing. The
situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo continues to a matter of utmost importance and
one that the Council must watch closely. After the
strides forward earlier this year in terms of the parties'
disengagement and the deployment of phase II of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), the
picture has remained mixed. We continue to believe
that the two key challenges for achieving further
progress are, first, to halt all support to the negative
forces operating in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, secondly, to proceed with
the inter-Congolese dialogue.

The outcome of the Council's recent approaches
to President Kabila and President Kagame respectively
indicates a certain lack of political will to advance
from the current state of affairs. It also displays the
absence of dialogue between the two heads of State.
This is regrettable, as much needed progress, with
respect in particular to the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement (DDRRR) of the armed factions in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
can really be achieved only through political
commitment jointly by the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of Rwanda.

While President Kagame has thus far not met
with representatives, President Kabila is denying all
allegations that his Government is supporting negative
forces operating in the East. This issue is of key
importance. Needless to say, it makes little sense to
talk about disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR) if armament
is taking place at the same time. We encourage the
Secretary-General and Member States with diplomatic
missions in the region to keep engaging the parties on
this issue. It is vital to re-energize the dialogue
between the leaders of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda. Let me mention in this regard that
my Government is considering a possible voluntary
financial contribution to DDRRR activities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We would,
however, like further information - as indicated
above - before taking a final decision.

There have been mixed reports from the
preparatory meeting for the inter-Congolese dialogue
held in Gaborone last week. It is a positive sign in
itself that such a first preparatory meeting has now
been convened. From what we understand, the parties
at the meeting were also close to reaching an
agreement to free all political prisoners and prisoners
of war and to return seized property and goods.
Hopefully, the upcoming meeting in Addis Ababa will
pave the way towards full commencement of the
dialogue. We encourage the facilitator, Sir Ketumile
Masire, and his team to continue their efforts to
facilitate an urgent startup of the more substantive
aspects of the dialogue.

Norway is deeply concerned about the human
rights situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Let me just mention that we are concerned in
particular about the situation of the many vulnerable
children.

Furthermore, and finally, Norway was very
concerned to learn that a United Nations helicopter was
fired at by unidentified gunmen in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is the
second time a United Nations helicopter has been shot
at since the deployment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). A future update on the progress
of the United Nations investigation into this matter,
following what we heard the Assistant Secretary-
General, Mr. Annabi, say here today, would be very
interesting. Violent actions against MONUC cannot be
tolerated under any circumstances.

