Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): At the outset, let me extend our condolences to the families of the OXFAM humanitarian workers who lost their lives today. I would also like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings. Two weeks ago the Security Council discussed the growing risk of further escalation and the gravity of the humanitarian tragedy unfolding in Syria (see S/PV.8715). Since then, the crisis has only gotten worse. As the Secretary-General emphasized yesterday, the rapid deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the tragic suffering of civilians have reached alarming levels. Under the pretext of combating terrorism, a relentless campaign of air strikes and ground attacks continues. The Syrian regime continues to violate international humanitarian law and to indiscriminately target civilians and civilian infrastructure, emptying out entire cities and villages. Almost | million people have been displaced over the past two months. Women and children represent 80 per cent of the newly displaced people. This is the biggest mass displacement since the war in Syria began nine years ago. Yesterday UNICEF reported that the last two hospitals operating in the western part of Aleppo were hit. One of them was a maternity hospital and the other a children's hospital. Four more hospitals were attacked in the past 24 hours. This is unacceptable. The mass- murderer in Damascus has killed more than 2,000civilians in Idlib since December 2019. Those actions constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity. People in Idlib are caught between violence, winter conditions and food scarcity. The lack of adequate shelter has resulted in hundreds of thousands of people living in the open air in freezing temperatures and sleeping on the streets with no cover. Existing camps and settlements are insufficient. Shelter is critically needed, along with new camps to address new waves of displacement. We are working with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to increase the capacity of the cross-border mechanism. We are also working with Germany to alleviate the need for shelter in Idlib and to support the most vulnerable. This is a major humanitarian tragedy, with serious repercussions beyond Syria. The people of Syria feel abandoned by the world. They expect the international community to help them. They expect the Security Council to raise its voice. The message that must come out of this meeting is clear: the Syrian regime must stop killing its own people. This is a test for the Security Council. This is a test of our humanity. We cannot fail. The regime also resumed its deliberate attacks on Turkish forces. Five additional Turkish soldiers were deliberately targeted last week and lost their lives. The Turkish armed forces immediately retaliated in self- defence. We will continue to respond by all necessary means. As President Erdogan announced, Turkey will hit all targets that pose an immediate threat. We will not withdraw our forces, and we will not abandon our observation posts. It is the regime that should withdraw from its current positions by the end of this month. I would like to underline once again that Turkish forces are in Idlib to stabilize the situation and preserve the de-escalation zone status of the province. Our military presence and reinforcements are fully in line with the Sochi memorandum of September 2018. The only way out of the biggest humanitarian horror story of the twenty-first century is a lasting ceasefire. We need, first, an immediate cessation of hostilities; secondly, the full implementation of Sochi memorandum on Idlib; and, thirdly, a return to the status quo ante. That is the main message we have been conveying to Russia at all levels, including, most recently, in a series of inter-agency meetings in Ankara and Moscow. In our talks, Turkey reaffirmed its commitment to ensuring the regime's withdrawal to the Sochi memorandum line. We emphasized our preparedness to enforce that withdrawal through military means if necessary. We stressed the need to de-escalate violence, prevent violations and avoid further worsening of the grave humanitarian situation. We will continue our contacts with Russia, as guarantor of the regime, to make sure that regime acts in compliance with existing frameworks on Idlib. Today's meeting is meant to be about the political situation in Syria. The fate of Idlib will also determine the prospects for a real political solution. It has been over four years since the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2254 (2015), which sets out a clear road map for a political solution to the Syrian conflict. The establishment of the Constitutional Committee has been the most concrete step taken so far towards implementation of that road map. It took us over two years to establish the Committee because the regime was not interested in a political solution. Now the regime is reverting to its usual tactics for stalling the Committee's work. The tyrant in Damascus is aspiring to achieve a Syria without people, a Syria without Syrians. He wants to hold on to power with total disregard for human life. We will not let that happen. Today Turkey provides care and protection to more than 9 million Syrians, both in Turkey and Syria. Let me underline - that is more than the population of the so-called regime-controlled areas. And here we are, in this Chamber again, listening to the previous speaker's delusional accusations. I will again repeat that I will not honour him with a response, since I do not consider him as my legitimate counterpart. His regime has the blood of innocent people on its hands and lost its legitimacy a long time ago. His mere presence in the Council Chamber is an assault on the millions of Syrians who have suffered countless crimes at the hands of the regime. This tragedy will not end before the people of Syria have a legitimate Government that comes to power through elections to be held in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and which truly represents their will and enjoys their full consent. Until then, Turkey will continue to stand by the democratic aspirations of the Syrian people and safeguard the protection of civilians in Idlib and beyond. Every passing day, we put vulnerable Syrian people at the mercy of this murderous regime. Now isthe time to act. The international community has the responsibility to protect.
