Mrs. D'Alva (Guinea-Bissau): On behalf on my
Government and the people of Guinea-Bissau, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for allowing my
delegation to participate here in the Council and for
giving me the floor.

I would like to commend the work of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS) during its mandate and thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, for his tireless and wonderful
work during the most difficult transition process that
Guinea-Bissau has ever faced. The fact that he is from
a brotherly Portuguese-speaking country and has
experience in a transition process and the consolidation
of peace in his own country has been a plus for Guinea-
Bissau and helped lead to the successful presidential
elections held yesterday.

We would also like to thank Ambassador Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil
and Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission's
Guinea-Bissau configuration, and Mr. Bernardo Serage,
representative of Mozambique and current Chair of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries.

After so many meetings in this Chamber on
the subject of Guinea-Bissau during the two-year
transition period since the coup d'etat of 2012, at
which the progress and prospects for the return of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau were reported
on and weighed, the people of my struggling nation
finally exercised once again their rights as citizens to
choose their leaders, with another round of presidential
elections held yesterday, 18 May, between the two
candidates, Mr. Jose' Mario Vaz and Mr. Nuno Gomes
Nabiam. On 13 April, the presidential and legislative
elections were held simultaneously, and the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo
Verde won the legislature with an absolute majority
of parliamentary seats. With yesterday's elections, the
Transitional Government met one of the most important
recommendations ofresolution 2048 (2012), which calls
for the restoration of constitutional order in the country.
That act is just a first step in the process of enabling the
country to normalize its relations with the international
community and its own people, and give back to the
people their legitimate right to choose their own leaders.
Despite that important step, the country still has a
long process ahead in recovering from its social and
economic problems, and the new authorities will not
be able to deal with them and restore sustainable peace
without the international community's support. In that
regard, we welcome the initiative taken to organize an
international financial round table for Guinea-Bissau.

The general civic responsibility and calm of the
people of Guinea-Bissau, and the largest turnout in
the country's history for both rounds of the election
process, have shown the people's determination to
prove to the world that they want democracy and
are willing to do their part. For those reasons, our
humble people deserve the support and attention of
the international community and the Security Council
in helping them to stay united and alert in this critical
post-election period so that their votes can finally bear
fruit. They have suffered in silence without payment
for months, but have remained hopeful that with the
elections their wait will end and that peace and security
will return, together with our partners, in order to help
us strengthen our democracy and State institutions so
as to achieve a stable society that can make progress
towards sustainable development.

On behalf of my delegation, I would like to take
this opportunity to thank the entire United Nations
system, the African Union, the European Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
every country, especially Timor-Leste, Nigeria and the
other bilateral partners that have supported Guinea-
Bissau financially and technically in organizing and
holding the elections, as well as all the international
observers who participated and made sure that they
were free, transparent and fair.

With peace and stability, Guinea-Bissau, a small
country with a population of 1.6 million people, has
enough natural resources to support itself, as long
as our partners are on board to help us protect those
resources and harness them in the work of developing
our country. In these past years of instability, our
resources have been illegally depleted. In this new post-
election stage, we will need our partners' support more
than ever to help build our human resource capacities
and transfer technologies so that we can best exploit
our resources in ways that will sustain them for future
generations, as well as helping us to protect our waters
and islands from illegal drug-trafficking activities. We
are counting on the financial support of all our partners
in order to improve the country's economic situation
and to implement and complete the security-sector
reform that is so urgently needed in order to maintain
peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau.

