Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General of
Department for Political Affairs, and Mr. Simonovie,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, for
their briefings.

The report on Ukraine issued by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
covering the period 7 May to 7 June, unfortunately
confirms the worsening ofthe human rights situation in
that country, in particular in the south-east. Chad notes
with concern that well-trained and -equipped armed
groups are gaining strength and continue to occupy the
majority of public and administrative buildings in many
cities and communities, in particular in the regions
of Donetsk and Luhansk. We also note an increase in
the number of kidnappings, detentions, ill treatment,
torture, killings and even summary executions by armed
groups. The attacks of those groups are no longer just
targeting journalists, elected or local officials or civil
society activists, but are directly impacting civilians.

We condemn the abduction and detention of
eight monitors of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and we demand their immediate
and unconditional release.

As the fighting intensifies, civilians are
increasingly caught in the crossfire between the armed
groups and the Ukrainian military. That results in a
growing number of civilians killed and wounded, in
particular women and children. Chad calls on all the
parties involved to act with calm and restraint and
urges countries with influence on them to help them
make dialogue and reconciliation between Ukrainians
a priority.

Given the environment of insecurity related to
social and economic hardship, civilians are fleeing the
areas of conflict. There are already more than 15,000
internally displaced persons, 64 per cent of whom are
women and children, in particular in the east. Chad
calls upon those involved in the fighting to facilitate
access for humanitarian organizations to areas affected
by military operations so that people's needs may be
evaluated and taken into account.

The crisis in Ukraine is an ongoing threat to the
freedom of expression. Many journalists have been
killed, kidnapped, tortured or prosecuted. Hate speech
on social networks continues to fuel tensions and widen
the divisions between communities. In that regard, Chad
calls upon all stakeholders to refrain from spreading
messages of intolerance that incite discrimination,
hatred or violence.

In spite of the bleak human rights situation in
Ukraine, Chad is pleased with the new Government's
efforts to restore public order, re-establish political
dialogue and stabilize the country. In upholding
Ukraine's sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity,
Chad supports and encourages the implementation of the
plan to peaceably resolve the situation, led by President
Petro Poroshenko, and in particular the Government's
unilateral decision to institute a ceasefire in the east of
Ukraine from 20 to 27 June.

We also welcome the Ukrainian Parliament's vote
on the resolution on the memorandum of understanding
and peace that provides for a package of constitutional
reforms of areas that include the decentralization of
power, special status for the Russian language, reform
of the judicial and police systems and enactment of
an amnesty for participants in the anti-Government
demonstrations in the East who agree to lay down their
arms. Chad urges that thejudiciary in Ukraine guarantee
the victims' rights and commits to investigating those
responsible for violating human rights, including the
perpetrators of the events linked to the Maidan Square
demonstrations, the murders that took place in January
and February and the incidents on 2 May in Odesa.
In our view, the underlying causes of the crisis
in Ukraine are structural ones, and if the country is
to emerge from crisis its solutions must include those
that take those realities into account. If they are to
succeed, reconciliation and development among the
country's communities must be achieved by peaceful
and democratic means, with respect and guarantees
for human rights for all. In order to deal with these
challenges and to those linked to its territorial integrity,
sovereignty and stability, Ukraine needs the support of
the entire international community.

