Mr. Thiebaud (France) (interpretation from French):
It is with satisfaction that my delegation voted in favour of

the draft resolution.

In its resolution 1001 (1995) of 30 June 1995, the
Security Council set extremely stringent conditions which
the Liberian parties were to meet rapidly if they wanted the
United Nations to remain lastingly involved in the
settlement of the conflict in Liberia.

When that resolution was adopted, few countries
believed that after the resumption of the civil war the
various Liberian factions would be able to reach an
agreement that would set the peace process back on track.
France at that time firmly advocated giving time to the
Liberians.

Events have proved us right. On 19 August 1995 the
Liberian factions signed in Abuja a complete Agreement
covering all the demands of the Security Council, making
it possible once again seriously to envisage the return of
peace to that country, which had just entered its sixth year
of civil war.

It is always a pleasure for my delegation to receive
good news from Africa. The events that have just
occurred in Liberia make us optimistic once again.
Following the Abuja Agreement, a cease-fire has been
established, a Council of State has been installed, and a
complete timetable for the implementation of all other
aspects of the Agreement has been accepted. Lastly, the
military disengagement of the various factions is
reportedly now under way.

The Secretary-General also tells us that tens of
thousands of refugees are voluntarily returning to their
country. It is therefore necessary, above and beyond the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL), for the United Nations to
be further involved in Liberia.

This involvement relates, first of all, to the United
Nations operation, which was established by the Council
in 1993. We are delighted that the Secretary-General
envisages an increase in its numbers in order to monitor
respect for the commitments undertaken by the Liberian
factions at Abuja. My delegation also awaits with interest
the report that the Secretary-General is to submit to the
Council on the new concept of UNOMIL's operations,
especially in the context of enhancing the relationship
between UNOMIL and the Cease-fire Monitoring Group
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOMOG).
 

This involvement also relates to humanitarian aspects.
We are pleased in this respect that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has decided to
dispatch a mission to examine the logistics for the return of
the 850,000 persons that fled their country because of the
war.

The involvement of the international community
should, lastly, extend to the economic sphere. The
implementation of the peace Agreement should, we believe,
be accompanied by a greater involvement of international
financial institutions, whose assistance could be decisive in
the implementation of troop demobilization, on which the
restoration of peace depends.

In conclusion, my delegation would like warmly to
thank those countries that made special efforts so that the
Liberians would not be left to their own devices. We hope
that the prospects opened up by the signing of the Abuja
Agreement will make it possible for the Liberian people to
set out again, without further delay, on the path of
democracy, progress and development.

May I add that I shall convey to Ambassador Merimee
the extremely kind words which the members of the
Council have addressed to him on the occasion of his
departure and the wishes expressed to him for the success
of his mission in Rome. He will, of course, be very touched
by those wishes.

