The President: (interpretation from French): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Gabon.

As we prepare to adopt the draft resolution that has
been submitted for our consideration, I should like first of
all to thank the sponsors for their efforts to produce the
final text.

My delegation welcomes the consensus reached by
the Council on the text of this draft resolution. In
authorizing the export by Iraq of petroleum and petroleum
products in sufficient quantities, the Council will help put
an end to the suffering of the Iraqi people. Indeed, it is
unacceptable that that people should continue to pay
unjustly for the errors of its leaders. The serious
humanitarian situation facing Iraq today would surely not
have come about if in 1990 the leaders of that country
had not taken the decision to attack a sovereign and
peace-loving country, Kuwait. The justified sanctions that
the Council had to adopt met the need to condemn firmly
Iraqi aggression. I believe that the Council's appeal in
paragraph 7 of the draft resolution deserves our full
support. It appeals to all Member States to cooperate in
order to make it possible for urgently required
humanitarian supplies to reach the Iraqi people as rapidly
as possible.

We should furthermore welcome the fact that this
draft resolution opens up the possibility of adjusting, if

 

necessary, the amounts of petroleum and petroleum
products exported for essential humanitarian needs.

My delegation hopes that the Iraqi authorities will take
the full measure of the Security Council's desire to work
for the improvement of the humanitarian situation in Iraq.
It therefore encourages Iraq to cooperate fully in the
implementation not only of the draft resolution before us,
but also of all relevant Security Council resolutions to
which Iraq is subject, for the sake of the well-being of its
people.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/ 1998/ 136.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America.

