President Tong: Let me begin by thanking you,
Sir, for this opportunity to address the Security Council
at this open debate. Let me also take this opportunity
to thank the Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica,
together with the Minister of Finance of Seychelles, for
their very informative statements early in this meeting.

I believe that as a global community, we have
gone well past debating what should and should not
be considered global security challenges, and what are
and are not immediate threats to global security and
survival. As Pacific island leaders, through the Majuro
Declaration adopted in the Republic of the Marshall
Islands in 2013, we declared climate change to be a
security threat to Pacific island nations and even sought
to bring the matter to the attention of the Council for
consideration. The initiative to hold this open debate of
the Security Council is therefore particularly welcome.

It is also encouraging to note the growing momentum
in the level of global acknowledgement of the issue of
climate change. This is an issue borne from the actions
of the whole of humankind, and yet remains lacking in
effective global leadership and global accountability,
and remains peripheral in the considerations of those
with the capacity and capability to address and mitigate
the relentless advance of climate change impacts.
Ironically and regrettably, it is also those with the least
capacity and the least capability who are bearing the
full brunt and impact of a security challenge that has
the capacity to wreak extensive damage - a security
challenge that has the capacity to wipe out whole
nations and whole cultures and indeed wipe out life as
we know it today on this planet.

The science forthcoming from the fourth assessment
report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change and elsewhere, together with our individual
experiences in our own countries and events taking
place in different regions as we speak today, provide
more than ample evidence that something is terribly
wrong. It is evidence that we are nearing the point of
no return, and yet we continue to procrastinate and to
remain hesitant, willing and hoping our neighbours
will take the first step, rather than taking the crucial
first step ourselves that will set the tone for the global
community to follow.

We have come all this distance, at considerable
cost, to attend this event because for us it is of vital
importance. Our people are asking the question: What
is it that we can expect to come out of this Security
Council event? Can we as leaders return today to
our people and be confident enough to say: yes, your
existence and your lives are important and we, your
leaders of the global community, have formulated
options to ensure that no matter how high the sea rises
and no matter how severe the storms get, there are
credible technical solutions to raise your islands and
your homes, and the necessary resources are available
to ensure that all will be in place before it is too late.

For those of us in Kiribati and other countries on
the front line of climate change, the impacts began
happening yesterday - last year. For us, any incremental
rise in sea level threatens our very existence and our
very livelihoods. Time is ofthe essence, and the urgency
of climate change as a global security threat cannot be
stressed enough. The quiet onslaught of climate change
lulls us into a false sense of security - into the belief
that the cost of addressing it now is far too high and can
be deferred to the next generation. This makes it even
more deadly and dangerous as a security challenge that
should not be ignored or treated with complacency. We
have all experienced to some extent the severity and
frequency of changing weather patterns and we can
all understand that when - not if - these climate
change-related disasters grow more frequent, the
entire global community will suffer from increasing
instability and increasing conflicts.

However, we all as global leaders must provide the
needed leadership to do something now and to ensure
that this meeting of the Security Council can deliver, be
decisive and agree on a set of actions that will provide
some guarantees of future security to all. We owe our
children, our grandchildren and their children more
than that. We need action that can guarantee that no
one will be left behind and, most importantly, urgent
action to address the security and existential challenges
from climate change for the most vulnerable peoples in
front-line States.

The sad reality is that we cannot do this alone;
hence our appeal today to the Council and, of course,
to the rest of the global community. For as responsible
global citizens of this planet, which we share as a home,
it is our moral obligation to ensure its preservation. It
is our moral obligation to ensure that the future of our
children, our grandchildren and their children is safe
and secure. For their sake, we must us do the right thing
as a matter of urgency.

Let me conclude by sharing our very traditional
Kiribati blessings of Td Mauri, Tc? Raoi, ao Td Tabomoa.

