Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
presiding over the Security Council this month and to
express thanks for the concept note (S/2015/ 845, annex)
for our open debate today on security, development and
the root causes ofconflict. I also wish to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his valuable briefing, which
outlined the different tools and mechanisms available
to prevent conflicts.

Our debate today on the prevention of conflicts is
very important. It is one ofa series that have addressed
this issue, together with a number of resolutions, such
as resolution 2171 (2014), which specifies the Council's
role in this regard.

Many parts of the world are witnessing conflicts
and wars that are very complex and more intertwined
than ever before. The number of civil wars has increased
from 4 to 11 since 2008, and the nature of war and
conflict has changed. Currently, we see many conflicts
and wars inside countries and inside societies, whereas
in the past they tended to be between two countries.
Countries have employed many strategies to attain
purposes that conflict with the principles underlying
the work of the United Nations.

Against that background, we must address the
issue of conflicts and how to prevent them using the
tools and mechanisms available to us. Today, as a result
of conflicts, more than 60 million people either have
been internally displaced or have fled as refugees. In
2015, more than $20 billion was spent on humanitarian
assistance and more than $8 billion on peacekeeping
operations. That tragic situation, the like of which has
not been witnessed since the Second World War, pushes
us to work together to benefit from the experiences of
the past and to find new ways of preventing conflicts
and of resolving them peacefully.

Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations gives
the Secretary-General the right to bring to the attention
of the Security Council any matter which in his opinion
may threaten the maintenance of international peace
and security. That is why we call on the Council to
activate the mechanisms needed to establish an early-
warning system for the purpose of preventing potential
conflicts from breaking out. We must reinforce the
support available to the relevant bodies, including
the regional organizations, as they play a crucial role.
International diplomacy and mediation and an early-
warning system are the main elements that we should
focus on to prevent conflicts. It is also important to
consult the country offices of the United Nations.

There is no straight path to peace, only a tortuous
one. The post-2015 development agenda has opened
up new horizons for achieving peace. In the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1, annex), Goal 16, on the
establishment of peaceful societies and making justice
available for all, confirms the strong link between
peace and development. There can be no peace without
development and no development without peace. That
is why we must deal with any conflict before it gets out
of hand.

Finally, I wish to repeat that the Security Council
needs to assume its responsibilities in maintaining
peace and security, pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations. It also needs to work on dealing with the many
important issues, such as the Palestinian conflict and
the Syrian crisis. The fact that those conflicts remain
unresolved shows how paralysed the Council is.

