Mr. Salama: I thank the Council for this
opportunity to brief members on the impact of six years
of war on the health of the Syrian people. The war in
Syria has taken a devastating toll on the people of Syria
and the health workers, hospitals and clinics intended
to serve them. The war has obviously had a direct
impact on the civilian population, with more than half
a million people killed and 1.5 million injured. Indeed,
until the recent security developments, we estimate
that approximately 30,000 people were sustaining
war-related injuries every month. Furthermore, in
many parts of the country, the war has virtually gutted
a once-strong health system. More than half of the
country's public hospitals and primary care centres
have either closed or are only partially functioning.
Approximately two-thirds of health workers have fled
the country. Tragically, in 2016 there were reports of
more than 100 attacks on hospitals and clinics across
the country.

Not surprisingly, the inability or unwillingness
of the warring parties to safeguard basic health care
has resulted in acute shortages and barriers to access,
including for life-saving services, such as trauma care
for the injured, medical treatment of common chronic
diseases and basic prevention programmes, such as
vaccination programmes for children. It is estimated
that now one in two children is not protected against
major infectious disease killers and that one in four
children is at risk of developing serious mental health
disorders, with their associated long-term impacts on
the children themselves and on the society to which
they contribute. More than 300,000 women are not able
to get the urgent care they need for a safe pregnancy and
delivery. Indeed, the indirect toll on civilian lives may
eventually far outweigh the direct toll due to bombs and
bullets.

As with our other United Nations and
non-governmental organization partners, in the health
sector WHO has been challenged to find new and
innovative ways to deliver services in that complex
context, whether through mobile health clinics or
through cross-line and cross-border programmes. In
2016, WHO and partners such as UNICEF and the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent were able to vaccinate more
than 2.5 million children against polio, measles and
other diseases; deliver more than 10 million treatments
and train more than 16,000 health workers; and assist in
medical evacuations of the critically sick and injured.
The credit for those results rests with the courageous
Syrian health workers, who continue to deliver
health care for their people under the most difficult
circumstances imaginable.

Unfortunately, in 2017 the ceasefire has not yet
translated into sustained improvement in access to
health care in the majority of hard-to-reach and besieged
areas. As noted by Mr. O'Brien, we are particularly
concerned by the situation in Deir ez-Zor, where people
are struggling to survive in the besieged enclaves. The
Al-Assad University Hospital has temporarily been
out of service due to clashes in the area, necessitating
the air evacuation of the wounded and the sick. WHO
and its partners, such as the Syrian Arab Red Crescent,
stand ready to deliver medical supplies sufficient to
cover the needs of the population for three months in
Deir ez-Ezor should there be access and a logistics
system in place to deliver them.

We also recognize the urgent un-met health care
needs in and around Aleppo following the intense
hostilities late last year and the resulting population
displacement. WHO and its partners are already
scaling up our existing primary health-care and other
programmes. We are aware of the reports of medical
supplies found in warehouses when the Government of
Syria regained control over eastern Aleppo. We look
forward to receving further details on the quantities and
types of supplies in order to determine the appropriate
action with the relevant authorities.

Finally, we have four major requests of the Council
today aimed at saving lives and underscoring the
sanctity of health workers. First, we must ensure that all
parties to the conflict permit the evacuation of critically
ill and wounded patients and their families from all
hard-to-reach and besieged areas of Syria. Secondly, we
must ensure that medical teams are granted sustained
and unconditional access to all parts of Syria in order
to assess needs, monitor programmes - including the
distribution of supplies and trained staff - as well as
provide direct medical care. Thirdly, we must ensure
that essential health supplies, including trauma and
surgical supplies, which have been systematically
removed from United Nations and Syrian Arab Red
Crescent convoys, are consistently allowed into hard-
to-reach and besieged areas.

Finally, the pernicious attacks on health care
workers and clinics must end. The perpetrators must
be held accountable. These attacks undermine the very
foundations of peace and security and have been the
subject of previous Security Council deliberations.
Equally unacceptable is any use of health-care facilities
for military purposes. We should join together to
condemn such egregious violations of international
humanitarian law and find a practical mechanism
to stop them once and for all. Ultimately, the Syrian
health-care system will need to be rebuilt, with serious
and sustained investment and the support of the entire
international community. We will save that discussion
for a more hopeful time, which we hope is not far off.

