Mr. Laptenok (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Allow me at the outset to welcome you, Sir, as
President of the Security Council. We also welcome the
initiative of Bangladesh to open this issue for general
discussion. It complements the work done by your
country and by the Non-Aligned Movement, of which
Belarus is a member, in many other areas of
international cooperation.

Like the more general question of protecting
international security, the issues of preventive
diplomacy and conflict prevention are becoming
increasingly universal. The political, economic,
environmental, social, humanitarian, information and
many other components of preventive activities are
coming to the fore. Long ago, preventive diplomacy
ceased to be a mere goal in response to the Charter
tasks of the United Nations, and became a concrete,
practical reality requiring joint efforts not only by the
members of the Security Council but by all the States
Members of the United Nations. It is obviously necessary
to move from a culture of reaction to a culture of
prevention, as the Secretary-General puts it in his
report.

Clearly, because of specialization in the work of
the United Nations system, not all causes of conflict
can be addressed by the Security Council. Other bodies
in the United Nations system can make an equally
useful, sometimes unique, contribution to the Council's
work. We envision an overall pattern of interaction that
would strictly adhere to the division of powers and
competence among United Nations bodies. Some
problems are common to the Security Council and to
other bodies, and here we must identify a number of
priorities: we need to design mechanisms for the timely
definition of the modalities of interaction between the
Security Council and other organs, including the
dispatch of multi-task fact-finding missions,
confidence-building missions and so forth. We think
that here there can be a special role for mechanisms
and models for interaction between the General
Assembly and the Security Council, between the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council
and between the International Court of Justice and the
Security Council, as well as interaction involving other
bodies within the United Nations system with respect
to specific conflict-prone regions. The basis for such
interaction is to be found in the Charter and in other
instruments to which previous speakers have referred.

We think it would significantly facilitate the
Council's addressing of such questions in the context
of preventive diplomacy to ensure the earliest possible
detection of factors that could give rise to conflict
situations; to create the conditions necessary for
sustainable socio-economic development in countries
subject to tension and in conflict-prone areas, with
particular attention to Africa; to help make real
progress in poverty eradication and in addressing
problems of inequality and security; to put an end to all
activities that threaten to cause the violent
disintegration of States or to cause their boundaries to
be redrawn; to halt the illegal trade in small arms and
light weapons; and to ensure the sovereignty of States
over their natural resources, which is particularly
important for States in destabilized areas.

There is an important role for the revival of
economic activity in areas suffering from slow
development; in general, greater investment for
sustainable development needs to be encouraged. More
active use should be made of the resident coordinator
system of the United Nations Development Programme
in coordinating projects and in implementing social and
economic development programmes in affected
countries, all in close coordination with donor
countries and with the local authorities. The
international community should provide adequate
resources to strengthen national and regional potential
for conflict prevention. South-South cooperation
should be encouraged. There is much else besides.

We feel that the problems caused by flows of
refugees are a reason to supplement preventive
diplomacy with comprehensive international
programmes under United Nations auspices targeted at
countries in destabilized areas. We also favour
enhancing the role of United Nations civilian police
contingents as an effective factor in preventing the
escalation of conflicts, as well as in halting them.

For our part, we intend to make an active
contribution to the work of the Security Council in this
sphere.

The Security Council, the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and other United Nations
bodies cannot fail to address another destabilizing
factor: the growing scale of terrorism. All States must
pool their efforts with those of intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to fight terrorism.
That is a worthy common objective for the Security
Council and for the whole family of organs and
agencies of the United Nations system.

No less urgent from the standpoint of ensuring the
proper conditions for stability and sustainable national
development in a number of regions is the problem of
combating HIV/AIDS. The work of physicians and other
specialists operating in African countries, which are the
most severely affected by this problem, is the focus of a
great deal of attention not only in the affected countries
themselves, but throughout the world. This will be the
focus of the special session of the General Assembly to be
held next week.

The orientation debates held by the Security
Council have virtually turned the Council into a
standing open-ended working group for discussion of
the most urgent items on its agenda. But we need
significant improvements in the apparatus for
extracting the distillate from those debates: their
practical outcome. This must be done through in-depth
consideration of the views of States that participate in
the discussions. We think that the Security Council
should pay particular attention to that issue.

