Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, are grateful to the Deputy Secretary-
General, Ms. Frechette, and to the leadership of the
various specialized agencies of the United Nations and
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for the
briefings they have provided on their operations in Iraq
to provide emergency assistance to the Iraqi people.

Like many others who have spoken, we are
primarily concerned with the ongoing instability in
many regions of Iraq, as a result of which there still
cannot be a full resumption of the work of international
humanitarian personnel in that country.

As the Council is aware, responsibility for
ensuring the safety of United Nations staff and of the
personnel of other humanitarian organizations, as well
as ensuring them unimpeded access to all persons in
need, in accordance with the provisions of international
humanitarian law and paragraph 8 of resolution 1472
(2003), lies with the coalition forces. In this regard, we
hope that, in order to resolve this issue in the near
term, additional necessary measures will be taken.

Overall, the situation remains alarming with
respect to supplying the central and southern provinces
of Iraq with sufficient drinking water. This problem has
become particularly important in the light of recent
outbreaks of infectious disease. There is a need to note
that establishing a water supply system, particularly in
the major cities, is closely linked to the restoration of
the operation of treatment plants, most of which were
damaged during hostilities or were looted in the
ensuing period.

We would note also that an equally complex
situation - as seen in the presentations made today by
the representatives of humanitarian agencies - has
also emerged with respect to ensuring the normal
operation of Iraqi hospitals, where, in addition to the
shortage of staff, there is a critical shortage of
specialized medical equipment, which was also looted
recently. This has resulted in a serious deterioration in
the level of health care in most regions of the country
when compared with the prewar period, which has
brought additional suffering to the Iraqi people. This
problem also requires very close attention.

One other point to which we would like to draw
the Council's attention is the status of the electrical
sector in Iraq. Prior to the war, the situation in that
sector was not all that favourable, and now the Iraqis
face the serious problem of its reconstruction. There is
no need to restate the importance of this sector in the
maintenance of the entire civil infrastructure in Iraq,
since it is also essential for the operation of hospitals,
water-treatment plants, schools and many other
facilities that have clearly defined humanitarian
designations. Clearly, one cannot restore the Iraqi
economy with only the low-power mobile electric
generators whose delivery has been given priority
recently. We need more radical measures. Clearly, one
cannot restore the Iraqi economy just with low-power
mobile electric generators, the delivery of which has
recently been given priority. We need more radical
measures.

In this context, we believe it is vital to implement
the maximum volume of contracts that were concluded
under the oil-for-food programme, which encompass
such sectors as water supply, electricity, and the supply
of vehicles and other essential goods. All of this will
clearly be needed during the economic reconstruction
of Iraq. We can say the same about equipment for the
oil sector, which is essentially the engine for further
development of the country's entire economy.

We are certain that, in line with the resolution
adopted today by the Security Council, the Secretariat
should take all necessary measures to ensure that these
and many other problems related to implementation of
contracts are fully resolved. We believe that this would
help to meet many of the humanitarian needs of the
Iraqi people and would help to ensure that the United
Nations, its specialized agencies and other
humanitarian organizations can do effective work in
Iraq.

