Mr. O'Brien: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the humanitarian
situation in the Lake Chad basin. I particularly want
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for so
clearly and comprehensively setting up the context,
the current dynamics and the options for actions.
I especially appreciate that my remarks will be
complemented by the genuine report from the ground
by Ms. Fatima Yerema Askira of the Borno Women
Development Initiative, who will be following me via
video teleconference from Maiduguri,

The humanitarian crisis across north-east Nigeria
and parts of Cameroon, Chad and the Niger, triggered
by the horrendous, violent and inhuman campaign of
Boko Haram, is deepening. Although Boko Haram has
lost much of the territory that it once controlled - but
by no means all of it - raids and suicide bombings
targeting civilians continue to cause widespread death
and destruction, fear and psychological and physical
trauma. Those threats have wiped out livelihoods and
vital infrastructure and prevent people from accessing
essential services.

In July 2016, when I last briefed the Council on
the Lake Chad basin (see S/PV.7748), approximately
9 million people were in need of humanitarian
assistance. Since then, the crisis has grown further, and
there are today 10.7 million people in need ofassistance,
including 8.5 million in north-east Nigeria and another
1.6 million in the Far North region of Cameroon. Some
2.4 million people are currently displaced, and the
vast majority of them - more than 1.5 million - are
children. While many families would undoubtedly
prefer to return to their areas of origin, continued
severe insecurity, limited livelihood opportunities and
the lack of essential services still make that difficult,
if not impossible, despite considerable encouragement,
if not pressure, from local authorities. Members of the
Council will recall that, in my most recent briefing,
I spoke of how many internally displaced people,
like Mustafa, whom I met at the Konduga camp near
Maiduguri, had been forced from their homes in Bama
in the Lake Chad basin in mid-2015. And when you are
torched out of your home, there is no home to return to.

As I witnessed during my latest mission to Nigeria
and the Niger, about 80 per cent of the displaced
persons are staying with host communities that are
themselves among the world's poorest. But they have
nevertheless generously opened their homes to the
displaced. The protection needs that I highlighted
during my briefing in July remain dire. Civilians face
violations of humanitarian and human rights law every
day, including death, injuries, sexual and gender-based
violence, arbitrary detention, disappearances, forced
displacement and forced recruitment. In north-east
Nigeria alone, more than 7,000 women and girls have
been subjected to Boko Haram-initiated sexual Violence,
including forced marriage, rape, abduction and slavery.
Upon their release, many of the survivors continue
to be treated by their own communities as suspected
Boko Haram sympathizers and face deep stigma
preventing them from reintegrating effectively into
society. In response, the United Nations and its partners
have provided care and support to 5,900 women and
children formerly associated with or captured by Boko
Haram who have been victims of sexual and gender-
based violence. However, those and other protection
activities must be scaled up in order to ensure that
the survivors receive the necessary medical care,
psychosocial support and livelihood support. We also
need to work even more closely with the Government
and the communities to prevent the stigmatization of
those women.

What started as a protection crisis has become a
major food and nutrition crisis as well - today one of the
largest humanitarian crises in the world. More than one
year ago, there were 3 million severely food-insecure
people in need of assistance across the Lake Chad
basin area. Despite the United Nations and partners'
mobilizing response, today there are 7.1 million. As
the Nigerian Government has scaled up its security
offensive over the past six months, it has recovered
land and released captured people and communities
trapped at the tyrannous hands of Boko Haram,
thereby revealing large numbers of oppressed, hungry
and abused persons so quickly that it has outpaced
the humanitarian response's ability to accelerate its
action as well as our ability to raise additional funds
from the international community to keep up. That
therefore has resulted in the staggering increase in the
numbers of very vulnerable people. The Multinational
Joint Task Force has also driven many Boko Haram
terrorists and agents back out of Cameroon, Chad and
the Niger, thereby concentrating more challenges and
needs in north-east Nigeria. For those reasons, food
and nutritional insecurity have reached extreme levels,
especially in parts of Borno, Adamawa and Yobe states
in Nigeria, with 5.1 million people food-insecure at
crisis and emergency levels.

In the worst affected and least accessible areas,
severe forms of hunger have been reported. Despite
all the assistance going in today, it is clear that, given
the forecasts that the situation may get even worse
and that the numbers of those in need may continue
to increase, our planning should be guided by those
pessimistic assumptions. And that is all in addition to,
and aside from, the chronic severe and moderate acute
malnourishment across the wider Sahel region - to
the west and north of the Lake Chad basin - affecting
millions of people, mainly children, women, the elderly,
the sick and those living with disabilities.

Children in north-east Nigeria and in the Lake
Chad basin are particularly vulnerable in this situation,
and reports indicate that the mortality rates for children
under the age of 5 in individual internally displaced
persons (IDP) locations have reached a level of four
times the emergency threshold. In July 2016, I briefed
the Council that 244,000 children in Nigeria's Borno
state were severely acutely malnourished. Today, that
number has grown to 300,000 children, and up to
450,000, as we must also include those from Borno,
Adamawa and Yobe.

Despite such worrying trends, there is hope that 2017
will yet prove to be a turning point for the people affected
by the crisis. As the nature of the conflict changes
and an increasing number of areas are coming under
Government control, now is the time to act decisively
to expand humanitarian assistance and protection, as
well as basic services, and thereby lay the groundwork
for early recovery and reconstruction, so as to prevent
this from becoming a protracted crisis. Over the past
six months, together with each of the Governments in
the Lake Chad basin region, we have taken significant
steps forward in scaling up the humanitarian response.
For example, the United Nations, with new leadership
in Abuja and in Maiduguri, and its partners in Nigeria
are reaching more than 2.1 million people with food
assistance, more than 4 million with emergency
primary health care and more than 1.7 million with
water and sanitation, despite a difficult and high-risk
environment for aid workers.

Since the beginning of 2016, UNICEF has provided
the following support to children in crisis-affected
areas. Approximately 160,000 children under 5 years
of age have been reached with lifesaving treatment for
severe acute malnutrition. More than 4 million people
have had access to primary health care services through
Government-run health centres and clinics set up in both
IDP camps and host communities. Approximately three
quarters of a million people continue to have access to
safe water, and more than 1 million people have access
to sanitation facilities meeting international standards.
More than 100,000 children have access to safe
temporary learning spaces. Nearly 200,000 traumatized
children have been provided with psychosocial support.

In support of the scale-up, since July 2015, within
a month of my taking up this post, I have released over
$91 million from the Central Emergency Response
Fund (CERF) for lifesaving humanitarian assistance
to 3 million people affected by the crisis in the Lake
Chad basin region. I would like to thank all Member
States that supported that vital work through their
contributions to the CERF, and I would urge every one
here other than the three Security Council members
who have already done so to make pledges for the CERF
for 2017. Last December, during the CERF pledging
conference for 2017, the President of the Niger himself,
Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, described the CERF as
a central and indispensable funding mechanism in
support of humanitarian action to relieve the suffering
of so many people across the Lake Chad basin.

I am pleased to report that we have a close
cooperation with the Governments of the countries
affected and that they are taking a fast-increasing lead in
the humanitarian response. The Nigerian Government,
for example, appointed a Chief Humanitarian
Coordinator in October 2016 and in the last few weeks
has set up platforms both at the capital and the State
level for close coordination between the Government
and the humanitarian community. And just in the last
week, Nigeria's Presidential Committee on Northeast
Initiatives has now adopted a three-phase reconstruction
and rehabilitation plan, with an immediate focus on
comprehensive relief efforts, social stabilization and
early recovery to address the needs of 7 million people
over the next 12 months. I welcome this and indeed
other initiatives taken by the Governments of the four
countries affected to provide immediate assistance to
the people in need.
At the same time, several of the Governments in
the Lake Chad basin are experiencing fiscal constraints
as they face economic recession and are also involved
in a costly military operation against Boko Haram.
Their means to respond to the humanitarian crisis
are thus limited and vastly surpassed by the scale of
the needs. In September 2016, in the margins of the
General Assembly, my Office organized a high-level
event at which the Presidents of Chad, the Niger and
Nigeria, and a senior Minister from Cameroon, all
joined me in calling for humanitarian assistance for the
Lake Chad basin, which was followed by new pledges
of $163 million by donors at the same event; I thank
them, a good result, but insufficient.

The regional humanitarian crisis that has
significantly deepened and broadened with the
despicable actions of Boko Haram takes place in an
extremely fragile and rapidly changing part of the world,
one that contains many of the elements - poverty,
unemployment and the absence of prospects and
opportunities for youth - conducive to both violent
extremism and protracted humanitarian need. There is
a clear need for continued action and attention from the
international community and the Security Council.

In addition to the urgent provision of life-saving
assistance to those in need, we must also address the
root causes of the crisis, particularly at the community
level. Poverty, underdevelopment and environmental
degradation need to be addressed through longer-
term assistance, supporting the sustained efforts
of the Governments of the countries affected. As
humanitarians, we are ready to continue to scale up and
to work closely with development partners, in line with
the outcomes of the 2016 World Humanitarian Summit.
I would like to call on Member States to ensure that
development and political actors strengthen longer-term
investments to address the root causes of the conflict.

This is the time to stand in solidarity with
the people of Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad and the
Niger. This crisis is urgent. Without our action, our
political engagement and sustained humanitarian and
development assistance, we will not be able to prevent
this from becoming an even more protracted crisis. For
example, supporting agriculture will be key to allowing
people to re-establish their livelihoods and to avoid
creating dependency on aid. In north-east Nigeria,
many farmers have missed three planting seasons in a
row. It is vital to support them immediately, as doing so
now would allow them to prepare their land and plant
their crops ahead of the next rainy season, in June.
As the Council is aware, initially, 19 months ago,
it was extremely difficult, despite repeated events and
statements, to get the global community's attention
focused on the humanitarian issues of the people in the
Lake Chad basin; it was as though I was shouting into
an empty room.

Today, the situation is different, as there is growing
global attention and focus on the Lake Chad basin, and
a clear recognition, including by the Governments of
the countries affected, that this is a major humanitarian
crisis and not just a security situation. In Nigeria, the
epicentre of the crisis, the United Nations has a new
and strong leadership in place and a close coordination
with the Government, as I briefed the Council earlier,
and mechanisms to iron out tensions as and when they
arise. I am very heartened to learn of the Council's
proposed visit to the area in the coming period, subject
to arrangements being finalized.

Donors have demonstrated increasing commitment
to the crisis in the Lake Chad basin, contributing more
than $238 million to the humanitarian response in
the Lake Chad basin in the second half of 2016, thus
tripling their contributions compared with the first six
months of the year. This led the appeal for the Lake
Chad basin in 2016 to be 49 per cent funded. But it
is that, 49 per cent, so we can do only less than half
of what we know is needed. Despite this acceleration
of contributions, which I commend, we need donors to
dig even deeper. We also need more donors to come on
board. And, as the Council will appreciate from all that
I havejust set out, the 2017 humanitarian response plan
and appeal for the Lake Chad basin has doubled relative
to the one in 2016, reflecting the deteriorating situation
in the region, to $1.5 billion. Together, we simply must
do more, and from here it is funding that is key.

In addition, I call on the Council to maintain and
enhance its support for national and regional action,
that is, security, political as well as humanitarian;
support for the conference on Nigeria and the Lake
Chad basin being organized in Norway on 24 February;
support for development strategies to help sustain
recovery and peace; and support for the engagement of
local organizations, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and international NGOs.

Over the past 12 months, the crisis has not only
persisted, but grown in dramatic fashion. Serious
protection concerns remain, and the food security
situation is critical. In the face of this reality, we have
made progress in scaling up the response, but it is still
not enough. We now need to redouble our collective
efforts to meet the growing needs. During my many
travels to the Lake Chad basin over the decades, I have
been struck by the tremendous resilience and generosity
of the people. Their ability to cope with severe hardship
and shocks is second to none. My hope is that today's
discussion will take us further towards a collective
response that is commensurate with the desperate
plight, and the almost unique resilience, of the people
in the Lake Chad basin.

