Mr. Jagne (Gambia): The Gambian delegation is
extremely grateful to the United Kingdom delegation for
reserving a slot devoted to Africa in the Council's
programme of work for this month. We are also honoured
to see you, Mr. President, a son of Africa, presiding over
today's meeting. There could not have been a more suitable
person than you to do so.

Having read some of the statements that you made
recently on Africa, we are honoured to have you with us.
I would like to thank Sir Jeremy for making those
statements available to me. Once one starts reading them,
one cannot stop; and I soon developed a voracious appetite
for more.

My delegation is also grateful to the Secretary-General
for leading the discussions and for his thought-provoking
remarks. His landmark report, "The causes of conflict and
the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa" (S/1998/318) led to the adoption of
very important resolutions incorporating the issues that are
being discussed today; we will come back to them later.

My delegation could not have agreed more with you,
Mr. Minister, when on two occasions you stated that Africa
still suffers from international policy neglect. You went on
to state that Africa had been manipulated by both sides
through proxy wars and client states during the cold war, at
whose end both West and East virtually turned their backs.

We are heartened to note, however, that the United
Kingdom, as well as the United States, following
Ambassador Holbrooke's visit to Africa, will support the
African renaissance. We are even more encouraged by the
United Kingdom Government's renewed commitment to
Africa. Here again,

"Britain will continue to play an active role as
a friend of Africa in the Security Council. And
when United Nations action can stop war or
build peace, we will back it to the hilt".

Now let us get down to business, starting with the
question of how to improve coordination and cooperation
between the Security Council and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and the key subregional
organizations, including coordination of joint activity on
specific issues. As we pointed out earlier, the Secretary-
General's report on the causes of conflict in Africa gave
rise to the adoption of three very important resolutions
and some presidential statements. The first of these was
Security Council resolution 1197 (1998) of 18 September,
on the strengthening of coordination between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in the
area of conflict prevention and the maintenance of peace.
The second was resolution 1196 (1998) of 16 September,
on arms embargoes, and the third was resolution 1209
(1998) of 19 November 1998 on the illicit transfer and
accumulation of small arms in Africa.

We can see from these few examples that the legal
framework is already in place to improve coordination
and cooperation between the Security Council and the
OAU. The Cooperation Agreement between the OAU and
the United Nations offers many possibilities, but to be
more focused one can cite the OAU Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution. There
are other means as well, such as through contributions to
the United Nations Trust Fund for Improving
Preparedness for Conflict Prevention and Peacekeeping in
Africa- though, as colleagues have said, it is not
enough to rely only on trust funds - and indeed the
OAU Peace Fund, and the establishment of a Council of
Elders within the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution.

With the establishment of a United Nations
Preventive Action Liaison Office in the OAU, Security
Council resolution 1197 (1998) called on the Secretary-
General to consider ways and means of making the Office
more effective, as well as the possibility of appointing
liaison officers to peacekeeping operations of the OAU

 

and of subregional organizations in Africa that are
authorized by the Council. Another possibility is
encouraging the nomination of joint special representatives.
Security Council resolution 1197 (1998) also invited the
Secretary-General to, among other things, adopt measures
for an improved flow of information between the United
Nations and the OAU and between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. Other measures
could include exchanges of staff and arranging joint expert
meetings on certain specific areas of early warning and
prevention.

With regard to the other issue, of how to make needs
for African peacekeeping more effective and in real time,
we made reference to two presidential statements, use of
the United Nations Trust Fund for Improving Preparedness
for Conflict Prevention and Peacekeeping in Africa and
encouraging contributions to the OAU Peace Fund. The
Secretary-General was also requested to assist the OAU and
subregional organizations to establish logistics assessment
teams through encouraging joint training and simulation
exercises and seminars with African peacekeepers, thus
helping Africa to develop peacekeeping capacity.

T hirdly, as to what additional instruments the Council
can bring to bear to help solve and, where possible, prevent
conflicts in Africa, we cited the control of the flow of arms
into Africa. We all know that in this area no flights would
leave any airfield in your countries without your
intelligence officials knowing about it. If we can share this
type of information - meaning that each time a cargo
plane is leaving your airfield or a vessel leaving your
seaports, you would then inform your counterparts in
Africa - we may not be able to eliminate it on the spot,
but we are certain that in the long run, we will be able to
deal a deadly blow to this traffic. We can also encourage
the adoption of legislation or other legal measures making
the Violation of arms embargoes a criminal offence.

Mr. President, I wish to conclude by quoting again
from one of your statements, this time when you addressed
the "Challenges for governance in Africa" conference on 13
September 1999, in which you said,

"Yet, common humanitarianism aside, the success of
Africa is vital to Western interests. Its success could
create a much safer, more environmentally sustainable
world. It would reduce aid budgets and the United
Nations budget. It would open up new markets and
would remove havens for terrorism that will
increasingly threaten the West".

