Mr. Spatafora (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to offer a very sincere and warm welcome to Mr. Tom
Koenigs, to congratulate him on his appointment as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and to thank him for his comprehensive
and instructive briefing. I would also like to assure the
Special Representative that Italy will offer him, on the
field and at the political level, the strongest support
and cooperation. He can count on us.

On this occasion, our tribute should also go to his
predecessor, Mr. Jean Arnault, who deserves our
gratitude for the remarkable accomplishments achieved
by the United Nations and the people of Afghanistan
during his tenure.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Austria
on behalf of the European Union. Our ongoing level of
substantial engagement in the stabilization and
reconstruction of Afghanistan prompts us to add a few
complementary remarks.

The report of the Secretary-General draws a
mixed picture of the latest developments in
Afghanistan, mentioning a series of extraordinary
successes in the political process, but reporting at the
same time some worrying delays and difficulties in
achieving our common goals in the areas of security,
the rule of law, respect for human rights, the
empowerment of women, and the fight against the
production and trafficking of narcotics. Nevertheless,
we are still convinced that the international community
and the Government of Afghanistan are on the right
track.

The success of the London Conference, including
the finalization of the Afghanistan Compact and its
endorsement by the Security Council, confirms that we
all share the same basic View that the increasing
ownership by the Afghan Government of the process of
stabilizing and reconstructing the country must be
supported by a sustained and coordinated effort of the
international community, with the United Nations
playing a central role. The successful holding of the
parliamentary elections last September confirmed that
such a joint approach is conducive to generating
historic achievements. Italy has been at the front line
of that endeavour, having held the command of the
NATO-led International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) since last August. The acknowledgement that
the polling was not significantly affected by security
incidents is therefore a matter of special pride for us.

Last August, before the Security Council, Italy
stated that

"the daunting challenges lying ahead should

strengthen our commitment. Those challenges are

related to the three vital and intertwined pillars of

security, institution-building and economic
development. No effort should be spared in
tackling those three pillars in an integrated
perspective" (S/PV.5249, p. 33).

We are therefore particularly glad that the
Afghanistan Compact is built upon that very approach
of complementarity between the pillars of security,
governance and development. We cannot fail to stress
at every possible occasion that an integrated approach
addressing all three components is vital and that none
of the pillars should be prioritized over the others
while we define the principles and criteria that will
inspire the follow-up to the provisions of the
Afghanistan Compact. We are confident that the
benchmarks contained in the Compact, as well as the
early establishment of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board, will play a crucial role in
facilitating the timely and effective implementation of
the document.

Italy is eager to contribute to such a process,
making the best possible use of the experience and
knowledge of the local context that we have been
building over the past ten years, first as facilitator of
the political process since the 1990s, and then as a
major donor to the development programmes, the lead
country and key partner for justice sector reform, a
contributor to Operation Enduring Freedom, leader of
the Herat provincial reconstruction team, and
coordinator of all the provincial reconstruction teams
in the western provinces. We are now studying how to
sustain our current, extraordinary effort in terms of
forces deployed on the ground - over 2,000 soldiers
and the command of ISAF operations - for instance
by employing our carabinieri and guardia difinanza to
contribute to the training of military and border police.
I will refrain here from adding to that long list of
accomplishments further details on our contributions to
humanitarian and development activities.

Turning to the proposals on the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), as contained in the report
before us, we fully support the general approach of
ensuring continuity in the work of the Mission. We
recommend pursuing consistency between UNAMA's
structure and the organization of the Afghanistan
Compact so as to guarantee full effectiveness in
fulfilling the follow-up and monitoring tasks vested in
the Mission. We appreciate, in that regard, the
inclusion of the mandate on the rule of law and justice
reform among the responsibilities of the political
office. We also welcome the proposed strengthening
and expansion - security circumstances permitting -
of the local offices. Strong cooperation with the
provincial reconstruction teams should be foreseen as
an essential component of such a process.

In conclusion, we look forward to an early
endorsement by the Security Council of the
recommendation contained in the report so as to allow
UNAMA to continue to stand as a model for other
peacebuilding processes.

Finally, let me recall once again the strong
sentiments of brotherhood with the Afghan people that
inspire our efforts and congratulate them for their
unwavering commitment to rebuilding their country
and to consolidating democracy. The challenges that
we continue to face should also remind us that
international peace and security are still at stake in
Afghanistan and will be for some time to come.

