I thank you, Madam President, for organizing today's open debate, which we highly value. Estonia has been continuously advocating for, and contributing to, prevention, post-conflict recovery and sustaining peace initiatives. Conflict prevention in particular is at the core of Estonia's Security Council membership, as well as part of its wider approach at the United Nations. Estonia has been contributing to peacebuilding, among other things, through the Peacebuilding Fund since 2013 and the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs since 2017. We acknowledge the crucial role of the Peacebuilding Fund and the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs in conflict prevention, monitoring and assessing political developments around the world. At the same time with the international community's efforts, I would like to stress the importance of local ownership. For peacebuilding and sustaining peace activities to last, we need political will and support from countries' Governments and local communities. Peacebuilding processes need to be inclusive, while taking into account the views of the local peacebuilders, especially women and youth, who are often the ones most affected by conflict. Another key factor for success is coordination on the ground. We have to continue working to improve coordination at the country level among the sometimes large number of actors, spanning the spectrum of actors in the areas of humanitarian and development cooperation and peace and security. A holistic approach will help societies become more robust and effectively address the root causes of conflict. When underlying, and often-time long-standing, grievances are actively addressed and human rights respected, communities become resilient, transitional justice is served and peace can be sustainable. Development and peace are intertwined. On the one hand, an active armed conflict leaves very limited resources for development initiatives that could bring the country out of conflict. On the other hand, countries with very little means to ensure security may be at increased risk of violent conflict. In that regard, the scale of climate-related security risks are underestimated. It is important to emphasize that climate change intensifies important drivers of conflict and fragility and challenges the stability of States and societies. Estonia was a developing country immediately after it regained its independence. We recognized early on that investing in technology and the digital sphere could help us get back on our feet. Such an approach has helped us create a society with more transparency, trust and efficiency. This year, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has stolen every headline, wreaked havoc among us and left many of us worried for our health, livelihoods and the well-being of our loved ones. As our President, Her Excellency Ms. Kersti Kaljulaid said during a Security Council open debate on COVID-19 in September, "technological development is the area that helps us to maintain the coherence of our world and to continue to cooperate with each other." (S/2020/953, annex IIT) This is the most opportune time for those countries that wish to leap into the new era. There are endless possibilities with digital solutions but, most important, we can achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and bring about increased prosperity to every single country. However, without political will, it will be difficult, and nothing will change overnight. We have been working on the same goals for almost 30 years, and it continues to be a work in progress. Developing digital societies and e-governance is only one possible path in pushing for development gains in any country. The Estonian experience has shown that it does not only work, but that it works very well. From our side, we have been, and will remain, open to cooperation in digital transformation initiatives, sharing our experience and best practices with those eager to take the next step.
