Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I am
speaking on behalf of Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary
General of the League of Arab States, in this debate on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the maintenance of global peace and
security. I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on presiding over the work of the
Council for the month of October. We appreciate your
effective and unique role and wish you every success. I
would also like to thank the Foreign Minister and the
delegation of the Philippines for their successful efforts
last month.

This meeting is a follow-up to last month's
summit of heads of State or Government, who
expressed support for firmer relations between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. The High-level Plenary Meeting of the
Assembly also reaffirmed the importance of the
participation of regional organizations in the work of
the Security Council and stressed the need to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
such organizations in all areas.

The Security Council, at the summit meeting held
on 14 September, stressed the need to strengthen the
role of the United Nations in the prevention of conflict
and to establish effective partnerships between the
Council and regional organizations in order to facilitate
confronting conflicts and crises at an early stage. In a
resolution, the Council also stressed its determination
to strengthen the capacities of the United Nations in
several areas through, inter alia, support for regional
mediation initiatives, in close cooperation with
regional organizations. The Council stressed the need
to strengthen regional capacities for early warning and
the creation of rapid reaction systems. Likewise, the
Millennium Declaration also noted the need to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in conformity with Chapter
VIII of the Charter.

Heads of State or Government also stressed that
regional organizations can work in complementarity at
the international and regional institutional levels for
the achievement of international peace and security,
given the regional organizations' knowledge of the
region. This is an integral part of international peace
and security.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Security Council on the one hand, and international
organizations on the other, should be governed by the
provisions of the Charter, and should include
peacekeeping operations, general reform and
development, all of which can contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Chapter VIII also deals with aspects of coordination
and cooperation that are enshrined in many agreements
between the United Nations and such organizations.
Thus, there are many relationships based on
cooperation that go beyond matters relating strictly to
the maintenance of peace to other, broader concepts.

Over and above political considerations, there are
many economic, social and human issues facing the
international community today, including poverty,
diseases, underdevelopment and terrorism, that require
us to fine-tune Chapter VIII so as to enable regional
organizations to face up to the challenges of the
twenty-first century with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Given the new international order, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the area of international peace and security is an
absolute necessity, because such organizations can be
effective and helpful partners with the United Nations
when dealing with questions pertaining to various
regions of conflict in the world. That is why the
Security Council must maintain stable and organized
relations between itself and regional organizations and
why such cooperation would be more effective. Here, I
would like to highlight the tasks carried out by regional
organizations and the practical role that they play in
the area of peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations
through the Security Council.

Article 52 of the Charter sets out the traditional
role of regional organizations in the management of
local conflicts. The Security Council must reactivate
the role of such organizations and must be seriously
attentive to their opinions and initiatives in the area of
conflict management and conflict resolution. This
would contribute to the maintenance of international
peace and security in an effective way.

The League of Arab States has taken several
initiatives, in accordance with the purposes and
principles set out in the Charter, with regard to the
relationship between the Security Council and regional
organizations with a View to the peaceful resolution of
conflicts in the Middle East. In this context, I would
like to refer to the Arab peace initiative launched at the
Beirut summit in 2002. We had hoped that the Security
Council would give serious consideration to that
initiative to put an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict and
achieve peace in the region. Unfortunately, the Council
has not made any sincere attempt to consider it to date,
and we have therefore lost an opportunity to bring
peace and security to the region. I would like to remind
the Council that that initiative is still on the table.

The League of Arab States is currently working
with the African Union and the United Nations with a
view to bringing about peace in Darfur. The Secretary
General of the League of Arab States is also in the
process of preparing an initiative with regard to the
Iraqi situation.

We must re-examine the relationship between the
Security Council and regional organizations in order to
consolidate it and to ensure that the Council is better
informed of events in conflict areas, in addition to its
mission in preventing such conflicts. The regional
organizations must be invited to participate in
activities, meetings and negotiations in the Security
Council that relate to countries that are party to such
organizations, with a view to strengthening their role in
those conflict areas in which they are involved.

I would also like to underline the role that
regional organizations play in conflict resolution,
peacebuilding and in coordinating humanitarian
assistance for those in need in areas of conflict, crises
and natural disasters. We must also ensure that contacts
are maintained between the President of the Security
Council and the Chairpersons of the regional
organizations, particularly with regard to relevant items
on the Council's agenda. We must also take the lead
from the heads of such organizations with regard to
drawing up strategies for implementing Security
Council resolutions and any reforms that are under
way. The strengthening of relations with regional
organizations, for example, will enable such
organizations to become active partners in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Maintaining international peace and security
requires us to respect international relations and the
principles of international law. Regional organizations
must therefore be strengthened to enable them to make
a contribution to conflict resolution and crises. That
will enable the international community to establish an
international democratic system of collective security.

