Mr. Rosales Diaz (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): As a member of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, Nicaragua fully associates
itself with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt in his capacity as Chair of our
Movement.

Nicaragua reiterates once again its most profound
condemnation of Israel's illegal occupation of all the
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories and
demands its immediate withdrawal from them. We
condemn the Israeli policies and practices of
construction and non-dismantling of settlements, as
well as the inhumane blockade of Gaza, the policy of
severing the West Bank and other Palestinian
territories.

The Security Council is meeting on the eve of a
historic moment, which must lead us to make an
incontrovertible reality of a Palestinian State that is
recognized and fully welcomed into the fold of this
Organization, thereby finally implementing all the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 181 (II),
which calls specifically for the creation of two States
in Palestinian land - one Arab, the other Jewish.

Indeed, it is no longer possible to allow the logic
of the denial of the very existence of a Palestinian State
to continue. Since the triumph of the revolution of
1979, Nicaragua has been in a privileged position to
witness the struggle of the Palestinian people and the
substantial concessions made by Palestine, which have
been shamelessly met by Israel with more illegal
settlements, more humiliations, more deaths, more
systematic assassinations of Palestinian leaders, more
destruction of homes and more plundering, including
of East Jerusalem.

In short, we have been witnesses to a policy that
is truly aimed at cornering the Palestinian people - a
policy that is supported by an unspoken determination
on the part of the Israelis to deny all Palestinian
citizens their very humanity.

For all of these reasons, Nicaragua reiterates the
need to put an immediate end to the insufferable
impunity that Israel has been enjoying, which has been
ensured, irresponsibly, by the Security Council, and
more specifically by the indiscriminate use of the veto
by those who have become the major accomplices of
Israel.

The time has come for the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities and demand that Israel
commit to peace. Threats of the use of veto must end,
and the international community must cast aside
rhetoric in favour of concrete action.

To that end, Nicaragua calls on the Security
Council and the General Assembly to recognize the
State of Palestine on the basis of its 1967 borders. That
is the only way to bring about a stable and lasting
peace that would enable both peoples to effectively
enjoy all of their rights, thereby putting a definitive
end to an unacceptable and inexplicable injustice.

