Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
introducing his twenty-first report to the Secretary-
General on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/20l9/364, annex).

We would also like to pay a fitting tribute to Lord
Paddy Ashdown, former High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for all his efforts to bring
peace to that country, and to extend our condolences
to the family of that illustrious servant in the cause
of peace.

My delegation welcomes the submission, by
the Bosnian authorities to the Commission of the
European Union, of the finalized official replies to
the 665 questions required for the review of Bosnia's
application for membership in the European Union. This
is a clear demonstration of the Bosnian Government's
willingness to pursue its efforts to initiate reforms in
the areas of the rule of law, the independence of the
judiciary and fundamental rights. Those reforms will
undoubtedly drive the country's political, economic
and social transformation and improve its chances of
joining the European Union.

My delegation welcomes the adoption by the Central
Election Commission and the Constitutional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina of electoral reforms that will
put an end to institutional dysfunction. In addition,
my country welcomes the decision of the Srebrenica
Municipal Assembly to build a monument dedicated to
peace to commemorate the tragic events that occurred
in that city in July 1995.

In spite of those positive developments, my
delegation remains concerned about the persistence
of political tensions, particularly with regard to
the difficulties encountered in the formation of the
Council of Ministers since the general elections of
7 October 2018. Continued delays in the formation
of the Government could further complicate the
complex economic and social challenges facing Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

My delegation believes that the search for peaceful
solutions to intercommunal disputes in the country
must become a demand shared by all Bosnian political
actors. In that context, it calls on them to refrain
from all discourse and actions likely to compromise
the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and its integration into the European Union. My
delegation therefore notes with concern the adoption
by the Parliament of the Republika Srpska of a law on
public security. The law, which allows for the creation
of a reserve police force, could undermine relations
between the central State and the Republika Srpska.
For that reason, C6te d'Ivoire urges the Parliament of
the Republika Srpska to postpone the creation of the
police force.

In conclusion, my country invites the Security
Council and the neighbouring countries of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to remain engaged in the pursuit of peace
and stability in that country and in the Balkans. We
support the efforts of the High Representative for the
full implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement.

