Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I wish to congratulate
you, Madame President, on the attendance and your
presidency today. I would like to thank you for
convening this debate.

At the outset, I wish to say that I find something
terribly short, or missing, in this house today, an
imperative that should not have been overlooked.
While I appreciate the fact that our document today
(S/2011/50) is a concept paper arising from last
month's discussions on institution-building and post-
conflict peacebuilding, there must be more emphasis
on financial availability. Much of what we are saying
here today - and what I am hearing here today -
would have been better put had more stress been
placed on making finances available. The sum of
$350 million on peacekeeping and peacebuilding is a
very small percentage contribution by the United
Nations to this awesome - really awesome - task
before us. It is not enough.

Having stressed the imperative of talking about
finances, I now move to today's theme. I would like to
speak about a comprehensive approach. While we
might envisage that comprehensive approach as
already happening, it is not.

We have not been addressing the root causes of
conflict through such means as the peaceful settlement
of disputes - the preventive factor. We have not been
disengaging conflicting parties and reducing violence
by deploying initial peacekeeping. We have not been
creating conditions conducive to socio-political
stability through innovative peacebuilding. We have
not ensured overall coordination among all
stakeholders, especially here, to forge synergies. Those
are the four pillars of a comprehensive approach which
need to be re-examined.

I speak of four possible ways of going forward.
Conflict analysis cannot be rationalized without
addressing the underlying causes. A dispassionate
analysis is needed for effective intervention. The
Council's presidential statement of 23 September 2010
(S/PRST/2010/ 18) underlined that fact. We must also
understand, within and outside the United Nations, that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are disciplines with
cross-cutting themes. They have the common objective
of preventing a relapse into conflict. Ten United
Nations missions are performing that task at the
moment, but neither process is explicitly defined, and
they must be. I believe that national ownership and
local actors must be involved to ensure smooth
implementation. The impression that the two
disciplines are competing for resources and attention
must be dispelled. We can minimize the chances of
relapse through that alone. The Security Council can
discharge its Charter responsibilities only by adopting
a judicious and not merely political approach.

Finally, as I have stated, we must ensure
coordination within and without the United Nations.
First of all, when we speak of coordination, our
principal organs - the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council and the Secretariat - and the
regional organizations must choose to address any
issue in one chosen form. The issue must be vetted,
discussed and put together in a way that can produce
cohesion. I believe that I must stress to the Chairman
of the Peacebuilding Commission how important the
Commission's role is in putting together, jointly with
all those organs, a cohesive programme and in refining
the nexus between all these bodies.

I believe that international financial institutions
tied to the United Nations must be brought into more
significant play and urged to make more significant
contributions. I believe that all this is within the
purview of the Secretariat and the immense efforts of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. And, finally, I
reiterate that a comprehensive solution and approach,
which must be coordinated to the maximum possible, is
the only way to move forward.

