Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
valuable statement, in which he presented his evaluation of
the situation in Burundi and the means to deal with it. At
the outset, let me say that we feel very fortunate to have
President Nelson Mandela present among us. I wish to
salute him most warmly and, on behalf of Tunisia, to
express our appreciation for accepting the task of Facilitator
in the Arusha peace process for Burundi. He thus follows
another African leader whose struggle for independence and
freedom and valuable contribution to the peace process in
Burundi will go down in history.

We have full confidence, in President Mandela
because of his eminent stature in the world and his well-
known struggle and commitment to African issues. We
share the great respect that African leaders and peoples
have for him. The active role that he has undertaken at
the regional and continental level offers the best chance
for continuing the Arusha peace process and pushing it
towards success. This gives us reason for optimism. We
express our support and encouragement for his efforts,
and we thank him for his valuable statement this morning.
We call upon all parties in Burundi to cooperate with him
and facilitate his task. We also call upon the international
community, including the more powerful countries, to
lend him support in the peace process.

I will limit my remarks to the following points
concerning the Arusha peace process. First, experience
has shown that the stalemate in negotiations will lead
some parties towards violence and extreme positions. The
Arusha process is entering a new and decisive stage, and
the option of negotiation becomes the best choice for
bringing peace and security to Burundi. Therefore, we
once again express our encouragement to President
Mandela to find the ways and means suitable to facilitate
the Arusha talks, in consultation with the concerned
parties.

One of the most urgent priorities is to halt the acts
of violence and killing and to engage in negotiations,
because the fighting and violence in Burundi have led to
humanitarian tragedies, an increase in the number of
refugees and displaced persons, a deterioration of living
conditions and a waste of its economic potential.
Providing humanitarian and economic assistance to the
people of Burundi would alleviate their suffering and
promote the peace process.

All parties in Burundi have to prove to President
Mandela and the international community that a political
solution through collective participation in the Arusha
process is what they need. This should be serious
participation leading to achieving the goals set for this
process. We hope that the talks will end as soon as
possible and will lead to a peace agreement accepted by
all parties.

Secondly, what do we expect from this agreement?
We hope that it will lay the groundwork for the
transitional period leading to a gradual reform of the State

 

institutions within a framework of national reconciliation,
forgiveness and wider participation in political life. We
believe that this will not happen overnight, as President
Mandela has just said, because this difficult process
requires time and the building of mutual confidence
between the parties. This is very important, as political will
and an actual commitment to implement what is agreed
upon.

Thirdly, the role of the international community in
general, and of the United Nations in particular, is
important in providing material support and encouragement
for this process until it finally succeeds, and then in
following it up so that the Burundian people can harvest the
fruits of peace.

We hope that the political confidence of the parties
has increased with President Mandela's assumption of his
task and the suitability of the situation for pushing the
process forward. However, at the same time, we believe
that the Burundian question is not a simple one; it is related
to the situation in the Great Lakes region as a whole. This
requires us to think about dealing with the problems of the
region in a wider context.

I would like to conclude by saying that the draft
resolution before the Council today is a clear message to all
the concerned parties to work seriously to bring an end to
the conflict in Burundi. We support its adoption.
