Mr. Lamamra: I am pleased to address the
Council, for the second consecutive day, to provide an
African Union (AU) perspective on issues of common
concern.

That the Security Council agreed to hold back-to-
back meetings on Somalia and on United Nations
support to the African Union when it undertakes
peacekeeping operations and, more generally, on the
partnership between the world organization and the
AU, bears testimony to the commitment of this body to
the promotion of lasting peace and security in Africa.

On behalf of African Union Commission
Chairperson Jean Ping and the AU as a whole, I again
salute Uganda, which is presiding over the Council this
month. I also salute your personal presence,
Mr. President, at this important meeting. I commend
Uganda for its leadership and for the many sacrifices
that it has made in pursuit of our objective of a
conflict-free continent, especially through its
participation in the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which is undoubtedly one of the most
challenging operations ever undertaken by our
continental organization.

Yesterday, we debated the situation in Somalia
and the urgent actions needed from the international
community, and in particular from the Security
Council, to meet the challenges arising from current
developments in that country and to extend to the
Somali people the support they desperately need as
10-59826
they strive to put behind them the two-decades-long
conflict that has torn their country apart.

In fairness to the United Nations and the larger
international community, we are not starting this
journey from scratch, for the United Nations is at the
forefront of those providing the financial, logistical
and technical support required for AMISOM. to fully
discharge its mandate. It is only fitting for me to
reiterate our appreciation to the United Nations for its
invaluable support package to AMISOM, which
ushered in a new era in the relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations in general,
particularly the African Union.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our gratitude once again to South Africa, which
initiated the process that led to the Prodi panel report
(see S/2008/813) and has since continued to work
tirelessly towards the effective follow-up of the
recommendations contained therein. We at the African
Union are pleased that South Africa is rejoining the
Council, for its presence in this body and its
long-standing commitment to peace will inject added
momentum to efforts aimed at making the partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
more relevant to the current challenges and
environment.

Yesterday's discussions and today's debate are
intertwined. In many respects, our joint undertaking on
Somalia offers a template of how the AU-United
Nations strategic partnership should evolve, if our
efforts at addressing the challenges of peace and
security in Africa are to succeed.

Less than two years ago, the Prodi panel, jointly
established by the African Union and the United
Nations in a spirit of renewed partnership, submitted a
forward-looking report on how best to enhance the
relationship between the African Union and the United
Nations, based on a judicious combination of their
respective comparative advantages. To buttress the
proposed approach, the Prodi panel pointed out that,
while African peacekeeping missions had demonstrated
aptitude for rapid deployment, which provided the
initial stability needed for a long-term solution, the
lack of capacity and other resources hampered their
ability to effectively implement their respective
mandates over extended periods of time.

The panel suggested a number of practical steps
towards further coordination and collaboration between
10-59826
the Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, as well as between the
United Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission.
The report identified ways of developing institutional
capacity commensurate with the demands placed on the
African Union.

On the enhancement of the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of the financing of United
Nations-mandated peace operations undertaken by the
African Union, the report recommended the
establishment of new financial mechanisms based on
United Nations assessed contributions.

Beyond those specific steps, the Prodi panel
stressed the need for a shared strategic vision to enable
the United Nations and the AU to exercise their
respective advantages, but also to reduce the likelihood
of duplication of effort and of organizations working at
cross-purposes.

Since the submission of the report, significant
progress has been made towards the implementation of
the recommendations that were formulated. I would
like, at this juncture, to most sincerely thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his report (S/2010/514),
which provides an exhaustive picture of what has been
achieved and the challenges ahead.

Allow me, in particular, to highlight the
ever-closer working relationship between the AU
Commission and the United Nations Secretariat. On
many issues of mutual concern, we endeavour, at
various levels, to consult with one another and, to the
extent possible, to harmonize our positions. In that
respect, the launching, here in New York on
25 September, of the joint AU-United Nations task
force on peace and security truly marked a milestone.
The presence of both Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Chairperson Jean Ping of the African Union
Commission at the launching of the task force, which
convened its first substantive session a few days later,
was a testimony to the commitment of the leadership of
the two organizations to deepening the AU-United
Nations partnership.

It is also worth mentioning the upgrading and
streamlining of the United Nations presence in Addis
Ababa through the establishment, in July 2010, of the
United Nations Office to the AU, as well as through the
capacity-building support provided to the AU in a
number of areas and the increased coordination on the
5
ground between representatives of our two
organizations.

The convening in Cairo last August, at the
initiative of the AU Commission and within the
framework of the Year of Peace and Security in Africa,
of a retreat bringing together senior officials and
envoys or representatives of the AU and the United
Nations, as well as from other partner organizations
and countries, gave a new impetus to the ongoing
efforts to ensure more effective coordination and
harmonization at both strategic and operational levels.
In the Cairo Call for Peace, adopted at the end of the
meeting, the AU was encouraged to organize another
retreat next year and to institutionalize this forum
thereafter, while at the same time working with the
United Nations to ensure an effective follow-up to the
steps agreed upon, including the establishment of
regional forums of mediators in support of the quest for
peace, security and stability in Africa.

This partnership also involves the policymaking
organs of the AU and the United Nations. That the
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council have now institutionalized their yearly
consultative meeting is a further indication of the
shared awareness that achieving lasting peace and
security in Africa requires that we pull our resources
together and harmonize our positions, building on a
creative reading and interpretation of the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter.

There has been progress even on the more
challenging issue of funding AU-led peace support
operations, though more slowly than Africa expects.
The support package provided to AMIS before its
transformation into the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the
support given now to AMISOM. are indicative of a
more innovative approach to peacekeeping and the
challenges associated with it. I could not agree more
with the observation in the Secretary-General's report
that the logistic support package financed through
United Nations-assessed contributions has been a key
factor in the operations of AMISOM.

With UNAMID, we have gone a step further,
joining our efforts in an unprecedented hybrid
operation, funded and managed by the United Nations.
In so doing, our two organizations have demonstrated a
capacity to respond to complex political realities with
the required flexibility and pragmatism.

The African Union welcomes the joint AU-United
Nations lessons learned exercise, planned for
mid-November 2010 in Nairobi, to study those
experiences, as requested by the Security Council in its
presidential statement of 26 October 2009
(S/PRST/2009/26). It is critical that the lessons drawn
be applied and that they inform future decisions by our
two organizations.

As we meet today, we ought, therefore, to be
proud of what has been achieved, for it provides a
strong platform for further progress in our joint
endeavour. At the same time, we should remain
mindful of the many challenges that lie ahead, which
require a greater and more focused mobilization from
all stakeholders.

While the AU Commission and the United
Nations Secretariat have enhanced their collaboration,
as indicated earlier, there is room for significant
improvement. That requires an action-oriented
approach geared towards achieving tangible results. It
also requires that at all levels we fully embrace the
spirit of partnership we have committed ourselves to,
and that we remain relentless in our determination to
make collaboration and coordination a permanent
feature of our relationship so as to avoid duplication of
efforts and waste of scarce resources. We must
maximize our impact and be of better help to those in
need of assistance. I trust that the Joint Task Force will
provide us with the required tools to precisely see to it
that the commitments made at the highest levels are
implemented and that the conclusions of the
coordination meetings we regularly convene are
followed through.

It is also important to make sustained efforts to
enhance the effectiveness of the relationship between
the United Nations Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council. There are many steps that could
immediately be taken to that end, ranging from regular
consultations between their respective chairs in order
to harmonize their agendas and ensure a closer
coordination and better synchronization in terms of
decision-making, to joint field missions and more
substantive discussions at the yearly meetings between
the two organs, with the necessary time and attention
being allotted to the latter.

I cannot conclude my remarks without addressing
the issue of funding the AU-led peace support
operations. As members are all aware, that issue is of
particular importance for the African Union, having
been discussed on several occasions by our highest
decision-making body, the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government.

Over the past few years, the African Union has
demonstrated renewed determination and willingness
to deploy peace support operations to help stabilize
fragile environments, where more often than not there
is no clear-cut distinction between a continuing conflict
and a situation where there exists a peace to be kept.
That is done to provide the much-needed backing to
forces of peace as they battle to keep the upper hand
over those bent on pursuing hostilities for narrow and
short-term gains, and to create conditions for
sustainable peace and long-term recovery, including
through the deployment of United Nations operations.

Significantly, AU deployments on the ground are
labelled peace support operations, and not
peacekeeping operations. In Burundi and the Sudan
yesterday and in Somalia today, the AU, we believe,
has demonstrated the validity of that approach.

At the same time, we are faced with serious
resource, logistical and capacity constraints, which
have hampered the ability of the operations deployed
to fully discharge their mandated tasks and achieve
their objectives. Yet we have no doubt that the risks
inherent in such undertakings were worth taking, not
only to seize the opportunities that presented
themselves for the advancement of peace - and we
feel vindicated by the experience in Burundi - but
also to fulfil our obligation and responsibility to
protect vulnerable populations caught in deadly
conflicts. In so doing, the AU, while fulfilling its own
mandate and promoting the goals and principles
enshrined in its Constitutive Act and other related
instruments, is also acting on behalf of the Security
Council of the United Nations.

Against that background, the importance of
finding a lasting solution for the funding of AU-led
peace support operations cannot be overemphasized.
Time and again, experience has demonstrated that
support using United Nations-assessed contributions is
the most viable response to the challenge at hand,
especially when the operations concerned, as is the
case for AMISOM, are undertaken with the consent of
the Security Council.
Therefore, I would like to reiterate the AU call to
the Security Council and the United Nations in general

to approach that issue with the urgency and flexibility
required, building on the support packages extended to
AMIS and AMISOM. and other relevant experiences, in
line with the Security Council's primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Clearly, this responsibility should be exercised in full,
including when it comes to its financial implications.

As the Secretary-General rightly pointed out in
paragraph 54 of his report, "The complex challenges in
the world today require a revitalized and evolving
interpretation of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations", based on the recognition that support
by the United Nations to the regional organizations in
matters relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security is an integral part of collective
security as provided for in the United Nations Charter.
Making peace happen in Africa - a continent that, in
spite of the significant advances made over the past
years, still accounts for the highest proportion of
conflicts worldwide - require no less from the world
body and its relevant decision-making organ on peace
and security matters.

We need an enhanced and innovative partnership
to meet today's challenges and endow ourselves with
the required capacity to confront the uncertainties of
tomorrow. We need to demonstrate leadership and
vision in order to take the bold steps that the changing
international landscape demands. We need to guard
ourselves against the deceptive comfort that the status
quo offers, for it erodes our capacity to explore
innovative solutions and better anticipate the future. I
have no doubt that the Security Council will
successfully navigate the challenges at hand.

For its part, the AU is determined to fully play its
role, consistent with the provisions of Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. We will pursue the efforts
initiated to enhance our capacity and accelerate the full
operationalization of the African peace and security
architecture. The ongoing Amani training exercise to
test African Standby Force procedures and the study
assessment of the African peace and security
architecture are clear illustrations of our determination
to press ahead in this area and to improve financial
management and transparency and raise more resources
from within the continent, including through
innovative partnerships with the private sector and
civil society, as part of the follow-up to the Year of
Peace and Security

We will endeavour to make conflict prevention,
in particular structural prevention, a centrepiece of our
action, making effective use of the relevant
components of the African peace and security
architecture and building on our solid normative
framework on issues relating to governance, human
rights, democracy, disarmament and arms control, and
border management, to list but a few. We will step up
our efforts to resolve existing conflicts, while
consolidating peace where it has been achieved in
order to prevent a relapse into violence.

I would like once again to express our most
sincere gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his tireless efforts and unflinching commitment to
the cause of peace and security in Africa and in the
world as a whole. His excellent report deserves credit,
for it not only eloquently articulates the challenges
facing us and the steps we need to take, but also gives
due recognition to the progress achieved by the AU in
the implementation of its reform agenda in the area of
financial and administration management, as well as to
the contribution the AU is making to the achievement
of our common goal of a continent at peace with itself
and with the rest of the world.

