Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): Estonians all over the world celebrated their independence day earlier this week - 102 years. However, in the light of what we have just heard in the briefings delivered by Assistant Secretary-General Mueller and Executive Director, it is hard to remain joyful today. We are all witnessing a tragedy unfolding in Syria. More than 900,000 people have been displaced during the past three months and at least 300 others are dead. Our Syrian colleagues tell us that it is a fight against terrorism, but actually they are turning the cradle of civilization into a graveyard. To date it is mostly ordinary people who have continued to suffer. Only two days ago the Syrian army, assisted by the Russian armed forces, targeted 10 schools in Idlib governorate. According to eyewitnesses, at least four people were killed and 15 injured in one of those attacks because the school building served as a makeshift refuge for the fleeing people.In addition to the human suffering, we remain extremely worried about the escalating military conflict between the Turkish, Syrian and Russian forces operating in the area. Turkey offers shelter to more than 3 million Syrian refugees and is determined to de-escalate the situation in Idlib. The attacks carried out by the Syrian army threaten both of those important Turkish efforts. Looking at the humanitarian disaster in Idlib, 14 foreign ministers of the European Union yesterday highlighted their strong concern over the situation. We reiterate here their call on the Syrian regime and its allies to end this offensive and to resume the ceasefire established in 2018. The Astana format has failed. It might have worked as a short-term remedy for some, but it is now certainly falling short in protecting and helping civilians in Syria. That means that we must once again consider a stronger Security Council role for Syria. Regarding the situation in the north-east of the country, the Secretary-General's report on the review of alternative modalities for the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah (S/2020/139) indicates that the region faces a serious lack of medical supplies in the coming months. However, there are alternatives to substitute for the closing of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point in the cross-border aid mechanism, including Tall Abyad in Turkey or even Damascus itself. For the Syrian regime to fill the gap, Syria will need to ease bureaucratic restrictions for aid organizations and grant unimpeded humanitarian access everywhere to those in need. Unfortunately, as reported by the United Nations, the Syrian regime has so far largely decided to neglect those requirements, giving access only in a sporadic manner. The international community will not normalize its relationship with the Syrian regime unless Damascus decides to abide by international humanitarian law and Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). That is the position of both Estonia and, more broadly, the European Union. In short - there must be investigation before rehabilitation, responsibility before availability and justice before any kind of recognition.
