Mr. Begec (Turkey): Let me begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. We also
appreciate the transparent conduct of the comprehensive
review process ofthe implementation ofresolution 1540
(2004). Turkey takes note of the report on the 2011-
2016 comprehensive review. We welcome the progress
made in the implementation of the resolution. Also,
we concur that full implementation is a long-term task
requiring strong efforts at the international, regional
and national levels.

I would like to reiterate Turkey's strong
commitment to the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). To that end, we are willing to further
increase our support to, and collaboration with, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of Experts. We
have contributed to the work of the Committee through
national implementation reports and matrices. With the
same understanding, Turkey co-sponsored resolution
2325 (2016), which was adopted this morning. We are
fully aware of the growing risks of the acquisition,
production and use of such weapons by non-State
actors, particularly in view of the scientific advances
in sensitive technologies that are increasingly available
through cybernetworks.

Turkey has in place the necessary national
legislation to fully implement its obligations under the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) and all relevant
international legal instruments, such as the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention, as well as the voluntary ad hoc
mechanisms on non-proliferation, prevention of the
financing of terrorism, and export controls. Turkey also
collaborates closely with the Security Council Counter-
Terrorism Committee, the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities and the sanctions
regimes, whose work is complementary to that of the
1540 Committee.
Since its adoption, resolution 1540 (2004) has
been a key cross-cutting mechanism of international
non-proliferation efforts. The 1540 Committee and
its Group of Experts fulfil a crucial oversight and
mentoring role in identifying implementation gaps and
capacity requirements for Member States, providing
assistance and match-making, as well as raising
awareness through public outreach activities. Growing
proliferation concerns and the scale and trends of global
commerce place unprecedented responsibilities on
Member States. Therefore, we welcome the Committee's
recommendations aiming at better assistance to
Member States, particularly in areas such as export
and trans-shipment controls. Yet the recommendations
pertaining to enforcement of prohibitions, national
control lists and other possible measures should be
considered in their proper contexts, especially in the
light of the Committee's recommendation for reducing
unnecessary compliance burdens.

In every part of the world, transit trade and
transshipments are usually the most susceptible links
in the chain of export control, in terms of diversion.
Turkey prioritizes adopting applicable methods to
reinforce transit controls in order to strengthen export
controls. Needless to say, it would be unfair to levy the
whole burden of controlling goods on transit countries
alone. More effective and equitable burden-sharing
is needed. We therefore reaffirm the importance of
strengthening controls at the origin.

The use of chemical weapons in our region
constitutes a particular source of concern for Turkey.
As a country that has never had any intention to pursue
a weapons of mass destruction (WMD) programme,
Turkey firmly opposes the development, production,
stockpiling and use of such weapons by State or
non-State actors alike.

Following the sarin gas attacks in eastern
Ghouta in Syria in August 2013, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2118 (2013) to eliminate the Syrian
regime's chemical weapons programme. As the gaps,
discrepancies and inconsistencies in the regime's
declarations and relevant submissions on its chemical
stockpiles remain unresolved, its non-declared WMD
capabilities and the use of non-listed chemical agents
for chemical attacks continue to be a serious source
of concern.

Furthermore, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, in its third and fourth reports, established
the liability of the Syrian armed forces in three cases
that have been under investigation. The Mechanism's
findings confirmed that the Syrian regime has not
fulfilled its obligations and continued to use chemical
weapons after the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013).
The Mechanism also found Da'esh responsible for the
chemical weapons attacks in Mare'a in 2015. The use of
chemical weapons is a crime against humanity and a war
crime. As such, we cannot allow that to become the new
normal. That is why there needs to be accountability
and prosecution.

Before I conclude, I wish to reiterate our call upon
the Security Council to take measures in accordance
with its resolutions 2118 (2013), 2209 (2015) and 2235
(2015).

