Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is grateful for the briefings given by
Ambassadors Verbeke, Arias and Burian, Chairmen of
the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
respectively.

Peru vigorously and unequivocally condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever
and by whomever it is committed. No ideological,
political or religious reasons can serve as justification
for those who commit, abet or finance acts of
terrorism. Given our experience in fighting terrorism
for more than a decade, Peru seeks to contribute to the
work of the subsidiary organs of the Security Council
that consider this matter.

Due to the nature of the terrorist threat,
cooperation among States against this criminal action
is crucial; hence the importance of the role of the
Security Council to strengthen this cooperation within
the framework of the maintenance of international
peace and security.

With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), we express our
gratitude to Ambassador Verbeke and his team for their
leadership and their hard work. We would also like to
point out the contributions made by the Monitoring
Team that advises the Committee.

With respect to this sanctions regime, we must
bear in mind that the situation in Afghanistan continues
to be of concern and that, as the Monitoring Team
indicates in its seventh report, the threat from Al-Qaida
has not abated. That report discusses the mixed support
of States to the sanctions regime, as well as the reasons
behind this situation. We believe that if we do not
change aspects affecting the credibility and
effectiveness of the consolidated list and the regime in
general - such as by updating information, rectifying
the lack of identifiers and ensuring the perception of
full respect for human rights - other efforts, such as
the preparation of working documents and the updating
of the electronic portal to mention only two - will
have only a limited effect.

With respect to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, we are pleased at the adoption of many
Preliminary Implementation Assessments, which

should shortly reach the recipient States. However, we
believe that some issues require greater consideration,
such as the inclusion of the topic of illegal immigration
as an element in the dialogue with States on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). On a
previous occasion, my delegation indicated that
associating the problems of illegal immigration with
the fight against terrorism prejudges the nature of such
immigration. That could lead to discrimination and
failure to respect for human rights and distracts
attention from the greater and real problem: effective
border control, which involves control of both
nationals and foreigners. After they receive the relevant
preliminary assessment, all States Members of the
Organization should indicate whether they consider
those topics to be valid.

The information compiled in these preliminary
assessments will give the Committee more complete
and in-depth knowledge, based on a technical analysis,
about Member States' implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). It will lay a solid foundation for better
understanding of national realities, a better dialogue
between the Committee and Member States and, in
each case, the identification of suitable approaches.
That work must be carried out within a framework that
promotes trust and cooperation and makes it possible
to provide assistance to States that need it. In order to
inspire such confidence, the Committee and its
Executive Directorate should concentrate on the
elements that are the focus of cooperation in the fight

against terrorism - which are precisely those
indicated in resolution 1373 (2001) and subsequent
resolutions of this Council - without engaging in

extensive interpretations of them.

Finally, we hope that Mr. Mike Smith, new
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, will be successful in
his mission and that, through a technical approach
based on excellent analysis, he can make the Executive
Directorate - whose mandate must be renewed
shortly - a partner of States in revitalizing
cooperation in the fight against terrorism.

With regard to the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and the danger that non-State
actors will gain access to such weapons, my delegation
is aware that a considerable number of countries have
not yet submitted their initial reports to the 1540
Committee. Nevertheless, we must place in their
proper context the reasons why such delays occur,
taking into account the lack of resources and of
technical and legislative guidance, as well as each
country's national priorities, primarily because most
States that have still not met that requirement are
developing countries.

Because of that situation and the need to support
States in the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) while maintaining respect for their rights and
obligations under the relevant treaties and conventions,
the Committee should focus on assistance, playing an
active role in facilitating contacts among States. In that
connection, outreach activities are particularly
appropriate for facilitating such efforts and for sharing
national experiences. Furthermore, we appreciate the
progress made in the cooperation between the 1540
Committee and international organizations, and we are
confident that that relationship will contribute to the
provision of assistance to States. We thank Ambassador
Burian and his team for the work he has accomplished
as head of the Committee.

In conclusion, I should like to indicate that, in the
View of my delegation, Security Council measures in
the fight against terrorism must always be in harmony
with what has been agreed by the General Assembly,
particularly the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

