Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): First, I would like
to thank the Uruguayan presidency for organizing this
open debate on such an important subject.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

I take the floor to respond to allegations made
against my country by the delegation of Armenia.
Those allegations are part of Armenia's practice of
falsifying data and fabricating pretexts to conceal
the fact that Armenia itself is directly responsible for
the illegal occupation of a significant portion of the
territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Through its
continued aggression and provocations against the
Republic of Azerbaijan, the Government of Armenia
imperils regional security and stability. By referring to
the so-called violation of the ceasefire, Armenia seeks
to justify its continued illegal military presence and use
of force against the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Azerbaijan. For the same reason,
Armenia fails to acknowledge the fact that at present
the front line extends far beyond the Nagorno-Karabakh
region, reaching the Agdam and Fizuli districts of the
Republic of Azerbaijan. In its relevant resolutions,
the Security Council condemned the seizure of those
districts and all other occupied areas of Azerbaijan and
demanded the immediate, complete and unconditional
withdrawal of the occupying forces from all occupied
areas of Azerbaijan.
Armenia set up and effectively controls the
separatist regime in the Nagorno-Karabakh region
of the Republic of Azerbaijan, particularly the so-
called Nagorno-Karabakh defense army. On 15 June
2015, President Sargsyan of the Republic of Armenia
officially approved the rotation between the Deputy
Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the
Republic of Armenia and the so-called minister of the
separatist regime. That particular example also proves
that Armenia and the separatist regime are in fact a
single entity. It should be recalled that, in a statement
made on 26 September 2015, the President of Armenia
alleged that Nagorno-Karabakh was "an inseparable
part of Armenia".

Armenia's military provocations, aimed at
violating the ceasefire regime, are regular, aggressive
acts against the Republic of Azerbaijan, which are
deliberately concealed. For instance, in its letter
contained in document S/2015/11, while pretending
to objectively inform the General Assembly and the
Security Council on ceasefire violations, Armenia
forgot to mention the fact that, on 12 November
2014, MI-24 combat helicopters of the airforce of the
Republic of Armenia attacked the defence positions
of the armed forces of the Republic of Azerbaijan
near the village of Kengerly, in the Agdam district of
Azerbaijan, and one of them was downed by response
fire. Similarly, Armenia has never acknowledged its
continued indiscriminate attacks against Azerbaijani
civilians. For instance, the purposeful targeting of a
wedding ceremony in a village of the Terter district on
1 September 2015 by the armed forces of Armenia from
their positions on the occupied territory of Azerbaijan
is yet another notorious example of Armenia's flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law. As a result,
three civilians, including one child, were wounded.

Throughout 2015, as a result of Armenia's illegal
occupation and ceasefire violations, 22 servicemen of
the Azerbaijani army were killed, 13 were wounded,
11 civilians were wounded and 1 was killed. In addition,
Armenia continues targeting civilian infrastructure
located in the vicinity of the front line. As a result,
houses, schools and other civilian objects in Tovuz,
Terter, Gedebey, Gazakh, Fizuli and Agdam districts of
the Republic of Azerbaijan were destroyed.

Armenia's so-called reports on the ceasefire
violations are designed to conceal their reality. The
purposeful concealment of key facts attests to that
country's deceptive and manipulative practices to
deny its role, involvement and grave responsibility
for the aggression and occupation of the territories of
Azerbaijan and its consequences.

In conclusion, let me underline that the continued
occupation of a big portion of the territory of the
Republic of Azerbaijan by the armed forces of Armenia
is a main obstacle to the settlement of the conflict
between Armenia and Azerbaijan and is the only
source of escalation of the situation and occurrence
of hostilities. Therefore, Armenia should withdraw
its armed forces from the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions 4 namely, resolutions 822 (1993),
853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993) - and fulfil its
obligation under the Charter of the United Nations, to
which all Member States reaffirmed their commitment
in October 2015. Without withdrawing its occupying
forces from all occupied territories of Azerbaijan,
Armenia's call for peace and alleged support for the
work of the Minsk Group of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe are nothing but
lofty words to conceal its annexation policy and to
mislead the international community.

