Mr. Renninger: The Afghan conflict has now entered
into its twenty-second year without any tangible hope for a
solution in the foreseeable future. The suffering of the
Afghan people continues unabated. It is also disturbing to
note that the negative effects of the conflict have begun to
spread beyond the borders of Afghanistan. Other countries
in the region and beyond already suffer from the spillover
of many Afghan-based problems, including the flood of
refugees, narcotics and arms smuggling, as well as cross-
border activities related to terrorism. On behalf of the
Secretary-General, I therefore welcome this opportunity to
express our concerns before the Council and to benefit from
the suggestions and observations of the Governments which
are attending today's meeting.

As members of the Council are aware, the most recent
quarterly report of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan
was issued on 17 March. In my briefing today, I will
provide an update on recent political and military
developments affecting Afghanistan and I shall also focus
on humanitarian aspects and human rights, including the
situation of women and girls in Afghanistan.

Let me start with recent political developments. The
talks involving the Taliban movement and the United Front,
which took place from 7 to 9 March in Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia, under the auspices of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC), have already been noted in the
Secretary-General's recent report. During the talks, neither
side changed its basic position. While the Taliban insisted
that the opposition had to join the Islamic Emirate and to
accept Mullah Omar as its leader, the United Front
reiterated that an interim Government, which would include
third parties, should be established. We understand that the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, chaired by the
Islamic Republic of Iran, is attempting soon to arrange
further talks between the two sides, which would also be
held in Jeddah. The United Nations supports fully this
effort and will take part in those talks when and if they
take place.

Initiatives of non-belligerent Afghan individuals and
groups appear to have made some progress. A 30-member
executive council of the Rome process, initiated by
former King Zahir Shah, convened in Rome on 11 and 12
March with a view to preparing for an emergency loya
jirga, or a traditional Grand Assembly meeting, inside
Afghanistan. These preparations are continuing.

The "six plus two" group of member States that
have been concerned with the achievement of peace in
Afghanistan has also been active in the recent period,
having convened a high-level meeting at Headquarters at
the end of February. The meeting addressed the
unprecedented increase in the production of narcotic drugs
in Afghanistan, an extremely worrisome development.
The Secretary-General therefore welcomes the initiative
of the "six plus two" group to address this issue. He is
pleased that this initiative has led to the preparation of a
technical meeting, which will be convened from 8 to 10
May in Vienna and will involve all members of the "six
plus two" and the major donor countries.

There were a few other noteworthy developments in
and around Afghanistan. There was a process of
rapprochement between Commander Ahmed Shah
Massoud and his Uzbek rivals, Generals Dostum and
Abdul Malik, who were ousted from Afghanistan by the
Taliban in 1997 and 1998, respectively.

On 26 March, Ismail Khan, the former Governor of
Herat and one of the most important prisoners of the
Taliban movement since 1997, escaped from a jail in
Kandahar, apparently with the help and connivance of a
Taliban guard. The Taliban launched an extensive
manhunt in south-western Afghanistan, putting a bounty
on his head and threatening to punish with a death
sentence those who would help the fugitives. There are
contradictory stories and reports about Ismail Khan's
present whereabouts.

In concluding this brief review of political
developments, I can only note that it is not possible to be
optimistic about an early cease-fire between the warring
factions, let alone negotiations leading to the formation of
a broad-based Government, as repeatedly demanded by
the Security Council.

Now I should like to turn to the military situation,
which, I fear, is equally gloomy. A stalemate has
persisted on the battlefield throughout the winter period,
with the front lines remaining essentially unchanged. As
in the past, severe winter weather and the observance of

 

the holy month of Ramadan forced the two sides to reduce
the intensity of the fighting. However, this did not mean
that it came to a complete halt. The United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA) was informed of
continuous clashes in various places, particularly after mid-
January.

The intensity and frequency of the clashes between the
two sides are steadily on the rise. There is every indication
that preparations for organized, large-scale offensives are
now well under way on both sides. Reports are abundant
regarding active recruitment of fighters, arrivals of
reinforcements and continuous supply of war-making
materiel from outside. Once again, the Afghan warring
factions seem ready to repeat the vicious annual cycle of
violence with the arrival of spring. I should therefore like
to draw the Council's attention to the possible start of a
major spring offensive in the near future.

UNSMA believes that the Taliban remain determined
to pursue a military solution and to defeat the United Front
in the North. It appears that the Taliban and the United
Front have already started tactical moves in order to capture
terrain of operational importance in the northern provinces
of Samangan and Baghlan. UNSMA has received reports in
recent days about increased movements of Taliban fighters
and equipment in and around Kabul. It seems that the
Taliban are once again concentrating their forces at the
front lines in the Shomali Plains, which lie only about 40
kilometres to the north of Kabul. Indeed, today there are
reports of heavy clashes between the two sides north-east
of Kabul.

The United Front might try to launch its own offensive
in order to regain lost ground and tilt the military balance
in its favour. The reported rapprochement between
Commander Massoud and General Dostum may encourage
the United Front to heighten the level of its military
operations. However, the potential effectiveness of a new
Massoud-Dostum coalition remains to be seen. Moreover,
the reported escape of Ismail Khan, a close ally of
Commander Massoud, could have an impact on this
situation.

It should be recalled that the Secretary-General has
repeatedly noted in his reports to the General Assembly and
the Security Council that external interference is one of the
biggest impediments to peace, as it provides the essential
means for the continuous civil war in Afghanistan.

The reported involvement of non-Afghan fighters in
the conflict, mainly on the side of the Taliban, remains of
great concern. Such reports, including from the local
media, indicate that in some cases non-Afghan fighters
are openly recruited through religious schools in Pakistan
and sent into Afghanistan by a convoy of buses and
trucks. These foreign volunteers are trained and armed in
Afghanistan before being dispatched to the front lines.
Observers estimate that, during the past weeks, as many
as several thousand additional fighters have arrived in
Afghanistan. The involvement of Arabs and Central
Asians has been reported as well. The growing reliance
on foreign fighters by the warring factions appears to
reflect increasing difficulties they face in recruiting
soldiers locally.
I should now like to turn to the humanitarian aspects
of the situation in Afghanistan. The country continues to
suffer from the accumulated effects of war and economic
collapse, with basic services virtually non-existent.
Conditions in urban areas are particularly miserable.
Unemployment in Kabul has reached dramatic
proportions, with approximately one quarter of all
families surviving on United Nations-subsidized bread and
many others on remittances from abroad.

The plight of civilians displaced by conflict
constitutes a major problem for the international
community. Limited food assistance is provided to
internally displaced persons in Kabul and additional food-
for-work projects are being developed. Efforts by the
United Nations to provide cross-line assistance to the
Panjshir Valley were relatively successful at the end of
1999, but have since stalled. The Office of the United
Nations Coordinator is continuing to negotiate access with
both sides, but conditionalities imposed by the Taliban
and rumours of impending offensives seem to have
hardened positions. This leaves over 7,000 families of
internally displaced persons in the Panjshir Valley in a
most precarious situation.

The situation in areas of low-intensity fighting is
also quite serious. Displacement, food shortages and a
measles epidemic have resulted in close to 1,000 deaths
in northern Hazarajat. Atrocities against civilians have
compounded the levels of human suffering.

In addition to all of these problems, southern
Afghanistan is experiencing at the present time drought
conditions which could result in a serious lack of drinking
water in urban areas and increased outbreaks of disease.

The United Nations is also most worried by the
situation in Kandahar, where searches of United Nations

 

premises and intimidation of staff in recent days caused the
withdrawal of all international staff from the area. It is
hoped that the Taliban will soon provide the United Nations
Coordinator with reliable guarantees against the repetition
of such incidents, which are a precondition for the return of
international staff. This matter is all the more pressing as
Kandahar serves as the centre for assistance in combating
the effects of the drought in southern Afghanistan.

As regards refugees, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has facilitated
the voluntary return of over 3,000 Afghans from Pakistan
since the beginning of this year. In February, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and UNHCR agreed on a joint programme
for the repatriation of Afghan refugees from Iran. The
programme is expected to curb forcible returns by
facilitating the voluntary departure of some 3,000 Afghans
per week and increasing the level of international protection
for those unable or unwilling to return.

I now turn to the area of human rights. The human
rights situation in Afghanistan, especially with the onset of
another fighting season, must continue to receive the
priority attention of the international community. Twenty
years of conflict have taken a terrible toll on the Afghan
population, killing countless civilians directly while
curtailing many other lives through dire poverty and
underdevelopment. Indeed, the living conditions of Afghans
are so precarious that diarrhoea, an easily treatable disease,
is thought to be responsible for the deaths of an estimated
85,000 children each year. Similarly, a recent epidemic of
measles, another preventable disease, took the lives of 650
children.

With another season of fighting about to begin, there
is every reason to fear that the pattern of targeting civilians
will continue. Gross violations of human rights and
humanitarian law, including summary executions, arbitrary
detention and forced displacement of civilians, have
occurred in a systematic manner and sow the seeds for
further bouts of fighting.

Recent killings include the alleged execution of elders
in Gosfandi, as they tried to mediate the conflict in the
Sang Charak area. This type of experience does not augur
well for the future and points to the absolute importance of
concerted efforts to bring the war to an end and to allow
Afghans to fulfil their desire for peace, a peace that is also
a prerequisite for the enjoyment of human rights.

I would now like to address the situation of women
and girls in Afghanistan. In recent years, especially since
the military advances of the Taliban movement, the
international community has been intensely engaged with
the situation of women and girls in that country,
particularly in those areas under the control of the
Taliban. The abhorrent measures imposed by the Taliban
on the women and girls of Afghanistan have been
repeatedly deplored by the Secretary-General and have
been condemned in numerous resolutions of this Council,
the General Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights
and the Commission on the Status of Women.

Cultural norms and traditions in Afghanistan have
historically been conservative and characterized by a
strong division of gender roles. Political, economic and
social decisions tend to be monopolized by males.
Increased access of women to education, health services
and employment was part of State modernization projects
at the beginning of the twentieth century and continued
until the late 1970s. This led to a growth in social
demand for female education and created a female
professional elite, especially in the capital city of Kabul.
Nevertheless, the extreme economic poverty of the
country and the urban-biased development policies kept
most of the rural population, especially women, on the
periphery as concerns modernization.

Women's access to education, health, employment
and public life has been extremely negatively affected
following the Taliban military victories. Where gender
issues are concerned, the Taliban ideology amounted to a
series of edicts banning women from all public activities.
The pre-existing vulnerable situation of girls and
women - the result of continuous war, conservative
cultural norms, the destruction of social and institutional
infrastructures and the absence of policies for the
rehabilitation of the social and productive sectors - was
significantly aggravated by these Taliban edicts, especially
the ban on all types of formal education for girls.

Evidence from the field appears to indicate that in
the last 18 months there has been a slow shift in the
Taliban's position on the access of women to health
services, education and employment opportunities. This
shift is, for the most part, due to increased demand from
local communities for health and education for girls and
for income-generating opportunities for women, especially
for war widows heading households. The assistance
community has also been instrumental in preparing the
ground for this shift through continued advocacy,
principled engagement and constructive dialogue and
negotiation with the authorities.

 

It should also be noted that the restrictions once
imposed on female staff of United Nations agencies have
been eased in practice. United Nations female staff now
travel and work in Afghanistan without major difficulty.

Some relaxation of Taliban policy on women's
employment in the health sector dates back to 1997, when
women doctors, nurses and midwives were allowed to
continue their medical practice in hospitals. More recently,
in 1999, about 40 female medical students who were forced
to leave Kabul University before receiving their degrees
were allowed to continue their education. In the first quarter
of this year, the authorities in Kandahar agreed, after
lengthy negotiation with the World Food Programme and
the World Health Organization, to start a nursing school in
Kandahar for 50 female and 50 male nurses.

Progress in the supply of alternatives to formal
education in Taliban-ruled areas has been achieved through
patient and persistent negotiation and advocacy between
local communities, the assistance community and the
Taliban authorities. Community-based schools for girls and
boys are being established in rural areas, while privately
organized home-based girls' education is on the increase in
urban areas. The BBC is developing an education
programme through radio as an innovative attempt to
increase access to education in the country.

Among the most recent developments of note was the
establishment in November 1999 of nine community girls'
schools that are financed by local communities in
agreement with the authorities in Kandahar province and 13
such girls' schools in Kabul.

Currently Afghanistan has no formal economic sectors.
In practice, agriculture and small home-based crafts provide
the only opportunities for women's employment. Female
employment opportunities are limited to carpet weaving,
tailoring, embroidery, soap making and similar types of
activities. The assistance community has been involved in
projects creating this type of employment, and some of
their projects have had an impact on the lives of grass-roots
women and their families in terms of providing them with
subsistence income.

Women have no access to markets, due to their
confinement, which leads in many cases to their
exploitation by male middlemen, except in cases where
non-govemmental organizations take the responsibility of
the final marketing of their production.

Despite the different policy position adopted by the
Taliban and the United Front regarding the role of
women, women in the areas controlled by the United
Front also suffer from limited access to education, health
services and income-generating employment. The region
controlled by the United Front has been historically the
poorest of Afghanistan. Continued civil war and cultural
norms further aggravate the situation of women in that
area. However, there would be more windows of
opportunity for girls' education in this region if the
resources could be made available.

While noting the limited progress that has been
recorded recently in improving the situation of women
and girls in Afghanistan, the overall situation remains
unacceptable and requires the continuous and sustained
attention of the international community. Ms. Angela
King, Assistant Secretary-General, Special Adviser on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, will be
pleased to respond to any comments or questions
regarding the situation of women and girls.

