Mr. Heumann (Israel): I wish we did not have to
make a further statement, but today several States have
once again revealed their true intentions. They do see
today's debate not as a forum for combatting terrorism,
but as a platform to single out Israel with baseless
accusations and inflammatory remarks.

The fact is that Israel is on the front line ofcombating
terror. It may be convenient to point a finger at us, but
it does not address the heart of the problem. Rather
than obsessively focusing on Israel, representatives'
condemnation should be aimed at the real terrorist
perpetrators. It has been evident throughout today's
debate that some States have much to say when it comes
to my country. I would suggest that these countries first
take a look at their own internal issues before spreading
baseless accusations about others.

I am sure we will hear in just a moment, once
again, Iran trying to direct attention away from its true
colours, but in the Middle East where there is terror,
there is Iran. It is at the helm of destabilization and
radicalization. It is sponsoring terrorism in Lebanon,
Gaza and Yemen, to name just a few examples, and
with Hizbullah as its proxy, it is exporting it around
the world.

In particular, I also want to comment on the
remarks made by the Saudi representative. It is odd that
Saudi Arabia is so confident in its rebuke of others.
Saudi Arabia's own approach to conflict management
seems to be to launch large-scale, indiscriminate aerial
bombardments in utter disregard for the lives of men,
women and children on the ground. Thousands have
been killed in these bombings. In one incident, they
killed over 70 civilians when they directly bombed a
wedding party in Yemen.

The accusation of the Saudi representative that the
actions that my country takes to protect its citizens fuel
terror demonstrates a complete lack of understanding
of what terror is, what causes it and how to counter it.
Since the Saudi representative seems to be confused
on the subject, allow me to extend a warm invitation
to him and his advisers to attend one of Israel's many
international expert training sessions on counter-
terrorism. I am sure that will be helpful for him.
