Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
have little to add to the briefing by Ambassador Jones
Parry, whom I wish to commend for the brilliant way
he led the mission.

Since I have been invited to take the floor, I shall
simply underline a few points, most of which have
already been raised. First, with respect to Security
Council missions, it is not easy for us to organize them
due to our schedules. However, based on my
experience, having now participated in three of them, I
think they are very useful, first of all, because they
promote better understanding of the Security Council's
concerns and policies as defined in the Council's
resolutions and statements. I think that referring to and
explaining those texts to concerned parties is a positive
contribution.

Secondly, I think the missions are useful for
communicating messages on the implementation of
those texts: whether we are satisfied, or, on the
contrary, concerned.

And finally, I believe that the missions -
perhaps not the least of their contributions - also
considerably enrich the Council, because in 10 days
one can acquire a great deal of information and get a
better idea of the situation on the ground. I think that,
following a mission, all of us are greatly enriched.
With that in mind, we are considering a mission to
Central Africa in the autumn. This has already been
agreed upon in principle.

With respect to the Council's relationship with
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), which my colleague Ambassador Jones
Parry just referred to, I was struck by the similarity of
our analyses and the complementarity of our actions. I
think the Council has been right to cultivate that
relationship; we should continue to do so because our
approaches are fully complementary.

With respect to the regional approach, I shall
limit myself to noting that I am especially concerned
by the problem of the circulation of small arms and
former combatants. Different countries are not moving
towards the settlement of their crises at the same pace.
Take, for example, Sierra Leone, which has just
emerged from crisis. One of the concerns of the Sierra
Leonean authorities is that the process of settling the
conflict in the country should not be adversely affected
by transfers of weapons and combatants who might
come into Sierra Leone. It is a fact that the situation
there is not developing at the same pace, and there is
therefore a special concern at the regional level to try
to better deal with the problem of small arms and the
movement of former combatants. An arms moratorium
exists, but there is no doubt it is insufficient because
weapons are still in circulation. I do not know in what
framework, but the Security Council should, in
cooperation with ECOWAS, return to this issue. It is a
difficult issue because it is not easy to be effective in
this area. But I think that it is necessary to return to it,
as Ambassador Jones Parry suggested.

I shall comment only briefly on individual
situations. The report to be issued discusses them in
detail and makes recommendations. I would simply say
that on C6te d'Ivoire there are some encouraging signs,
but I think we have all come back rather concerned.
The Security Council has delivered its messages, which
are contained in its resolutions and statements. I think
the Council has done that clearly and firmly. It must
now follow the situation closely. Those who hinder
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement or
continue to attack the United Nations should bear their
responsibility, as the Security Council stated in its
presidential statement of 25 May 2004
(S/PRST/2004/l7).

We shall follow the situation closely. Interesting
commitments have been made. We should monitor
them closely. Those commitments relate to the
restoration of the normal functioning of the
Government and to adopting by 28 July three texts
provided for in the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement: laws
on nationality, property and the electoral commission.
In the presence of the President of the National
Assembly and the Prime Minister, President Gbagbo
said that if those laws were not adopted by 28 July, a
special session would be held in August to do so. We
shall follow that situation very closely. Commitments
were made also regarding the possible establishment of
a United Nations radio station and the signing of a
headquarters agreement.

In Liberia, we saw an increase in the strength of
United Nations force in a country which has emerged
from a war that completely destroyed it. We can see the
vastness of the task. But as for me, what I saw rather
encouraged me.

In Sierra Leone, the real problem is the exit
problem and what will happen after the United Nations
force leaves. It should not destabilize or jeopardize
Sierra Leone. Clearly, the problem is economic in
nature. Thus, economic growth - a current goal -
which is due to the current United Nations presence,
should not be lost.

With respect to Guinea-Bissau, substantial efforts
are being made. Those efforts should continue, with the
assistance of the international community. In that
connection, the fact that in this specific case, we
conducted a mission together with our colleagues from
the Economic and Social Council, including
Ambassador Kumalo, has been very useful, and we
were able to work together in that country. I think that
in Burundi we could continue the experiment.

I, too, should like to conclude by thanking the
Secretariat for all its efforts and for having made the
mission possible. It was quite a difficult mission,
because we visited many countries in only a few days.

