Mr. Krishna (India): I would like to begin by
thanking the Brazilian presidency for organizing this
debate. Brazil and India have a very special
relationship. It is a great honour for me to make my
first appearance in this Council under the Brazilian
presidency. India returns to the Security Council after
19 years. These years have been transformational for
India. We believe that an effective and efficient
Security Council is in our common interest and we will
work towards strengthening it.

Mahatma Gandhi, the father of our nation, said
that "poverty is the worst form of violence". The
Charter of the United Nations, recognizing that
violence and the lack of development are interrelated,
commits the United Nations to promoting social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom.

The international community, over the past two
decades, has invested a large amount of human and

material capital in peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding initiatives. Our collective experience in
dealing with these conflicts shows that without peace,
development suffers. At the same time, the lack of
development and prospects for economic progress
creates fertile ground for violence and instability,
which further set back development.

The unevenness of the development process and
the disparities prevailing on a regional, national, and
global scale feed into a vicious cycle. Our efforts
should therefore focus on promoting development for
all by encouraging economic activity and enhancing
livelihood security.

India brings to this table almost 60 years of
experience in overcoming many of the challenges of
transforming a colonial legacy into a modern dynamic
nation of a billion people who are trying to meet their
aspirations within a democratic system dedicated to the
rule of law. India has taken significant steps designed
to accelerate the range and depth of welfare and social
justice programmes. In recent years, they include the
assurance of 100 days of employment to every person
living in rural areas, the enactment of the Right to
Information Act to help our citizens to become more
aware, the right to education to help every Indian share
in the benefits of the country's economic progress and
also to contribute to it, and the initiative for reservation
for women in Parliament and in state legislatures to
ensure equal partnership of women in our progress and
the increase in reservation for women to 50 per cent in
local bodies.

Development has to be accompanied by
inclusivity and tolerance. In that context, I quote the
Prime Minister of India, Dr. Manmohan Singh:

"The goal of the development process must be to
include every last member of our society,
particularly those who are at the margins. This not
only broadens the support base for development,
it also strengthens the Government's ability to
perform its core developmental roles."

The lessons of inclusivity can also be applied to
international efforts in the maintenance of peace and
security. The process of implementing a peace
agreement must run along with the provision of
humanitarian and emergency assistance, resumption of
economic activity and the creation of political and
administrative institutions that improve governance
and include all stakeholders, particularly the weak and
the underprivileged.

We are greatly encouraged by the African Union's
efforts to develop post-conflict reconstruction
capacities. The success of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development - NEPAD - and the African
Peer Review Mechanism has lessons that are relevant
to national ownership.

The international community needs to ensure a
predictable and enhanced flow of resources. It is
instructive to note that the United Nations
peacekeeping budget, which is about $8 billion
annually, is more than the combined budgets of the
United Nations Development Programme and UNICEF.
It is obvious that development expenditures need to be
enhanced greatly if they are to make a dent on security
problems. We also need to ensure that collective
security mechanisms intersect with our collective
efforts for economic progress to mitigate the causes of
persistent insecurity at a global level.

Prime Minister Indira Gandhi once said that "A
nation's strength ultimately consists in what it can do
on its own, and not in what it can borrow from others".
The international community can encourage, motivate
and facilitate. It cannot impose solutions. The
temptation to create a new orthodoxy, of talking down
rather than of listening, must be avoided at all costs.

No country has contributed as many peacekeepers
to as many peacekeeping operations as India. Our
peacekeepers have been early peacebuilders. We are
also committed to contribute, bilaterally and
multilaterally, to development initiatives. To that end,
we are working through the IBSA - India, Brazil and
South Africa - mechanism, with the African Union
and with regional African groupings to promote South-
South perspectives on development and security.

The international structure for maintaining peace
and security and peacebuilding needs to be reformed.
Global powers and the capacities to address problems
are much more dispersed than they were six decades
ago. The current framework must address these
realities.

We understand the expectations that accompany
our Council membership. We are acutely conscious of
the need for effective coordination between the
Permanent Five and the elected members, especially
those whose credentials for permanent membership

stand acknowledged. On issues concerning
international peace and security, all of us are on the
same page. I am happy to note that this process of
closer cooperation is making headway.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming India's
commitment to making its vast experience in more than
six decades of nation-building available to global
efforts towards greater development and improved
security.

