Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
would like to reiterate that deliberations related to
climate change are very much within the purview of
the General Assembly, the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and other
United Nations organs and entities. However, my
delegation understands the rationale for discussing the
subject in the Security Council, because at present the
effects of climate change pose a serious threat to
human security.

Climate change is a threat multiplier that
exacerbates existing negative trends, tensions and
instability, overburdening States and regions that are
already fragile and conflict-prone. The risks are not
just of a humanitarian nature; they also include
political and security risks that directly affect both
national and international interests, requiring a
comprehensive policy response to deal with food,
water and energy shortages. The areas most affected

 

will be those under strong demographic pressure and
with a massive influx of environmental migrants. That
will lead to political, religious and ethnic
radicalization, which will have an impact on human
rights.
It is well known that attainment of the
Millennium Development Goals would be at
considerable risk because climate change, if
unmitigated, may well wipe out years of development
efforts, increasing poor health conditions,
unemployment and educational resources.

My delegation recommends further strengthening
the UNFCCC in collaboration with other United
Nations entities to address the impact of climate
change on international security in a comprehensive
and effective manner. It is thus critical to further
enhance knowledge and assess the capacities of
regional bodies and Member States and to improve our
efforts in the prevention of, and preparedness for early
responses to, climate-related disasters and conflicts,
through monitoring and early-warning systems. We
must also strengthen civilian protection and disaster-
management mechanisms and build capacity in
personnel and equipment. The financial implications
for such responses should be identified and considered
by the United Nations, for improved dialogue between
countries on both sides of the climate change spectrum.

Climate change and its security dimension can
strain international relations as well as donor capacity.
Still, the issue is becoming a driver for improving and
reforming global, regional and local governance.

My delegation would particularly like to
emphasize the extremely necessary and critical role
that United Nations-led preventive diplomacy can play
in Central Asia and other regions of the world in
addressing the scarcity of water resources, which could
lead to tensions and even conflicts. That was confirmed
by Mr. Achim Steiner in his written statement, where
he referred to the assessment of the Environmental and
Security Initiative in the Amu Darya River Basin in the
Central Asian Region.

Kazakhstan has been contributing to the United
Nations effort to mitigate the effects of climate change
by fulfilling its obligations, and so it established its
Council of Sustainable Development and the
Department of the Kyoto Protocol. The country made
quantitative commitments for the post-Kyoto period to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 25 per cent by

 

2050. The country proposed to grant the International
Fund for Saving the Aral Sea the status of a United
Nations institution.

The Aral Sea crisis 4 which is human-made, as
is climate change - is well known. The Sea has lost
three fourths of its water, spelling disaster for millions
of people living around it and impacting the
environment of the Eurasian continent. The countries
of the Central Asian Region need the assistance of the
world community to rehabilitate the Sea. Kazakhstan
stands ready to fully contribute to the multilateral
effort 4 including building on the Cancun
recommendations - to reduce the threats of climate
change at the global and regional levels.

