Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation would like to thank Italy and you,
Mr. President, for convening today's constructive
debate. We wish you every success at the helm of the
Security Council this month.

We associate ourselves with other Member States
that have reiterated the importance of Security Council
resolutions for dealing with human trafficking,
which undermines the rule of law, thereby fostering
continuing transnational organized crime that in turn
leads to further instability. This very serious issue
demands that we work to combat various different types
of crime. For that reason, Iraq has ratified a number
of related international and regional conventions,
including the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its supplementary
Protocols, which we ratified in 2009. In that regard,
in 2012 we enacted law No. 28 on anti-trafficking,
establishing the necessary mechanisms for delivering
the required assistance to victims of human trafficking
and for combating the crime and its consequences
generally, as well as for ensuring that perpetrators be
held accountable for such crimes, which undermine
human dignity.

We also have a number of constitutional sections
that criminalize forced labour and slavery as well as
trafficking in women and children. In the past three
years, serious crimes have been committed against
Yezidi women, and others, at the hands of the terrorists
ofDa'esh. As a result, under our aforementioned law No.
28 of 2012, my Government set up a commission within
the Ministry of the Interior. The commission brings
together representatives from the various provinces and
governorates with the aim of formulating programmes
and plans for countering trafficking in persons and
ensuring that victims and witnesses are protected.
It also enables us to exchange information and share
experiences with various relevant bodies, neighbouring
States and international organizations. We have also
launched a number of awareness-raising campaigns to
spread a culture of fighting human trafficking, working
with civil-society organizations and academic and
religious groups.

Human trafficking and similar crimes perpetrated
by terrorists, including slavery, sexual exploitation,
terrorism and forced labour, enable them to finance
themselves. Iraq has suffered from such crimes, such
as the abduction by members of Da'esh of thousands
of Iraqi citizens, especially women and children and in
particular people from the Yezidi community, who have
become victims of trafficking and endured inhumane
and degrading treatment. In that regard, we urge these
victims' countries of destination not to treat them as
criminals or as illegal migrants. Rather than being
arrested or forcibly repatriated, they should be given
help. For our part, we are providing material reparations
for victims of human trafficking, including victims of
Da'esh, with a particular focus on women and girls.
In that regard, our judicial authorities are striving
to build the capacities of the relevant institutions in
order to prosecute the perpetrators of these crimes,
establish criminal justice and protect citizens against
such crimes.

Enforcing anti-trafficking laws is crucial, and
while we now have law no. 28 of 2012 and a number
of mechanisms for implementing it, what that really
requires is that we train our law-enforcement bodies in
tackling such transnational organized crime, bearing
in mind that such crimes may fall under several
jurisdictions at once. We must therefore emphasize the
importance of judicial cooperation in putting an end
to such crimes. In order to Show our determination
to combat human trafficking, we have been working
to stop traffickers and terrorist groups abducting
people and forcing them to cross Iraq's borders. In that
regard, we contributed to the drafting of the political
declaration on the implementation of the Global Action
Plan to Combat Trafficking in Persons, just adopted by
the General Assembly in September as resolution 72/ 1.

The responsibility for this issue is a collective
one, shared by every State. Iraq therefore calls on all
Member States to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 2195 (2014),
2331 (2016) and 2379 (2017). We also call on Member
States to support us in dealing with these challenges.
My delegation appreciates Italy's efforts during the
drafting of resolution 2388 (2017), which the Council
adopted unanimously today, and of which we were a
sponsor. The resolution enables us to better identify
the real and potential victims of human trafficking,
particularly unaccompanied minors, and to ensure
a coordinated response, and it will help the various
United Nations missions on the ground fight networks
involved in human trafficking. Furthermore, we now
have a great deal of experience in fighting human
trafficking, and an investigative team is being
established in that regard, in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 2379 (2017).

Lastly, Iraq calls on all States to abide by their
commitments and scale up their efforts to combat
human trafficking so that we can eradicate it. We need
the Council's help in tackling these problems, and we
need to be able to work cooperatively with various
States on the political, economic and security fronts.
The fact is that human trafficking is a global issue, and
no State can confront it alone.

