Mr. Fall (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
welcomed the Security Council decision taken
following its public meeting last 29 and 30 January to
set up an ad hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa. The Group is fortunate to
have the Permanent Representative of Mauritius as its
Chairman.

Sir, I should like to congratulate you warmly on
assuming the presidency of the Council. We greatly
appreciate your personal commitment to continue the
work of your predecessors in the presidency. I should
also like sincerely to thank all other Council members
for doing their utmost to make the issues of Africa
their mission.

Regrettably, it has now become a ritual that
whenever we discuss the situation in Africa we hear the
same hackneyed descriptions: it is a poor
neighbourhood on the edge of the planetary village; it
is a small, forgotten spot in the world, where the worst
horrors pile up one on top of the other - armed
conflicts, countless refugees and displaced persons and
the apocalyptic ravages of HIV/AIDS. Faced with these
tragedies and their dreadful consequences - and the
Africans themselves are primarily at fault - the
United Nations has to reflect, together with us, on
"new and innovative initiatives" - to use a favorite
expression of the Secretary-General - because this
could eliminate or at least significantly reduce the
suffering of people in Africa.

Turning more specifically to the issue of conflict
in Africa, regional institutions are firmly committed to
seeking political situations with, of course, the
irreplaceable assistance of the United Nations. Thus, in
Angola, Burundi and the Great Lakes region, for
example, there are encouraging prospects, and those
countries may soon regain the joy of stability, peace
and development.

The role of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) in maintaining peace and
stability is well known, and is recognized even here in
the Security Council. Here, the most eloquent case is
that of Sierra Leone, where elections have just been
held with the support of the international community,
and to its great satisfaction.

Turning to the work of the ad hoc Working
Group - fortunately chaired, as I said by the
Permanent Representative of Mauritius - we
congratulate its members on the alacrity and serious-
mindedness with which they began their work, thus
opening up new prospects for the Security Council to
reduce tension and to ensure the intelligent
management of conflicts. In that spirit, Senegal fully
endorses the approach taken by the Group: that it
should look in depth at how to integrate the Economic
and Social Council, the new United Nations Office in
West Africa, in Dakar, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and civil society in working on strategies
for a new kind of productive partnership.

The vital cooperation and coordination between
the Working Group and the ad hoc Advisory Group on
African Countries Emerging from Conflict will be
crucial in bringing about an improvement in the
working methods of the various United Nations
structures and in enhancing the coordination of their
activities. My country attaches the greatest importance
to diligent consideration of the Secretary-General's
recommendations in the relevant reports, particularly
with respect to Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic.

On the subject of conflict prevention, I would
like, just as the Foreign Minister of Senegal has done,
to highlight the enlightening example of Guinea-
Bissau. This is a typical case of a country where there
is every indication of social chaos. Yet, the
international community, sitting by as spectator, is
waiting for the criteria of good governance and
transparency to be met before taking action. The
Government and the people of Guinea-Bissau are
making enormous efforts to get their country out of
crisis. We reiterate our urgent appeal to the entire
international community, including the Bretton Woods
institutions, to quickly provide the necessary assistance
to Guinea-Bissau, as well as to the Central African
Republic, to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
soon to Madagascar, to help them solve problems
relating to the functioning of their institutions and to
the implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process. Also, Senegal truly believes
that, with valuable input from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Guinea-Bissau can soon find
its way back to the path of growth and development.

Senegal would like to draw the attention of the ad
hoc Working Group, and of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa to a scourge
that has become endemic in many African countries,
particularly in West Africa. I refer to the proliferation
and illegal trafficking in small arms; this is very
widespread and has an impact on the stability, security
and development of countries in the subregion. The ad
hoc Working Group, working with the Office of the
Special Representative for West Africa, could really
help countries more effectively to mount the various
initiatives under way at the national and subregional
levels, if not at a continent-wide level.

Senegal supports setting up a working partnership
with the main subregional players in priority areas such
as early warning, strengthening human resources,
capacity building, development and the processes of
disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration.

While the Working Group works to implement its
programme of work, it is essential that there should
also be functional support and participation on the part
of all partners in civil society. The international
community believes that civil society is extremely
important here as a fully fledged partner. It ensures a
breadth of representation that must be encouraged.

Senegal believes that conflict settlement and the
eradication of poverty in Africa is not something that
can be done by governments or public institutions
alone. The international community has to take account
of, and more deeply involve, other groups and sectors,
such as women, youth, the elderly, non-governmental
organizations, trade unions, private enterprises,
transnational corporations, and so forth.

Experience shows that the only way out of
conflict is to enable people to fully and freely enjoy
peace, socio-economic security and human rights. This
means that political leaders and others at the decision-
making levels must respect the principles of a state of
law based on democracy and good governance.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU) is now
becoming the African Union and with the adoption of
the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD) there are hopes for the future. These hopes
have three anchors: the credo of the crucial
responsibility of Africans themselves, the essence of
the partnership and the belief in mutual respect.
NEPAD, in addition to economic, financial and
commercial opportunities, is also a globally integrated
strategic framework for freeing Africa from the
disasters that it suffers from: endemic poverty, bad
governance, fratricidal conflict, and so forth.

This is why Senegal fully endorses continually
strengthening the cooperation among the United
Nations, the OAU the and subregional organizations in
the areas of conflict prevention, management and
settlement. Once the Dakar office is up and running,
we hope the ad hoc Working Group will visit West
Africa to learn at first-hand about the situation there.

I now conclude by repeating what the Secretary-
General said: "Armed conflict is the worst enemy of
development." Further, His Holiness, Pope John
Paul II, reminded us that "development" is the other
name of"peace".

