Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, we are very grateful to Under-Secretaries-General
Alain Le Roy and Susana Malcorra and Mr. Annabi for
their presence at today's debate and for their
statements. We would also like to take this opportunity
to wish Ambassador Butagira every success in the
future.

Without a doubt, convening this debate is a
constructive and necessary initiative, which opens the
prospect of a relevant collective discussion within the
Organization on the challenges facing peacekeeping
operations, with a view to enabling them to continue to
be an effective and crucial tool of the United Nations.
Undoubtedly, the results and recommendations that
will stem from this analysis will make it possible to
identify the areas where we need more action as well as
best practices that can be implemented in the future,
given the growing complexity of the international
situations in which United Nations peace operations
find themselves.

I would like to very briefly speak about five
aspects. The first relates to the decision-making
process. For Mexico, the decision-making process
behind the establishment of a peacekeeping operation
is crucial to success. In adopting decisions for the
establishment and definition of mandates, it is crucial
to incorporate a comprehensive strategic vision that
considers political, logistical and financial aspects and
has clear and realistic objectives. Likewise, Mexico
believes that this process should be inclusive and
should not simply be limited to a group of countries.

This process has to be based on a solid, high-
level political approach within the Organization. That
is necessary if the Organization is to have the ability to
offer a prompt and effective response. Consensus and
genuine cooperation of the parties to a conflict that
gives rise to a peacekeeping operation are also crucial
for ensuring the operation's viability.

Secondly, there is the question of mandates. In
our opinion, mandates must provide very specific
political guidelines that help define the conditions that
will determine the success of the mission, including the
way in which the distinct components of the mission
are integrated and unified, the nature of the
relationship with regional organizations and with the
different actors in the field, in order to achieve
effective cooperation. In this effort, we must also
consider the various components of peacekeeping
operation mandates - military, technical,
humanitarian and legal aspects, among others - which
also involve the coordination of a wide and diverse
group of actors.

Thirdly, there is the multidimensional nature of
peacekeeping operations. Undoubtedly, operations are
increasingly complex, encompassing a large number of
political, social and economic variables, which range
from the establishment of the rule of law to ensuring
the political viability of a State, taking into account the
regional and local environments. Scenarios constantly
evolve, and the nature of conflicts is always changing.
No two countries are alike, and therefore no two
peacekeeping operations can be alike.
Furthermore, it is clear that, in these
multidimensional operations, threats to peace require a
collective approach based on different types of
cooperation. Mexico acknowledges that the
cooperation between the Organization, particularly the
Security Council, and regional and subregional
organizations is increasingly necessary for collective
security, provided that regional organizations have the
needed legal and material capacity. The experience of
United Nations peace missions in Africa, for instance,
has highlighted the importance of having not only a
common strategic vision between the African Union
and the United Nations, but also a broader strategy
involving conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-
conflict reconstruction.

In that context, it is very important that, from
outset, we ensure coordination with United Nations
programmes and agencies and with the various regional
organizations in the field. A challenge that we cannot
overlook is the fact that the lasting solution to a
conflict means that we have to go beyond military and
security measures, incorporating broader and more
effective long-term responses that address to the root
causes of a conflict and promote future stability.
Otherwise, the recurrence of conflict in a given State
will be the rule, and not the exception. Here, we agree
with Mr. Annabi.

Fourthly, there is the question of the protection of
civilians. This element is essential as we seek to
strengthen peacekeeping operations, especially when it
has special significance given the specific
circumstances. This is a sensitive subject, but it is
important to avoid the creation of vacuums between
mandates defined in Security Council resolutions and
their implementation on the ground. In this regard, we
find extremely relevant the independent study that the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and Department of Peacekeeping Operations are
carrying out on the implementation of civilian
protection mandates in peacekeeping operations, whose
objective is to review the stages of the process of
developing these mandates, and to carry out an analysis
from the stage of the negotiation of the wording of a
resolution to its implementation in the field.

Finally, there is also the issue of effective
coordination and planning for peacekeeping operations.
We believe that it is essential that the Security Council
support an effective planning and coordination
mechanism that includes a special representative of the
Secretary-General in charge of coordinating and
managing a mission's military, civilian and
humanitarian components. It is an inescapable fact that
the complexity of peacekeeping missions requires that
they be given realistic, comprehensive and viable
mandates. However, in order not to doom them to
failure, they must also be accorded better planning,
capabilities and resources.

In the United Nations context, Mexico believes
that it is essential that the Security Council launch an
ongoing dialogue between the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, which is currently chaired
by Japan, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, otherwise known as the C-34, the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding
Commission, troop-contributing countries and the
programmes and agencies of the United Nations on the
ground, especially the United Nations Development
Programme, UNICEF and the High Commissioner for
Refugees. It is also crucial to establish a permanent
dialogue with major contributors of financing for
peacekeeping operations. Along the same lines, it is
also necessary to consider the issue of the sharing of
financial responsibility between the Security Council
and the General Assembly when in comes to
peacekeeping operations, especially given the growth
in such operations.

In conclusion, it is a fact that the various current

mandates of peacekeeping operations - from
mediation and intervention functions to those of post-
conflict reconstruction - include tasks that are

difficult to reconcile with the resources available.
Political constraints and the financial limitations of the
Organization should therefore be taken into account at
the time mandates are established. Few things could be
more damaging to the United Nations than to establish
missions that have no chance of meeting the goals set
for them. Mexico believes that, in order to ensure the
credibility and legitimacy of the United Nations, it is
necessary to set up peacekeeping missions endowed
with the appropriate financial, political and military
resources to fulfil their mandates in the way I have
described.

