Mr. Rock (Canada): I have the honour today of
speaking on behalf of Canada, Australia and New
Zealand. I first want to thank the Philippines for
hosting this open debate, and to thank as well the
Secretary-General and the Emergency Relief
Coordinator for their candid and compelling reports on
this subject of enormous importance.

I will devote my remarks today primarily to the
Security Council's role in protecting civilians in armed
conflict. The record shows that over the past five years,
the Council has made critical strides in adopting a
range of measures that recognize the complex nature of
contemporary conflict and the fact that the plight of
civilians must be effectively addressed as part of any
comprehensive international response.

However, despite that progress, the international
community has in past months witnessed the deliberate
targeting, displacement and abuse of civilians by
parties to more than two dozen conflicts, all displaying
a shocking disregard for international human rights and
humanitarian law. We have also witnessed the abuse of
those no longer taking active part in hostilities. Recent
experience has also demonstrated that peace
agreements do not, in and of themselves, provide
sufficient protection to civilian populations.

In December 2003, the Council (see S/PRST/2003/27) reaffirmed its central commitment to
civilian protection and asserted its intent to use the
aide-memoire and the lO-point plan then before it to
make Council responses more effective in this regard.
Today's debate affords the first opportunity to measure
the Council's actions against that pledge. Regrettably,
we can only conclude that a significant gap remains
between Council commitments and concrete action. Let
me identify four examples.

First, we note that lack of access and lack of
security remain the greatest obstacles to effective
humanitarian action - obstacles that, at least in part,
the Council has the authority to publicly recognize.
The Council and the General Assembly have it within
their power to declare any country where United
Nations and associated staff operate to be at
exceptional risk. Such a decision would provide those
personnel with enhanced legal protections. But even in
situations such as that in Afghanistan, where five aid
staff working for Medecins sans frontieres were
recently murdered, a declaration of exceptional risk has
not been made, despite the Council's August 2003
commitment (see resolution 1502 (2003)) to make
better use of this tool. Accordingly, Canada, Australia
and New Zealand urge the Council to make such
declarations in appropriate cases.

The second example is the issue of the Council
making more frequent use in appropriate cases of powers
within its authority to assist efforts on the ground. For
example, in West Africa rebels continue to move across
borders, and there are difficulties in implementing
sustainable disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation
and reintegration programmes. These problems are
worsened by the absence of monitoring mechanisms to
enforce arms embargoes and by the Council's all too
infrequent use of both monitoring and such embargoes
to suppress conflict and to sanction those who would
seek to benefit from the economy of war.

Thirdly, the Council's failure to systematically
condemn widespread instances of sexual and gender-
based violence in specific conflicts also means that
actions to address such violence, including improved
monitoring and reporting and physical protection,
remain unsupported.

Fourth, and still more troubling, is the fact that
the Council continues to resist responding to conflicts
of which it is not formally seized, despite documented
evidence in many cases of grave violations of human
rights and of humanitarian law. This sends a troubling
message with respect to impunity and compliance with
international norms.

The situation in Darfur, the Sudan, is a
particularly egregious example of that reluctance. On
25 May the Security Council finally adopted a strong
presidential statement (S/PRST/2004/18) on the
conflict in Darfur, but that was more than five months
after aid agencies had begun actively raising the alarm
and two months after fact-finding experts of the
Commission on Human Rights and the Emergency
Relief Coordinator had expressed their gravest
concerns. Prior to the statement's adoption, the Council
had in fact received only informal briefings on the
crisis, and the presence of relevant actors to provide
those briefings was facilitated grudgingly and only
after considerable procedural wrangling.

We appreciate that the Security Council is now
seized of the situation in Darfur. We hope and expect
that the Council will follow up appropriately. In our
view, the Security Council should call on the parties to
do everything in their power to end war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed in that region, to
prevent the commission of further crimes and to bring
to justice those who are responsible. The Security
Council should also call on the parties to the conflict in
Darfur to respect international obligations on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, to grant safe
and unhindered humanitarian access, to disarm the
militias and to ensure the safe and voluntary return of
the displaced persons.

In our respectful View, the Security Council has
been too slow to respond to the emergency in Darfur.
Such inexcusable delays put at risk the lives of those
that the Council is charged with protecting. The
Council's moral authority is underpinned by its
willingness to respond effectively and promptly to
threats to international peace and security. To preserve
and to enhance that authority, it must demonstrate
greater resolve in addressing even sensitive and
politically challenging situations. We stress that some
of the key tools required for a more effective response are
already at the disposal of the Council. We encourage the
Secretary-General and the Emergency Relief Coordinator
to continue to bring to the Council's attention serious
situations that are not on its formal agenda, as was
recently done in the case of northern Uganda.

In urging more resolute action, we also hope to
prompt more creative efforts. We recognize that not all
actions can or should be public. Other measures can be
considered, such as discreet Council fact-finding
missions and communications between the Council
President and the parties to a conflict. Canada, Australia
and New Zealand also fully support the graduated
approach outlined by the Secretary-General in paragraph
39 of his report. Some existing Council resolutions
help identify needed triggers for response. One thinks
of paragraph 10 of resolution 1265 (1999) in that regard.
We fully believe that the Council can meet these
important challenges; the report of the Secretary-General
lays out several key recommendations in that regard.

Canada, Australia and New Zealand welcome the
attention given in the Secretary-General's report to
regional dimensions and responses in the protection of
civilians. The creation of a culture of protection
requires that norms developed by the Council be
adapted to regional realities and be reflected in
coherent frameworks for action. My own country,
Canada, has therefore been pleased to work with the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in
sponsoring regional seminars on the protection of
civilians, the most recent of which was held with
hemispheric partners in Mexico this past March.

We fully endorse the Secretary-General's call for
the Security Council to commission a study aimed at
improving the monitoring and reporting of cross-border
issues in crisis and post-conflict situations. With
reliable data, the Council, in partnership with regional
actors, will be better placed to respond in a more
effective and timely manner to violence against
civilians. A key issue that must be addressed in this
context is the presence of armed elements and
combatants in refugee camps and settlements and its
potential to undermine regional stability. Again, my
own country, Canada, was pleased to fund the experts
meeting noted in the Secretary-General's report, and
we encourage United Nations agencies to bring this
issue to the Council for its information and action,
when needed.

Regional institutions and mechanisms must also
be strengthened and engaged on the protection agenda.
In the Pacific, Australia and New Zealand, together
with other members of the Pacific Islands Forum, have
been active in mounting regional responses to security
crises, including most recently in the Solomon Islands.
Canada is proud to work with the African Union on the
establishment of an African Union special representative
for the protection of civilians. The creation of that office
opens up the possibility that there will be an engaged
and effective African advocate for war-affected
populations across the continent. We regard that as an
exciting development, and we encourage the Security
Council to establish ongoing communication with the
new mechanism.

(spoke in French)

The Secretary-General has outlined many
concrete measures that can be taken to strengthen the
Council's ability to respond to threats to civilians in
armed conflict. However, tools such as enhanced
monitoring are useful only to the extent that the
information transmitted is acted on.

Allow me to address the question of impunity.
The implementation of a culture of protection also
requires that attacks against civilians be recognized as
crimes and that those guilty be punished. The Security
Council and Member States bear a special
responsibility, requiring them to ensure that those who
perpetrate crimes against civilians participating in
United Nations operations are brought to justice. In
that connection, we vigorously support efforts to
extend the scope of the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel so that
civilian personnel employed in United Nations
operations will enjoy the protection provided by the
Convention.
(spoke in English)

In conclusion, Canada, Australia and New
Zealand urge the Council to give full consideration to
the report before it and to respond quickly to those
areas identified for follow-up. In that regard, we call on
the Council to consider adopting a new resolution on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict - one that
will be aimed at addressing gaps in the current agenda.
Canada, Australia and New Zealand will remain
actively engaged and supportive of those efforts.

Ultimately of course, Member States themselves
must take primary responsibility for ensuring the
protection of their own people. Indeed, as argued in the
recent report of the International Commission on
Intervention and State Sovereignty, entitled The
Responsibility to Protect, this is a responsibility
implicit in the very concept of State sovereignty. Much
more can and should be done by Member States. But
when they fail to assume their responsibility, the
Security Council must act. It is evident that the Council
can and must do more.

This morning, the Emergency Relief Coordinator
reminded us of the international community's failure to
exercise our collective responsibility to protect
civilians in Rwanda a decade ago. Clearly, much work
remains to be done to ensure that a similar tragedy will
never happen again. The Council will ultimately be
judged on its ability to prevent such circumstances and
to protect the most vulnerable. It is a challenge that we
simply must meet.

