Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his report on the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We would also like to thank Tania Hary for
her briefing.

We are regrettably compelled to note that over
and over again when we discuss the situation in the
Middle East in this Chamber, we have to talk about
the deteriorating overall situation in the region. But
instead of heeding the calls to consolidate international
efforts to resolve long-standing and new crises, we
see unilateral actions that are completely out of step
with a logic of compromise and collective action.
First and foremost, I mean the problem that is central
to the whole region, the issue of the settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Two days ago, the United
States took yet another step undermining the entire
complex of agreements on the issue. It was announced
that the United States authorities no longer consider
Israel's construction of settlements in the West Bank
a violation of international law. Furthermore, it was
underscored that this was a recognition of the so-called
realities on the ground. As far as we are concerned,
such realities are unacceptable and unlawful. It is clear
that this move will worsen an already tense situation
in the efforts to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

Of a piece with that statement are the decisions of
the United States Administration on Jerusalem and the
illegitimate recognition of Israel's sovereignty over the
occupied Syrian Golan, which are gross violations of
international law and resolution 497 (1981) in particular.
In that context, we want to once again affirm that the
Golan is unquestionably Syrian territory, occupied
and then illegally annexed by Israel. Israel's rocket
fire on Syria has intensified in the past few days and
runs directly counter to the efforts to normalize the
situation in the region. This kind of action is seriously
worrying and abhorrent. We affirm the principled
position reflected in resolution 2334 (2016), according
to which Israel's establishment of settlements in the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, has no legal force and is a violation of
international law, as well as one of the main obstacles
to achieving a two-State solution and ajust, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

As far as we are concerned, the internationally
recognized foundations for a settlement in the
Middle East, including the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Madrid
principles, remain unshakeable. Besides that, like our
colleagues, we are concerned about the escalation
around the Gaza Strip that has been accompanied by
the launch of rockets into Israel and retaliatory shelling.
We also need active efforts at the international level to
improve the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza.

We are more than ever convinced that today it has
become absolutely vital to take practical steps to extract
the peace process from its dangerous impasse. First
and foremost, the policies promoting Israeli settlement
activity and the demolition of Palestinian property
must cease. Russia will continue its efforts in bilateral
and other formats aimed at reviving direct dialogue
between the Palestinians and Israelis. As with most of
our colleagues, it is clear to us that the only way out of
all of this spiralling collection of problems is through
concerted international and regional efforts, with
the United Nations and its Security Council playing
a central role. We believe that the Quartet, whose
functions have been endorsed by numerous Security
Council resolutions, is still relevant and needed more
than ever.

Last week's vote on the Middle East bloc
draft resolutions in the Fourth Committee clearly
demonstrated the international community's growing
support for the principles that constitute the basis
for a settlement. We also believe that the support
that has been shown to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) is extremely important. UNRWA's activity
has a political dimension as well as a humanitarian one,
and an important stabilizing effect in the Palestinian
territories and the countries of the Middle East. Israel
and Palestine have major religious significance for
hundreds of thousands of adherents of the monotheistic
religions, and the swift establishment of a lasting peace
in those lands is in the interests of every Christian,
Muslim and Jew.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
unresolved problem of Palestine, together with the years
ofinstability in the region as a whole, is building up the
potential there for protests and radicalism in general.
The situation demands concerted efforts on the part of
responsible members of the international community.
The Secretary-General was instructed to work on that
issue under resolution 598 (1987). The need to develop
a sustainable mechanism for collective security in
the region through dialogue on an equal footing is
becoming ever more urgent. Russia's initiative in that
regard is aimed both at unblocking conflict situations
and developing measures for confidence and control.

