Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me, first
of all, to express to you, Mr. President, the satisfaction
of the delegation of Mali at seeing your country, the
People's Republic of China, preside over the Security
Council this month. China is a friend of Mali and a
long-time partner, to which we wish every success and
pledge our full cooperation during its presidency. At
the same time, I would like to congratulate Angola,
also a friend of Mali, for its outstanding leadership
of the Council during the previous month, one of the
highlights of which was the field visit that took place
from 4 to 9 March by the 15 members of the Council,
who went to Mali, Guinea-Bissau and Senegal. I
welcome the positive results of the visit, and I reiterate
the congratulations of my delegation to all Member
States for the quality of the exchanges with all of the
stakeholders in the peace process. Allow me also to
pay tribute to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
laudable ongoing efforts on behalf of international
peace and security, in particular when it comes to
resolving the crisis in Mali. I also extend my gratitude
to his Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), our brother and friend
Mahamat Saleh Annadif, with whom the Government
of Mali has a very good relationship of cooperation. We
look forward to that continuing in the future.

I am also pleased to commend the efforts ofAlgeria,
which has been leading the international mediation and
is Chair of the Agreement Monitoring Committee, as
well as the efforts of the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the European
Union, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
France, Burkina Faso, Mauritania, the Niger, Nigeria,
Chad and the United States of America. I also thank
all countries that contribute troops to MINUSMA and
would like to remember the Blue Helmets who have
fallen in the line of duty and all victims of the crisis
in Mali.

The delegation of Mali takes note of the report
(S/2016/28l) of the Secretary-General under
consideration and would like to thank its friend,
Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing and, above
all, for his ongoing support for the peace efforts in Mali.
With regard to the peace process in Mali, the
Security Council, as I already mentioned, carried out
useful work during its field visit, as the visit allowed
members to see at first-hand the progress achieved
and the difficulties that remain, but also to listen and
engage in an exchange with all stakeholders about
their concerns and expectations. Those frank and
direct interactions strengthened the conviction of
the Government of Mali that it is up to the Malians
themselves to take their destiny into their own hands and
to commit resolutely to implementing the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali with the support of
the international community.

The assurances given by the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita,
on 6 March, at the fruitful meeting he had with members
of the Security Council echoed that spirit. Members
will recall that on that occasion President Keita left
no shadow of a doubt with regard to the willingness
and determination of the Government of Mali to
fully play its role to speed up the implementation of
the peace agreement in an environment rid of the
spectre of terrorism, violent extremism and all
forms of transnational organized crime. Similarly,
during the meeting between the Government of Mali
and the Security Council delegation, on 5 March,
the Ministers outlined the various measures taken
by their Government within the framework of the
implementation of the Agreement.

Members therefore have all the information about
the evolution of the peace process in my country.
Nonetheless, the current meeting on the review of the
Secretary-General's report on the situation in Mali
gives my delegation an opportunity to return to certain
observations made by the Council during the meeting
on the conclusions of that visit to the field, which
are referred to in the current report under review. I
am sure that all members noted some things during
their visit. First, I am sure they noted the significant
advances that have been made in the implementation of
agreement, which are largely thanks to the leadership
and personal efforts of the President of Mali. Secondly,
I am sure that members also noted the resurgence in
terrorist attacks, which are today the main obstacle to
the implementation of the peace agreement. Thirdly,
members also underscored the need to take into account
the regional and transregional nature of the challenges
that are confronting Mali. Finally, they recognized the
incompatibility of MINUSMA's current mandate with
its operating environment, as well as the Mission's
operational shortcomings, in particular in terms of
training and equipment. With regard to the last point,
I would like to briefly recall that the Government
of Mali, during its discussions with the Security
Council delegation, outlined a series of actions whose
undertaking would improve the position of MINUSMA
by making it more proactive.

The recommendations of the Government of Mali
were aimed at ensuring that MINUSMA operated
in a more effective and efficient way and revolved
around bringing together the Mission itself and the
Malian defence and security forces, as well as regional
initiatives, which will support all those efforts. The
Malian Government's recommendations were also
the subject of extensive discussions as part of the
United Nations inter-agency strategic review mission
for Mali, led by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. El-Ghassim Wane. We
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
him on his appointment to that important post. The
review of the quarterly report, in June 2016, to which
the conclusions of this review will be appended and
which has been launched for the purpose of renewing
MINUSMA's mandate, will offer us an opportunity to
go into greater depth about the concerns that we have
about MINUSMA.

At this juncture, I would like to recall our common
view that MINUSMA, despite being almost entirely up
to strength in terms of troops and police, is nonetheless
struggling to fully assume its role of stabilizing the
country and supporting the Government of Mali for
the full implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation. Beyond the attacks targeting the civilian
population and the Malian defence and security forces,
the Mission itself is now the target of terrorist groups.
The heavy toll of more than 80 Blue Helmets killed
in just three years of the existence of the MINUSMA
makes it, unfortunately, the deadliest peacekeeping
operation currently. That explains why the Government
of Mali believes a lot is riding on the renewal of the
mandate of MINUSMA and why the mandate must
take into account the current security context, which
is marked by a resurgence and intensification of the
terrorist threat.

The Government of Mali, commensurate with its
responsibilities arising from the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation, has undertaken a series of actions
focused on the following priority areas. First, in terms
of political and institutional reforms, and this is not an
exhaustive list but I would like to underscore certain
actions - and Mr. Ladsous touched on some of these
in his own briefing - namely, the appointment, in
January, of governors for the newly created regions of
Taoudenni and Me'naka. I would also point out that, in
March, a new governor was appointed for Kidal, which
had been without state Government for approximately
three years. I would like to make it clear that all three
governors are from communities in northern Mali.

I also draw the Council's attention to the adoption
by the Council of Ministers, on 24 February, of the
draft bill and decree relating to the interim authorities
called upon to manage the territorial collectivities,
especially in the northern regions of Mali. I am pleased
to announce that the National Assembly of Mali has
just adopted, at its meeting on 31 March, the texts that
were submitted by the Government. They are simply
awaiting their enactment by the President and, above
all, the appointment of the leadership of those interim
authorities.

Allow me also to inform the Council that we have
begun the constitutional review process by drawing up
draft decrees and a timetable, especially to incorporate
the provisions pertaining to the implementation of a
second chamber, which is one of the key elements of
the peace agreement.

There is also the issue of the holding of local and
regional elections, which were postponed to foster a
more inclusive approach. We hope the elections can
be held as soon as possible, in particular following the
establishment of the interim authorities and once the
security situation on the ground has improved. We have
also established and installed regional development
agencies in all regions of Mali and in the district of
Bamako.

Turning to the issue of defence and security, I draw
members' attention to the effective establishment of
bodies responsible for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, as well as security sector reform
initiatives. I also underscore the efforts undertaken
by the Government of Mali to provide support for
combatants from the signatory movements as a precursor
to and during the effective start of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. I also refer
to the identification of 24 sites to be prepared by
MINUSMA and the start of construction on three
other sites.

With regard to justice, national reconciliation and
humanitarian efforts, I would like to note that basic
social services have been relaunched in the north,
where security conditions allow, with the cooperation
of the Platform coalition of armed groups and the
Coordination des mouvements de 1'Azawad. In addition,
the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission has
begun its work. In order to improve its inclusivity and
increase the representation of the signatory groups, the
Government of Mali has adopted a decree increasing
the number of commissioners from 15 to 25.

I should also note that steps have been taken to
further strengthen trust among the parties, including
through the release of prisoners. Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous also touched on the very important
issue of trust, and I think that significant steps have
been taken to genuinely improve the atmosphere of
calm understanding among the parties in Mali, all of
which are now in a position to speak with one voice
and continue with their commitment to achieving
the comprehensive and complete implementation
of the peace agreement. Another crucial issue that
Mr. Ladsous mentioned is the organization of a national
reconciliation conference by the end of the year so as to
enable us to implement the provisions of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation as soon as possible.
With regard to the establishment of an international
commission ofinquiry, I should emphasize that as long
ago as July 2014 the Government of Mali sent a letter
to the Secretary-General, who informed the Human
Rights Council. We are still awaiting a response from
the Secretary-General on the issue.

With regard to the bodies monitoring the agreement,
I would also like to note that the Agreement Monitoring
Committee has held regular meetings whose inclusivity
has greatly improved in the wake of the integration into
subcommittees of all the agreement's signatory groups,
testified to at the Committee's seventh meeting on
9 and 10 March, which through the collaborative efforts
of the Malian parties was able to settle the issue of its
entities' representativeness under articles 10 and 24 of
its internal rules and to adopt a budget. I should also
highlight the establishment of a national mechanism
for coordinating and monitoring the implementation of
the Peace Agreement through the creation of a national
coordination committee for its implementation, which
is chaired by the Prime Minister and is also open to the
signatory groups and civil society.
There are various aspects that I should note in the
area of social, cultural and economic development,
the first of which are the continuing efforts to carry
out development activities on the ground, where
security conditions permit, including through
sectoral programmes and projects. With regard
to the joint evaluation mission to the north, the
Government has already passed on its comments to the
Monitoring Committee.

We should also welcome the setting up within the
Ministry of Economy and Finance ofa team responsible
for defining the financial architecture of the sustainable
development fund forMali'snorthernregions,with initial
funding of almost CFAF300 billion, about €457 million,
for the period from 2016 to 2018, representing the
Government of Mali's peace contribution. I should
emphasize the substantial increase in the State budget
allocations for the implementation of the peace
agreement in 2016, in the amount of €25 million, about
€l6.4 billion more than the previous year. In addition,
on 24 March we held sectoral consultations in Bamako
on transport infrastructure in the north. All the projects
presented that were subjected to feasibility studies have
received funding pledges, and we are making progress
on that front. At this point I must urge our technical
and financial partners to honour the commitments they
made at the international conference for Mali's recovery
and development held in Paris in October 2015.

Unfortunately, the optimism generated by
the signing of the agreement and the start of its
implementation is now somewhat tempered owing to
some persistent threats and challenges, at the centre of
which are terrorism, drug trafficking and every form
of organized crime in the Sahelo-Saharan region. That
was the unanimous conclusion reached during the
Security Council's visit to Mali and the MINUSMA
strategic assessment. As Mr. Ladsous emphasized just
now, this is because the criminal activities of both the
terrorist groups and the drug traffickers are aimed
indiscriminately at peaceful civilians, the Malian
defence and security forces and the international forces
of MINUSMA and France's Operation Barkhane. The
threats now extend to several countries in West Africa
and the Sahel, as was unfortunately demonstrated by
the recent terrorist attacks in January in Ouagadougou,
Burkina Faso, and in March in Grand Bassam, Cote
d'Ivoire. I would like to reiterate to those nations
and bereaved families the heartfelt condolences and
solidarity of the people and the Government of Mali.

In combating terrorism, beyond our national
efforts, we should place special emphasis on regional
and international cooperation. Mali's defence and
security forces are on the front lines of that fight.
Sadly, they are still paying a heavy price, and we should
commend their sacrifices and bravery. However, the
complexity of the environment and the asymmetrical
nature of the war mean that Mali's defence and security
forces cannot cope with this threat, which concerns all
of us, alone. They need support from their partners in
logistics, intelligence and active cooperation aimed at
strengthening their operational capacity for intervention
on the ground. I should like to reiterate our appreciation
to France for the Barkhane force's outstanding work in
the fight against terrorism and for all the sacrifices it
has made.

With regard to the mandatory, in fact essential,
coordination of efforts to curb the recurring threats in
West Africa and the Sahel, I would like to recall the
initiatives of the Nouakchott Process and the Sahel
Group of Five (G-5 Sahel), and to encourage the Security
Council to support the operationalization of the G-5
Sahel intervention force, whose operating modalities
were adopted on 4 March in N'Djamena at a meeting
of the Group's Ministers of Defence. We also believe
it is crucial to ensure that the international community
can provide us with the necessary support for the
establishment of an African Union intervention force
for combating terrorism. In that regard, I welcome the
recent African Union-United Nations joint assessment
mission in Mali, whose conclusions, we hope, give new
momentum to Africa's peace and security architecture,
including the African Standby Force.

As the Security Council is aware, the region's
general instability is related in large part to the
continued deterioration of the political and security
situation in Libya, which has direct consequences for
the countries ofthe Sahel, including Mali. In that regard,
we urge that the efforts to reach a political solution to
the Libyan crisis continue. It is for that reason, which
we share with the other States of the region, that my
delegation is opposed to any kind of unilateral military
intervention in our brother country of Libya. In that
connection, I would like to remind the Council that the
multidimensional crisis that rocked my country in 2012
followed the earlier military intervention in Libya.

With regard to the allegations of human rights
violations mentioned in paragraph 31 of the Secretary-
General's report, I would like to point out that
unfortunately the numbers cited do not enable us to
distinguish the cases that may specifically be laid at the
door of Mali's defence and security forces. With regard
to the 265 detainees referred to in paragraph 32 of the
report, checks carried out by our relevant services
make it clear that the number bears no resemblance to
the one available at the Ministry of Justice, which leads
me again to invite MINUSMA to bring allegations
of human rights violations to the Malian authorities
within a reasonable time frame, in order to enable the
Government of Mali to respond in a timely fashion.

Similarly, the observation in paragraph 36 of the
report that

"the Malian judicial authorities did not initiate
criminal proceedings in relation to those human
rights violations and abuses"

should, from our point of View, be tempered by the
observation in paragraph 33 that

"[m]ajor impediments to criminal proceedings
included the lack of logistical resources for
magistrates, insecurity preventing the judicial
authorities from effectively carrying out
investigations, especially in the north".

Faced with such obstacles, and as recommended by
the Secretary-General, it is vital that the stabilization
process be sped up through redeployment of the
defence and security forces in northern Mali and that
an environment more conducive to the implementation
of the agreement be fostered.

Whatever the case, I would like to refer to
paragraph 36 of the report and recall the nature of war
crimes and crimes against humanity and the fact that
there can be no amnesty for the perpetrators of those
crimes, particularly crimes of sexual and other types
of violence. Mali therefore reiterates its Willingness
to cooperate closely with all actors involved in the
protection and defence of human rights. In the outline
that I have just presented on the current situation, and
in the light of the forthcoming renewal of MINUSMA's
mandate, the Government of Mali would like to call
to attention of the Security Council the need to make
certain adjustments, first, with respect to adapting
MINUSMA's mandate to the new security environment
and, next, to speeding up the implementation process
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

Before concluding, I would like to strongly
emphasize, as was done by the Secretary-General in his
report, the need to speed up the implementation of the
agreement as a whole, but in particular its provisions
pertaining to political issues and security issues, which
colour the proper execution of all other provisions of
the agreement. Against that backdrop, and in the light
of all that I have just said, it seems very clear that the
Government of Mali has given strong impetus and
taken significant steps towards the full implementation
of the agreement. Such actions were publicly welcomed
by the signatory movements to the agreement. The
adoption, last week, of a law on interim authorities by
the National Assembly is further eloquent proof.

The Government of Mali also believes that
important and rapid progress is needed from the
signatory movements on security issues, particularly by
stepping up the process of cantonment, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and the roll-out of
joint patrols, and, as Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
mentioned, by communicating the lists as soon as
possible so that we can move forward in an area as
sensitive as this one, that is to say, in a volatile security
environment. Such measures will allow us to better
pursue the recommendation of the Secretary-General
directed to the Government that we strengthen the
presence of the defence and security forces in the north
so that, more broadly speaking, State authority may be
extended throughout the national territory, in order for
there to be better protection for persons and property.
Such actions will also allow for the restoration of
basic social services and create a more favourable
environment for the peace process and for the activities
of MINUSMA.

To that end, and in conclusion, I would like to
reiterate the Government of Mali's determination
to fully shoulder its responsibilities, and invite the
Security Council to fully shoulder, in turn, its own
responsibilities, namely, to get the parties, especially
those that have not yet done so, to meet their
commitments, and, most important, to step up the pace
of change to allow us to stabilize Mali once and for all
and strengthen peace and stability in the region, in the
Sahel and hopefully well beyond.

I thank you, Mr. President, for the support that
my country continues to enjoy from the Council,
from the United Nations more generally and from the
international community as a whole.
