Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to begin by congratulating the United
Republic of Tanzania on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. It is
a privilege to see its Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation, Her Excellency the
Honourable Asha-Rose Mtengeti Migiro, presiding
over today's meeting.
I wish also to express our gratitude for today's
numerous statements of solidarity with my country in
connection with the tragic deaths of eight members of
the Guatemalan contingent of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). The blood spilled by my
compatriots serves as a confirmation of my country's
commitment to the regional stability and peace that is
so sorely needed by our brethren on the African
continent.

My country has followed very closely the armed
chaos endured by the peoples of the Great Lakes region
over the course of nearly four decades of internal
conflict. We understand and are convinced of the need
for efforts to ensure that the peoples of the region can
attain development. That requires an environment of
peace, security and political stability.

I wish to focus on two countries of the region:
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where Guatemalan military observers and special
forces are stationed. In 2000, the Economic and Social
Council added a new dimension to its work with the
establishment of Ad Hoc Advisory Groups on African
countries emerging from conflict. During its
presidency of the Economic and Social Council in
2003, Guatemala proposed the establishment of such a
group for Burundi. The Ad Hoc Advisory Groups have
proved to be a useful tool for bringing together
development partners, including within the United
Nations system, the Bretton Woods institutions and the
broader donor community, with a view to jointly
considering the needs of the countries in question. The
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Burundi adopted a broad
approach to issues related to the transition and
recovery processes in that country, which averted a
renewal of conflict.

With the imminent operationalization of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we urge the Commission's
Organizational Committee to consider countries such
as Burundi and hope that such consideration will be
possible through the anticipated machinery of
Commission meetings focusing on specific countries.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo we
have seen slow but positive progress. My country joins
the Secretary-General and the membership of the
General Assembly in congratulating the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on the successful constitutional
referendum held on 18 and 19 December 2005, and we
hope that free, impartial, transparent and democratic
elections will similarly be held by 30 June 2006, when
the transitional period ends.

At the same time, Guatemala notes with concern
that militias and foreign armed groups continue
hostilities in the region. These are exemplified by the
recent attacks against Guatemalan troops by the rebel
Lord's Resistance Army. We need speedily to learn the
details of how that tragic incident occurred. In that
regard, my delegation echoes the words of the
representative of Pakistan.

We encourage the countries of the region to
enforce the arms embargo on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to impose the strictest possible
controls on illegal cross-border transfers of natural
resources and weapons and on cross-border movements
of fighters.

Guatemala has benefited directly from a United
Nations peacebuilding mission, which is why we
understand the enormous importance of those who
work in the Organization's peace operations. Without
the shadow of a doubt, this is a basic activity and
fundamental objective of the United Nations, the sole
international body with the credibility and legitimacy
and with the right tools to carry out these difficult but
necessary tasks. That is why, despite the recent tragic
deaths, my Government remains fully prepared to
continue to support United Nations peace operations. I
reiterate my country's commitment to the
Organization's peacekeeping operations and my
delegation's readiness to continue to work to improve
the peacekeeping system. We are convinced that every
effort in that regard will further the high founding
ideals of the United Nations and will help it to carry
out one of its essential Charter functions.

Let me conclude by paying tribute to the memory
of all those who have lost their lives in the service of
understanding and peacebuilding under the United
Nations flag.

