Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let me also add our
voice to everyone else's in welcoming Ambassador Craft.

We also welcome today's unanimous adoption of
resolution 2488 (2019), which streamlines the process
through which the Government of the Central African
Republic can acquire arms and equipment. This is
a clear message of support for the that country's
Government and the progress made in the areas of
weapons management, security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

It is vital that work continue to ensure that weapons
intended for the security forces do not fall into the
hands of armed groups. Further progress is needed,
including work towards the five benchmarks agreed
by the Council in January. That progress will take
time, and during that time the forces of the Central
African Republic will need to continue to perform their
duties. I therefore urge the Government of the Central
African Republic to make use, where necessary, of the
exemptions process provided for in the arms embargo
so as to ensure that its forces are equipped with the
weapons and material they need.

The United Kingdom supports the arms embargo
as a means to help limit the supply of weapons to
armed groups. However, it is clear that arms groups
have continued to acquire weapons from across the
borders of the Central African Republic, with which
they threaten the lives of civilians and break the terms
of the peace agreement. Therefore, we call on the States
of the region, including through their respective mixed
commissions, to fully enforce the terms of the arms
embargo and curb the flow of weapons and ammunition
to armed groups.

More broadly, the United Nations sanctions regime
is designed to promote security in the Central African
Republic and help implement the peace agreement.
We support the use of sanctions, where appropriate,
to respond to breaches of the peace agreement and
welcome the efforts of the Panel of Experts to draw up
new statements of case. We encourage all States to fully
enforce all aspects of the sanctions regime. In addition,
breaches of the peace agreement, which threaten the
lives of civilians, such as the May attacks, must be
dealt with under the core mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to protect
civilians. MINUSCA needs to be permitted to respond
as appropriate, including, if necessary, with force.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the United
Kingdom's full support for the Government of the
Central African Republic in their continued efforts
under difficult circumstances.

