Mr. Paolillo (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): The
serious problems affecting the African continent must
be a matter of concern for all regions of the world.
They require the utmost attention from all of our
Governments, and they should be an absolute priority
on the agendas of international organizations.

We must undertake concerted and energetic

action to assist our brothers in Africa to overcome the
enormous obstacles that are impeding, and even
paralyzing, their efforts to achieve economic
development and democratization. Some of those
obstacles are the result of centuries of being subjected
to colonial rule, while others have resulted from long-
standing rivalries. Yet others stem from extreme
poverty and the precarious social conditions prevailing
in some regions of the continent. It is a moral duty to
assist Africa. If we do not carry out that duty, the rest
of the world will not be at peace with itself.

I wish to reiterate Uruguay's solidarity with all
the Governments and peoples of Africa, in particular
with those experiencing crises at this moment. We have
proven our solidarity by having participated for years
in peacekeeping missions in a number of countries,
including Mozambique, Angola, Rwanda, Sierra
Leone, Liberia, Eritrea, Western Sahara and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The tragic events that have taken place in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have gained
notoriety in recent days. Uruguay has been a part of the
United Nations peacekeeping force in that country
from the very beginning, with a contingent that
currently numbers more than 1,600 men. Among other
things, it was a naval unit from Uruguay that opened up
navigation and river communications in the Congo
River basin, which had been interrupted for over three
years.

I would like to convey to the members of the
Security Council the great concern of the Government
and people of Uruguay over the delicate situation in
which over 700 of our compatriots find themselves in
Bunia, where Uruguay agreed to have part of its troops
transferred in spite of the extreme danger in the region.
Uruguay has no economic interest in the area, or in the
Congo in general. Its presence in this unhappy country
is in keeping with moral principles and with putting
solidarity into action.

The situation of the civilian population and of the
Uruguayan forces in Bunia is simply terrible. On the
verge of a humanitarian catastrophe, and likely at any
moment to become the victims of unbridled and
mindless violence on the part of warring factions, the
lives of the inhabitants of Bunia and of the Uruguayans
attempting to protect them have become a nightmare
that has now lasted for several weeks.

The Security Council has just adopted a
desperately awaited resolution providing for the
deployment of an Emergency Multinational Force to
Bunia. Uruguay would like to express its gratitude to
the Council for having done so. I would also like to
thank the Governments of the countries that have
expressed their readiness to participate in the
Emergency Force, as well as to the Secretariat for its
efforts aimed at expediting the preparation and
deployment of the Force.

On behalf of my Government and of Uruguayans
whose lives and physical and mental integrity are
currently seriously under threat in Bunia, and on behalf
of all of Uruguay, I urge that measures be adopted
immediately to implement that resolution and to
proceed to the deployment of the Emergency Force to
Bunia as soon as possible, so as to restore calm,
provide security for the population and protect
everyone's lives. Any delay may be fatal for the
inhabitants of Bunia and for members of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as - it must be said -
for the credibility and prestige of the Organization.

