We would like to start by thanking the Special Envoy for his briefing, as well as Ms. Ghazi for her intervention and powerful testimony. We continue to support the Special Envoy's call for a nationwide ceasefire, for large-scale releases of detainees and for the need for full humanitarian access. We welcome the relative calm in the north-west of the country since the Russian-Turkish ceasefire arrangement at the beginning of March. However, recent Russian air strikes and Syrian artillery illustrate the fragility of the situation. The risks for hundreds of thousands of vulnerable civilians in this region are enormous. We urge all parties to refrain from violence, reduce tension and exercise maximum restraint. The United Nations should play a central role in the implementation of a nationwide ceasefire, as well as in its monitoring. The war in Syria has now raged for over nine years. We have said it before so many times, and I repeat it today again - there is no military solution to this war. Meanwhile, the devastating effects of the economic collapse brought about by years of mismanagement and corruption are reverberating ever wider throughout Syria. The recent protests unfolding in Suwayda and elsewhere are a mere symptom of a far greater crisis striking at the heart of Damascus. Nine years of violence and brutal suppression have not led to the results the Syrian authorities had hoped for; instead, they have left the country in a shambles. Only a political solution can break the cycle of violence and put Syria back on track. The Constitutional Committee and the wider political process should urgently be reinvigorated, and we fully support the Special Envoy's efforts as an important contribution to the United Nations-facilitated political process mandated by resolution 2254 (2015), and we urge those Member States with influence over Damascus to use it urgently. Furthermore, any elections, including parliamentary elections, should be fair, transparent and open to the members of the Syrian diaspora, in order to constitute one step on the path to such a political solution. On the issue of political prisoners and missing persons, so far hardly any progress has been made. It is high time for Damascus to move beyond one-for- one prisoner exchanges and to release prisoners and information as an important confidence-building measure. More than ever before, full humanitarian access must be ensured. Belgium, as humanitarian co-penholder together with Germany, will continue its work towards the renewal of resolution 2165 (2014), concerning cross-border assistance. We urge all Council members to be fully aware of the common responsibility we bear on this topic. We must shoulder this work together, guided solely by the humanitarian interests of Syrian men, women and children. At the end of this month, the fourth Brussels conference will take place. The European Union (EU) and its member States are the most important humanitarian donor for Syria, having contributed over €17 billion since the beginning of this Syrian war. Yet, until this war is over and a political solution is well under way, we reconfirm our position that the EU will not fund reconstruction. To conclude, let me say a few words about sanctions. The EU sanctions are targeted at those responsible for ordering or carrying out attacks and torture against their own people, making or using chemical weapons, or building their personal fortune on the war economy. They are carefully crafted to avoid any adverse humanitarian effects or unintended consequences for persons who are not targeted.
