Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Clearly, the truth unnerves the representatives
of colonial Powers in the Chamber. We have seem them
leave when they hear the truth being spoken. By such
actions, they prove that they have malicious colonial
intentions against my country and the people of Syria.
Similarly, they demonstrate that their diplomacy is a
diplomacy of chaos, coercion and the use of force, and
it is not based on the principles of dialogue and peaceful
conflict resolution. To those colleagues who walked
out of the Chamber while we were still in session (see S/PV.7777), I would like to thank them because they
gave me the status of permanent member instead of
them.
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
presiding over the work of the Council this month - at a
time when the whole world, and our region in particular,
are experiencing major, serious challenges. Such
difficult challenges come as a result of the erroneous
policies of some States, including permanent members
of the Security Council. They are seeking to implement
their own interventionist policies, which contravene the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. However, your experience and wisdom, Sir,
serve to provide leadership for the work of the Council
at this critical time.

Allow me to take this opportunity to condemn the
cowardly act of terrorism perpetrated by the Al-Nusra
Front against the Russian Embassy in Damascus a
few days ago. Several Member States voted positively
for the French draft resolution (S/20l6/846), but they
opposed releasing even a press statement condemning
that attack. We are also sorry that the Council failed
to adopt the draft resolution (S/20l6/847) submitted
with a view to achieving peace and expediting the
political process in Syria by differentiating between
the so-called armed opposition forces and the terrorist
Al-Nusra Front. Blocking the Russian draft resolution
serves to reaffirm, for the hundredth time, the lack of
political will on the part of those who oposed it. They
have no real political will to combat terrorism and
no genuine will to reach an inter-Syrian resolution to
the crisis. Clearly, differentiating between extremist
terrorists and the moderate armed groups is a difficult
process, akin to trying to separate enriched uranium
from unenriched uranium, if there were such a thing as
unenriched uranium.

I have not bothered to reflect on the French draft
resolution, as it was crystal clear that it had its own
objectives - clear not just to me, but to the Syrian
people too. It makes me recall the one-hundredth
anniversary of the infamous Sykes-Picot Agreement,
a colonial agreement between France and Britain that
brought continuous suffering to our people, created
divides in our society and looted our wealth and
resources. We think that the French draft resolution
reflects the nostalgia France feels for its dark colonial
past. It was under the illusion that fuelling the Syrian
crisis would create a golden opportunity for it to revive
its former colonial power, which will not return.

Today, the Foreign Minister of France attempted to
be the Syrian people's guardian when he spoke about
what was good for them and what he, in his capacity as
Foreign Minister, should do to help them - as though
he were still dreaming that he represented a colonial
Power that could hijack the right to speak on behalf
of the Syrian people in the Council. However, French
politicians should be ashamed of what they have done
to Libya and to the Libyan people. And when turning
our attention to the Guernica and Srebrenica massacres,
we see that such massacres were the result of European
competitive barbaric policies to which we, nor anyone
else, bears any relation. Such policies were purely
European barbaric policies.

As for the carnage in Syria today, it has been
caused by mercenary foreign terrorists whoe were born
in France, Britain, Germany, Italy, Norway, Spain and
Belgium. These are terrorists who are manipulated by
the intelligence agencies of Western States, the fatwas
on jihad, financing from Qatar and Saudi Arabia and
Turkish sponsorship for all these acts of aggression.
Before I proceed with my statement, I would like to
remind the French Minister of what his predecessor
once said:

(spoke in French)
"The Frenchjihadists are doing a goodjob in Syria".
(spoke in Arabic)

This is the policy ofFrance, as expressed by the Foreign
Minister of France at the time, Laurent Fabius, in 2012.

Elements and provisions of the French draft
resolution prove yet again that they have malicious
intentions towards my country. From the very
beginning, successive French Governments have sought
to undermine the Syrian State in its totality, not simply
targeting a particular Government. The draft resolution
clearly calls for an end to the operations conducted by
the Syrian Army and its allies to defend the Syrian
people and combat terrorism, on behalf of all the
members of the Security Council, from the Al-Nusra
Front, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and affiliated terrorist groups. It seems that whenever
the Syrian Army and its allies gain ground against the
terrorist groups - namely, the Al-Nusra Front - well-
known members of the Council rush to rescue them
from their inevitable defeat by convening meetings or
putting forth draft resolutions that completely disregard
the suffering of the Syrian people. They seek only to
rescue the terrorists, whether in Aleppo or in other
cities and regions of Syria.

We had hoped that this unprecedented and
tireless effort by France to push for the adoption of
its resolution - similarly with the draft resolution by
Russia - would have been geared towards finding a
political solution to the crisis in Syria, led by Syrians
without any foreign intervention or preconditions. We
had hoped that, instead of submitting a draft resolution
to impose a no-fly zone in our own air space, France
and its allies would have imposed a moratorium on the
support provided by their Governments to terrorism,
which they then export to Syria. We had hoped that
the Government of France would be able to answer the
question that the Syrian people continue to ask, that is,
whether the money from the Total oil deal, the Qatari
gas deal and the Saudi Arabia arms deals were worth
the Syrian blood spilled?

For more than six years, the United States, France
and Britain have persistently called for one meeting
after another. They have sponsored draft resolutions,
presidential statements and press statements in the
Council with one purpose, namely, to deceive the
public into believing that they are seeking to resolve the
crisis in my country. Meanwhile, they have launched
media, diplomatic and political campaigns to falsely
promote certain ideas, including that the situation
taking place in Syria is a confrontation between the
so-called moderate armed opposition and Government
forces, which they accuse of committing war crimes.
They completely disregard the fact that their policies
have jeopardized the lives of hundreds of thousands
of innocent civilians in Syria due to their continued
support for the armed terrorist groups that have used
civilians as human shields.

In response to remarks by some colleagues who
talked about targeting hospitals, the fact is that in
eastern Aleppo terrorists have turned the largest and
most important eye hospital in the Middle East into a
base for their military operations.

I would like to remind members that, since the
beginning of the crisis in Syria, the Security Council
has held 75 official formal meetings, 97 consultations
and 8 Arria Formula meetings. It has also adopted
17 resolutions, in addition to releasing a number of
presidential and press statements, on the situation in
Syria. However, those efforts have not prevented the
world terrorist diaspora from destroying my country,
Syria. I would like to remind the Council that the United
States has used its veto 77 times, Britain 33 times and
France 19 times. The representatives of those countries
have no shame. When they block draft resolutions, they
simply call for an end to the Israeli occupation of our
lands and justice for the Palestinian people.

It is self-evident that the support programmes
provided to "moderate armed groups" by the United
States, as well as by some regional and Arab countries
following the paymasters of the region, continue to
reach the hands of ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front. These
groups, along with their affiliates, are terrorist groups.
The Syrian people have rights, and these countries are
claiming that they seek to achieve their interests. They
should consider the logic and the mechanisms that
govern their approach towards Syria. The United States
has estbalished a programme to train fighters that it
has pre-determined as moderate: according to officials,
the United States has spent $500 million to train 49
fighters. Forty-four of them took weapons provided by
the United States and, as soon as they reached Syrian
terrority, joined the terrorist Al-Nusra Front. That
leaves five, and we have no idea where they are now.

The United States, Saudi Arabia and Qatar have
provided arms and money to the Yarmouk Martyrs
Brigade in the southern region of Syria and the
occupied Golan Heights. This Brigade has announced
its allegiance to ISIL. Those countries have insisted that
Harakat Nur al-Din al-Zanki was moderate, despite it
being a terrorist organization supported by Turkey and
its claiming of responsibility for its crimes in Aleppo.
They have in fact now officially joined the Al-Nusra
Front. Therefore, all of those "moderate" armed groups
are now affiliated with ISIL. The most recent incident
involves the Suqour Jabal al-Zawiya Brigade, which,
supported by the United States, has announced its
allegiance to the Fateh al-Sham Army - the new name
of the terrorist group Al-Nusra Front.

I would like here to mention 1,800 electronic
messages that were deleted from the inbox of the former
United States Secretary of State. Those messages
included details on consignments of weapons that were
transferred to armed terrorist groups in Syria from
Libya through Turkey, by decision of the American
Administration.

In implementing such destructive policies, these
countries have relied on a misleading political media
campaign to convince global public opinion that they
are fighting terrorism and that the terrorists that they
fund, support, harbour and transfer into Syria from
more than 100 States are either "moderate" opposition
or "first responders". Recently, the term "White
Helmets" has been used to refer to them, and they have
even been nominated for a Nobel Peace Prize. I have
with me pictures that show these "moderate" members
of the opposition - the White Helmets - with one of
them firing an rocket-propelled grenad at aeroplanes.
By the way, he is a physician. We have dozens of similar
pictures, if any Council members would like to take
a look. I would also like to point out that the founder
of these malicious White Helmets is in fact James Le
Mesurier, an intelligence officer from Britain.

As the United States-based Ron Paul Institute for
Peace and Prosperity recently reported, the Pentagon
paid $540 million to the British public relations firm
Bell Pottinger, which typically renders services to Chile
and Saudi Arabia, to develop an aggressive propaganda
campaign against the Syrian Government. The firm
fabricates YouTube videos, photos, video clips and
so on.

The United States of America formed an
international coalition under the pretext of fighting
ISIL and other terrorist organizations, including
organizations for which they have, since 2003, provided
fertile ground for them to spread. However, the facts on
the ground have proved that, since the establishment of
the so-called coalition, ISIL has expanded and gained
more ground, because that coalition has not been
seriously combating terrorism - to the contrary. The
coalition air forces have been responsible for killing
hundreds of Syrian military personnel and civilians,
destroying infrastructure and economic installations
and providing air drops with weapons and military
supplies to terrorist organizations to spread still more
chaos and wreak havoc in my country. However,
according to the coalition, all that was simply a mistake.
Therefore, the coalition air forces have killed civilians,
destroyed infrastructure, aided and armed terrorists
and then justified those crimes by calling them simply
mistakes that need to be forgiven. Days later they repeat
those same mistakes.

Honestly, one now needs to decipher the actual
strategy of the United States-led coalition based on
a code based of repeated mistakes. Those offences
appear to be governed by a systematic, intentional
policy, as was the case when their aeroplanes targeted
the positions of the Syrian Army in Deir ez-Zor. That
attack actually exposed dozens of civilians to the ISIL
threat. They even had the audacity to request that safe
humanitarian corridors be opened for the terrorists to
maintain their dignity. Did the United States, Britain
and France open safe humanitarian corridors to protect
the "moderate" terrorists of Al-Qaida in Afghanistan,
or for those who committed the massacres at Charlie
Heba'o or the Bataclan Theatre - or in Nice, California,
Boston, Chicago, New York or London? Why have they
failed to open such humanitarian corridors in Europe
and the United States for terrorists to escape?
The United States representative said, "we must
learn from the lessons of the past". I would like to tell
him: I hope that the United States can do that. I hope that
the United States could learn from their mistakes in Viet
Nam, Cambodia, Korea, Cuba, Nicaragua, Yugoslavia,
Iraq, Libya and Africa. I hope that he would recall and
apologize for what they did to innocent Iraqis - the
408 civilians they killed on 13 February 1991 in the
Amiriyah shelter in Baghdad.

My Government reaffirms that it will continue to
cooperate with the United Nations and its specialized
agencies to implement the monthly humanitarian
response plan. We have approved the October response
plan and wish to note that the failure to fully implement
it is because of the practices of armed terrorist groups
and their allies that continue to obstruct humanitarian
access. Those groups continue to target convoys and
humanitarian workers and to loot the assistance
provisions. The most recent attack targeted the
humanitarian assistance convoy headed to Oram
Al-Kubra, in rural Aleppo, on 19 September, which
led to the deaths of a number of Syrian citizens and
volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC).
They looted supplies and burned the trucks. The
"moderate" armed groups have denied access to SARC
staff to deliver assistance to a number of areas. Those
are facts of which United Nations agency workers in
Syria are well aware. We have initiated an investigation
into the attack against the United Nations-SARC convoy
in Oram Al-Kubra and will provide the Council with
the results of the investigation when it is concluded.

The fact that we are sitting in the Chamber today at

this meeting to consider the situation in eastern Aleppo
as some shed crocodile tears is a direct result of the
United States shirking its agreement reached with the
Russian Federation on 9 September. That agreement
was supposed to differentiate between the moderate
armed groups and the Al-Nusra Front. The Syrian Arab
Government has been committed to the cessation of
hostilities agreement and has taken action to implement
its provisions and to deliver assistance in Aleppo.
However, the fact is that the United States has not been
honouring its obligations. Terrorist groups, supported
by the United States and its allies, continue to violate
the agreement and are regrouping to launch new attacks,
all ofwhich has led to the end the cessation of hostilities
agreement and to the continuing deterioration of the
situation in Aleppo after the terrorists killed 157 Syrian
soldiers and 300 civilians in eastern Aleppo.

In conclusion, the blood being spilled in our
country is our blood. We are the victims of a terrorist
war and its pain, anguish and torment. It is ours and no
one else's. It is the height of hypocrisy and falsification
of evidence that those sponsors of terrorism actually
shed crocodile tears on this humanitarian crisis. We
will continue to fight terrorism, and that continues on a
parallel track with the commitment to reach a political
solution through intra-Syrian dialogue wherein Syrians
and no one else decides on the future of Syria, with no
foreign intervention.

In addition, I wish to call upon those who have shed
crocodile tears for the Syrian people and to advise them
to shed genuine tears for the 250 Yemenis killed today
by Western air forces - with Western aeroplanes used
by the Saudis.

