Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank all today's
briefers - Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Monseigneur Utembi
and Ms. Furaha - for their valuable briefings.

Today's meeting follows the announcement of
President Joseph Kabila Kabange of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that he will not run for
the presidential elections scheduled to be held on
23 December. We welcome that important step and
the other positive steps that were recently made in the
political process, including the registration of candidates
for presidential and legislative elections and the respect
shown by President Kabila for the Constitution and the
New Year's Eve political agreement.

Given the recent positive steps taken in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo during this month,
and nearly four months ahead of the presidential
elections, which we hope will be held on time and
without delay, we would like to take the opportunity
of today's meeting to reiterate the content of the press
statement issued by the Security Council (SC/13455)
on 13 August. The press statement underscored the
importance of a commitment by all the Congolese
political actors and the institutions responsible for
organizing the elections to prepare for the success of
the electoral process, leading to a peaceful transfer
of power, in accordance with the Constitution and the
New Year's Eve political agreement. The statement also
called on Congolese stakeholders to create the necessary
conditions in order to ensure an environment conducive
to peaceful and inclusive political activities, and to hold
free, fair, transparent and conclusive elections with the
participation of all Congolese during every stage of the
elections. The statement reiterated the importance of
taking measures to help confidence-building and respect
for the fundamental rights and the elections timetable.

In the light of such preparations by the Congolese
Government and the Commission electorale nationale
independante, we encourage them to request the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to provide logistical
and technical support, especially since the Government
intends to use electronic voting on the election day for
the first time.

I would like to underscore the importance of the
commitment to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is a large country with a large population
and very rich in natural resources. It is the heart of
the African continent and the neighbouring countries.
Its security and political stability has undoubtedly an
impact on that of the neighbouring countries and the
whole region.

Finally, working closely with the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Southern African Development Community and
other main organizations and regional stakeholders
would contribute to the implementation of the New
Year's Eve political agreement and the success of the
upcoming electoral process.

