Mr. McNee (Canada): I am honoured to speak on
behalf of the Netherlands and Canada, co-Chairs of the
Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region. The Pact
on Security, Stability and Development in the Great
Lakes Region and the Declaration on the
Implementation of the Pact, both signed in Nairobi on
15 December, inaugurate a new era of cooperation in
the Great Lakes region. In that context, I thank you
very much, Sir, for having organized this meeting
today.

The 11 member States of the region will drive the
implementation of all the integral parts of the Pact. A
key element of their full ownership of that
unprecedented endeavour is the creation of the first
coordination mechanism for the Great Lakes region.
We congratulate Burundi, chosen to host the seat of the
follow-up mechanism, and we warmly congratulate
Ambassador Liberata Mulamula, chosen on behalf of
Tanzania as Executive Secretary to head the new
mechanism.

The launching of the secretariat in its initial
months will be full of expectation and challenges as
well. For that reason, the Group of Friends will extend
its financial support for a six-month transition period
as core countries take over secretariat functions for the
Conference and consolidate their national coordination
mechanisms.

(spoke in French)

I would like to commend the joint United
Nations-African Union secretariat and its team of
experts, under the leadership of Mr. Ibrahima Fall, for
their unflagging commitment and their contribution to
the success of the Conference.

The Group of Friends supports the request
initially made by Tanzania on behalf of the countries of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region for a three-month extension until 31 March of
the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region. That
will facilitate the transition from the joint United
Nations-African Union secretariat to the new
secretariat of the countries of the Conference.

On behalf of Canada, I wish to indicate that my
country also supports the call, made in paragraph 9 of
the Declaration on Implementation of the Pact, on the
United Nations and the African Union to remain
committed and to support the new secretariat for at
least one year. We hope that the newly created
secretariat will enjoy the support of the United Nations
and the African Union for a year.

