Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I would, first of all, like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's open
meeting to review the report of the Security Council
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
under the able leadership of Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke.

The report submitted by the mission on
completion of a whirlwind trip to the region highlights
the challenges that the United Nations faces and the
measures that the parties to the conflict and the
international community need to take to ensure success
in our collective efforts to establish peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Pakistan believes that the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement is a comprehensive document, and its
faithful implementation by all concerned could ensure
a lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Pakistan also supports an active involvement of
the Security Council in peacekeeping efforts, in
accordance with the Ceasefire Agreement, so as to
facilitate an early end to the protracted conflict.

One of the preconditions for phase II deployment
of peacekeepers, outlined in Security Council
resolution 1291 (2000) of 24 February this year, is that
"the parties respect and uphold the Ceasefire
Agreement" and create a secure environment. We are
reassured by the commitment given to the Security
Council mission by President Kabila and others that
they would facilitate an early deployment of
peacekeepers.

While it is essential for all the parties in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to move fast to
engage in a sustained dialogue process to consolidate
peace, we urge all concerned to ensure implementation
of the Lusaka Agreement by facilitating an end to the
arms flow from outside and the disarming of all
members of the armed groups. All parties to the
conflict must also protect human rights and respect
international humanitarian law. Progress in these areas
will be necessary to ensure the success of the peace
process.

By resolution 1291 (2000), the Security Council
has given a robust mandate to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
Congo (MONUC). Acting under Chapter VII of the
Charter, the Mission has been given tasks as
challenging as in the case of Sierra Leone. These tasks
include protecting United Nations and co-located Joint
Military Commission (JMC) facilities, installations and
equipment; ensuring the security and freedom of
movement of its personnel; and protecting civilians
who are in imminent danger of physical violence.
These are not easy tasks. The Mission should be
adequately equipped to fulfil these tasks.

There is a need to focus our attention on effective
planning and on deployment of peacekeepers. We
would like to emphasize the requirement for a practical
concept of operation and configuration of the force in
such a manner that it is capable of supporting
implementation of the Mission's mandate. The security
component of the Mission should also be adequately
equipped so that it proves to be an asset for the
Mission. Particular note in this regard needs to be
taken of the inadequacies of the planning for the
deployment of peacekeepers in Sierra Leone, in order
not to repeat these problems in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. While we agree that trust and
confidence are essential for the success of a
peacekeeping mission, there is no shortcut to effective
preparation. As they say, prevention is better than cure.

As we indicated to the Council on an earlier
occasion, Pakistan has committed one battalion group
for deployment to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In keeping with our past traditions of extending
unswerving support to United Nations peacekeeping
efforts, we will do our utmost to contribute to the
efforts of the international community to realize
sustainable peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Our personnel in the field would like to see the
Mission be successful so that they can take pride in
their contribution to the cause of peace.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
commitment to the progress and prosperity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as of the
continent of Africa.

