Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): This
public debate is the first meeting of this nature of the
Security Council since the terrorist attacks perpetrated
in France last week. Allow me to say a few words on
the subject.

On behalf of France, I would like say how
overwhelmed and strengthened we were by the massive
support that was shown to us from all around the world.
On behalf of France, I would like to thank the United
Nations for its exemplary support through the Security
Council press statement issued on 7 January (SC/11727),
through the minute of silence observed by the Council
and through the commitment of the Secretary-General,
who came to provide his support to the French Mission
to the United Nations here in New York, as well as the
representatives of so many countries. All these were
signs of exceptional solidarity.

On behalf of France, I would like to underscore
the historic dimension of the march that took place
in my country on 11 January. Four million citizens of
all origins took to the streets of my country to combat
terrorism and to defend the values that are at the very
core of who we are. That was the largest demonstration
since the liberation of France in 1944. Four million
people were marching side by side, with a number of
world leaders unprecedented for such a public march
since the funeral of President Kennedy in Washington,
halfa century ago. It has been an extraordinary message
of unity. The France that speaks today is standing tall,
mobilized, with greater determination than ever. The
march in Paris and all throughout France was the best
response to terrorism.

France, which had been targeted for defeat, is
still standing with its friends and its allies, in support
of three principles. The first is the protection and
defence of free expression and its corollary, freedom
of the press, which does not champion either hatred or
terrorism. The second is the affirmation of a response
to terrorism that combines the greatest firmness, both
beyond and within our borders, with strict respect
for the fundamental rights, without which democracy
is denied. Naturally that response does not target
any religious community; it targets individuals who
practice or defend violence. Of course France expresses
solidarity with all countries affected by terrorism,
such as, most recently, Nigeria. The third principle is
tolerance, which comprises a resolute struggle against
all forms of anti-Semitism, Islamophobia, racism and
all types of discrimination against people. We will not
allow men, women or children to be attacked or killed in
France because they are Jewish, as occurred last Friday
at the kosher supermarket, or because they are Muslim
or of any other religion, or atheist. France protects all
of its citizens, without regard to belief or lack of belief.

The attacks have highlighted the extent to which,
in an interdependent world, the security of each and
every one is a common good. More than ever, peace and
stability in the Middle East are inseparable from that of
Europe. More than ever before, France is committed to
the future of the Middle East.

Today, the Middle East is an area of major
instability, marked by regional rivalries and the
scourge of terrorism, with an immense human cost
that is only partly reflected in the terribe number of
dead, of refugees and of displaced persons. In order to
restore durable peace and stability, we must maintain
a single course, namely, provide a fair response to
the legitimate aspirations of peoples and preserve the
peaceful coexistence of peoples in a zone that has
seen sectarianism gain ground. That is the meaning
of the policy that France seeks to lead and which it is
pursuing in all current crises. We will stay the course
with strength and determination, whether it concerns
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Iraq, Syria or Lebanon.

On 30 December, the Council suffered a new
setback in the relaunching of the peace negotiations
between Israel and Palestine (see S/PV.7354). Once
again the Council was unable to unite to find consensus
to move towards a two-State solution, which is the only
solution capable of providing a just solution to the
aspirations of the two peoples - for the Palestinians,
the aspiration to a sovereign, independent State; for
the Israelis, the guarantee of lasting security. Those
two legitimate claims can be satisfied only if we move
towards the solution that is known to all, on the basis of
internationally recognized parameters.

As is well known, the current situation remains
dangerous. The process is at an impasse. Gaza is
growing poorer as Israel blocks the tax payments that
are by law are due to the Palestinian Authority, and that
threatens the stability of the area. We are doing all that
we can to prevent an escalation. That would not be in
anyone's interest.

In that context, France is determined to work towards
changing the methodology ofthe peace process. We are
convinced that without that, the two-State solution will
remain wishful thinking. That collective effort must
be based on an indisputable basis that the Security
Council can and must offer through the adoption
of a resolution on the parameters of the final status.
France will continue its efforts towards a constructive,
reasonable and consensual resolution, one allowing the
Council to become an actor fully committed to peace.
We continue to believe that an international mechanism
in which the countries of the region have a role to play
should help the parties to emerge from the impasse that
has lasted far too long.

In Iraq, as in Syria, Daesh has thrivedthrough lack of
governance, and the repression and the marginalization
of the Sunni population. Our fight against Daesh must
be carried out on all fronts - political and military,
foreign terrorist combatants and financing - without
ever losing sight of the fact that in Iraq and in Syria,
any lasting solution must be political.

In Iraq, the military intervention of the international
coalition aims to weaken the offensive capacity of
Daesh and support the Iraqi forces on the ground. The
international community must provide full support to
Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi, who has committed
himself with courage to the path of reconciliation and
assembly. We must encourage him to continue his
efforts on behalf of recovery and good governance.

In Syria we are facing a completely opposite
situation. The regime of Bashar Al-Assad and its
brutality and repressive measures have encouraged the
development of Daesh. The fight against terrorism in
Syria can never involve compromising with a regime
that is responsible for 200,000 deaths. In Syria, half
of the population has been forced to flee their homes.
They should not have to choose between the scourges
of terrorism and dictatorship. The fight against Daesh
cannot be separated from a political transition that
responds to the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people on the basis of the Geneva communique
(resolution 2118 (2013), annex II).

The Security Council must remain fully mobilized
in favour of the thorough and definitive dismantling
of the Syrian chemical arsenal. The continued proven
use of chlorine gas by the regime dmonostrates that
the international community cannot have faith in
the sincerity of the Syrian commitment towards the
Chemical Weapons Convention. In the light of such
violations, we cannot neglect the imperative to fight
against impunity.

The situation in Lebanon remains extremely
precarious, as we have seen once again with the
terrorist attack in Tripoli on 10 January, which the
Council has condemned. Those events show how much
Lebanon has experienced the direct fallout from the
crisis in Syria. We must do all that we can to ensure
respect for the disassociation policy and the principles
of the Baabda Declaration of 2012 (S/2012/477, annex).
At the same time, we must encourage the Lebanese
people to elect a President as soon as possible. The
continuing vacancy of the position of Head of State
deprives Lebanon - which is facing an influx of more
than 1.2 million Syrian refugees into its territory - of
the ability to respond effectively to the humanitarian,
political, security and economic challenges it faces.

Mr. Barros Melei took the Chair.

France is aware ofthe seriousness ofthe situation in
the Middle East. Now more than ever, it is determined
to work as hard as necessary towards a resolution of the
conflict that undermines the region. In the light of the
terrorist threat, France reaffirms that it will maintain
a clear course and fully assume its international
responsibility.

