Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): 1 want to thank Ambassador
Kairat Umarov, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, for his briefing
and for his dedicated efforts in guiding the work of the
Committee. We appreciate the outcome of his visit to
the region, which took him to Djibouti, Ethiopia and
Somalia. 1 must reiterate how much we appreciate the
objectivity and integrity with which he has managed the
work of the Committee. Of course, much has happened
since the Chair's visit, and those events have enormous
implications for the work of the Committee, as well as
for the sanctions regime in a number of ways.

It is altogether impossible to deny that the politics
of the Horn of Africa are in the process of rapid change,
with salutary implications, all of which is the result of
the rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea, which
would have been totally inconceivable only a few month
ago. What has happened over the past couple of weeks
is indeed historic. Following a 20-year hiatus, Ethiopia
and Eritrea have decided to turn the page and open a
new chapter concerning not only the normalization
of relations, but the expression of commitment to
building relations that truly reflect the long-standing
ties between their peoples. What was once considered
impossible has been made possible thanks to the
courageous and bold steps taken by the leadership of the
two countries. The Ethiopian and Eritrean peoples, who
have longed for peace for two decades, have warmly
welcomed the breakthrough with much jubilation and
optimism. Gone are the days when no one could be sure
how long the guns would continue to be silent between
the two countries.

As just indicated, that has enormous meaning
and significance not only for the peoples of the two
countries, but also for the region, which has been
ravaged by conflict and crisis for far too long. It will
also make a major and historic contribution to the
efforts to silence the guns in Africa, while setting
an example of resolving conflicts in the continent.
Undeniably, the region will be in a far better position to
contribute to peace in Somalia. The Intergovernmental
Authority on Development will be more effective in
bringing the countries of the region together to work
for peace and regional cooperation in all areas much
better than before.

It is in that broader context, that we would like
the Security Council to understand what is happening
between Ethiopia and Eritrea. That wind of change has
been welcomed by the region and beyond. Undoubtedly,
the positive momentum generated over the past couple
of weeks must be sustained, and the international
community has a responsibility to support the efforts
of the two countries. We believe that the Council has
a particular responsibility in that regard. Already,
improved relations between Ethiopia and Eritrea seem
to have facilitated the restoration of friendly relations
between Eritrea and Somalia, as was evident when
the President of Somalia, Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed Farmajo, paid a State visit to Eritrea a few
days ago. It is impossible to ignore that that is a major
boost for progress in the stabilization of the situation in
Somalia. The Council must appreciate the significance
of that development for the security of the region.

It appears to us very proper that the Council should
support and encourage the bold steps taken by the
Ethiopian Prime Minister. That has underlined how
much doing things outside the box is necessary to
break log jams in conflict situations, no matter how
intractable they might have been in the past. If there
is a recognition of the broader context that I have
tried to explain just now, I do not think it would be
difficult to find innovative ways of acknowledging the
significance of that development in our region at a time
when conflict resolution is becoming very complex and
we have come to acknowledge how much the prevention
of conflict should be prioritized.

The breakthrough for peace achieved between
Ethiopia and Eritrea is without any doubt to
be celebrated. It is Ethiopia's conviction that this
welcome development is not meant to be limited to
relations between the two countries. I would like to
take this opportunity to assure the Council that the
prevailing spirit is one of embracing, not excluding,
people in the region. It is in that spirit that we are trying
to do our part to help restore friendly relations between
the good peoples of Djibouti and Eritrea. The Djibouti
Foreign Minister visited Addis Ababa last week to
deliver a message on behalf of President Guelleh to my
Prime Minister. He was able to conduct very productive
and useful discussions both with our Prime Minister
and his counterpart, our Foreign Minister.

Ethiopia has expressed its readiness to do whatever
is necessary to contribute to the normalization of
relations between Eritrea and Djibouti. It is our firm
conviction that such efforts are critical to peace and
security in our region. The new spirit that has been
created should exclude no country and is the foundation
on which Ethiopia's policy is based. Naturally, that new
spirit also demands that no country should continue to
be isolated. The Council has an obligation in that regard.

Let me conclude by expressing our readiness to
work closely with the Council in the coming months
to sustain this remarkable achievement, which has
enormous implications for peace and prosperity in the
whole of Africa and even beyond.

