We thank Germany for convening today's debate and for the invitation to speak as co-Chair, together with the Netherlands, of the international humanitarian law and human rights working group of the Berlin process. Switzerland is deeply concerned about the deterioration of the situation in Libya and calls on all parties to the armed conflict to respect international humanitarian law in all circumstances. We also urge all those who bear responsibilities to fully respect and protect human rights. Switzerland supported the establishment of an independent, international and impartial fact-finding mission, recognizing that violations must be investigated to ensure the accountability of perpetrators. In order for the Berlin process working group to successfully implement its mandate, it needs the full support not only of the Libyans but also of the international community, in particular the Security Council. Three issues should be immediately acted upon. First is the cessation of hostilities. For any progress towards sustaining peace to be achieved, it is now time to silence the weapons and to bring all parties to the negotiation table. We therefore support the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and welcome the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020). As one of the host countries of the peace talks led by the United Nations, we will continue to support their convening in Geneva. Secondly, in the light of the deteriorating situation in Libya, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) needs a robust mandate in order to monitor and report violations of human rights and of international humanitarian law on the ground, as well as to ensure a close follow-up to the Berlin process. Therefore, Switzerland strongly encourages strengthening the human rights component of UNSMIL by allocating the necessary resources. Finally, peace efforts must include and reach out to the relevant Libyan stakeholders, including civil society, in order to ensure the inclusive nature of the Berlin process and anchor it in the reality on the ground. To that end, in its role as co- Chair, Switzerland will work to achieve tangible progress, in particular with regard to key humanitarian aspects, such as improving humanitarian access and ensuring the protection and assistance of the civilian population. Before concluding, allow me to address the issue of the establishment of a demilitarized zone around Sirte and Al-Jufra, which has been referred to. It certainly has the potential to prevent the emergence of renewed hostilities among the parties to the conflict. Of course, its operational modalities would need to be looked at in detail. In the meantime, in its capacity as co-Chair of the international humanitarian law and human rights working group of the Berlin process, Switzerland calls upon all countries to exert their influence over the parties in order to agree a ceasefire as a matter of urgency. In line with its long-standing commitment and holistic approach to Libya, Switzerland will continue to promote cooperation across conflict lines and support Libyan officials in their efforts to overcome institutional divisions.
