Mr. Chambas: It is certainly a pleasure to see
you, Sir, presiding over this body, and I deem it a great
honour to have been invited to participate in today's
important open debate on peace consolidation in West
Africa. Your country, Ghana, is one of the poles of
democracy, stability and growth within the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and has
been at the forefront in working to ensure peace,
stability and democracy in West Africa. Our collective
efforts have yielded positive dividends, as peace and
normalcy gradually return to the West African region.
We commend you for this brilliant initiative.

I would like to express appreciation to the United
Nations, especially the Security Council and the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for their solidarity
and tremendous support in facilitating peace in war-
torn and conflict-infected West African countries. The
United Nations was our partner in Sierra Leone,
Liberia, Guinea and Guinea-Bissau, and it is currently
our partner in cote d'Ivoire. As the global body with a
mandate for ensuring peace and security in the world,

06-4607]
the United Nations is playing its appropriate role in the
peace process in West Africa.

Let me preface my statement with some general
observations. Conflict in West Africa is a serious threat
to global peace and security and requires global
attention and priority. The youth crisis in West Africa,
which is partly the fallout of prolonged conflict in
some West African countries and the debilitating
economic situation, is potentially explosive in West
Africa and poses serious migration challenges for
Western countries in Europe and North America.

It is cheaper and easier to invest in and
consolidate peace than it is to contain and resolve
conflicts. Peace consolidation is a proactive, rather
than a reactive, response to threats to peace.

As I said earlier, the United Nations has been a
major partner in the peace process in West Africa. The
United Nations has also taken a bold initiative in
creating the Peacebuilding Commission to support
post-war countries in the process of peacebuilding and
national recovery. As the Secretary-General rightly
observed, the Peacebuilding Commission is designed to
fill a gaping hole in the peace activities of the United
Nations and is meant to assist countries in their
transition from war to peace and stimulate stability,
democracy and development. This is highly
commendable. From July 2004 to June 2005, it is
estimated that the United Nations spent about $4.5
billion on peacekeeping operations. That expenditure
would not have been worthwhile without strong back-
up in terms of post-conflict peace consolidation. That
is because there is the possibility of a backlash if
urgent steps are not taken by the international
community, led by the United Nations, to scale-up
peacebuilding initiatives and activities for the peoples
and Governments of post-conflict countries.

Pro-peace forces must be reinforced, while
institutions, infrastructure and facilities must be
reconstructed. Peace is still very fragile in many post-
conflict countries in West Africa, where the United
Nations has assisted us in facilitating peace. Also, there
are new threats to peace in some hitherto fairly stable
countries such as Guinea and Guinea-Bissau. In
Liberia, for example, while the country installed a new
democratic Government, headed by Africa's first
elected woman president, Her Excellency, Ms. Ellen
J ohnson-Sirleaf, on 16 January 2006, the country needs
06-4607]

tremendous support to put it on the path of irreversible
peace.

Peace consolidation for West African countries
will include the following four major components: the
rebuilding of democratic institutions, including the
judiciary, parliament and the civil service; security
sector reform to establish competent, truly national
security forces that are well equipped and can
adequately protect lives and property; support for the
economic capacity of the Government to rebuild
destroyed infrastructure and deliver social services to
the people; and private sector development to create
jobs and economic opportunities for the large army of
unemployed people, especially youth.

There are several ways through which the
international community, especially the United
Nations, can assist in the process of peace
consolidation in post-war countries. These include
budget support programmes. In most cases,
post-conflict countries do not have the fiscal basis to
raise the revenue needed for their budgetary
obligations. They depend largely on foreign aid and
support for their budgets. This constitutes a major
means by which the international community can
facilitate the stability of a new Government and put it
on a sustainable path.

The second way is project facilitation, especially
the reconstruction of infrastructure. In many post-
conflict countries in West Africa, the social
infrastructure - electricity, water, roads, et cetera
has- either collapsed during the war or is barely
functional. The reconstruction of those facilities is a
major challenge to new Governments in many post-
conflict countries, which is germane to peace
consolidation. Liberia and Sierra Leone are good cases
in point.

The third way is institutional capacity
enhancement. Key institutions central to effective
governance either have been weakened or are virtually
non-functional in many post-war countries. Those
institutions include the judiciary, civil service,
parliament and security forces. They need both human
capacity enhancement and the provision of required
institutional facilities and resources. For instance,
conducting elections is an arduous challenge for post-
conflict countries; so is maintaining law and order. The
international community can target those strategic
governance sectors for capacity support.

The fourth way is policy formulation. Many post-
conflict countries have a dearth of capacity in the area
of policy formulation, especially with regard to the
economy. The reason is that conflicts usually trigger
the flight of human capital from conflict spots to other
parts of the world, especially Europe and North
America. To reinforce local capacity in the area of
economic policy formulation, the international
community, led by the United Nations, could help
mobilize the diaspora human resources of each post-
conflict country to assist it in the economic sphere.
Liberia, for instance, has tremendous human resources
in North America - resources that can be effectively
harnessed in a systematic way for policy formulation
and development priorities in that country.

There must be mutual accountability on the part
of both the international community, which is assisting
the post-conflict country, and the country itself. The
country must conduct a regime of transparency,
accountability and due process. While conditionalities
should not be set for countries, it is important that the
international resources mobilized for development be
used judiciously as the country improves its capacity to
generate its own resources internally.

The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission is a welcome development. Africa, which
has eight of the world's 17 United Nations
peacekeeping operations in 2006, should qualify for
the Commission's pilot scheme. West Africa, which has
been an epicentre of conflict and war on the continent,
should be a natural beneficiary of the work of the
Commission.

However, the Peacebuilding Commission may not
be in a position to take on many countries in its first
few years of operation. Yet the challenge of peace
consolidation and post-conflict reconstruction is urgent
and requires that there be multiple options and
strategies for assisting countries. Those options may
include the following.

The first is continued support by various United
Nations agencies for peace consolidation initiatives in
West Africa. The United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA) can be a focal point for coordinated peace
consolidation efforts by United Nations agencies. We
in ECOWAS are already working very closely together
with UNOWA; we are engaging in very close
collaboration with Mr. Ould-Abdallah and his
colleagues in Dakar.

The second option is support for ECOWAS in its
peace consolidation initiatives in the subregion.
ECOWAS is undertaking various peacebuilding and
peace consolidation initiatives in the West African
subregion, including accelerating the implementation
of the New Partnership for Africa's Development and
regional integration programmes, improving the
capacity of electoral management bodies, facilitating
the establishment and strengthening of the capacity of
national human rights institutions to protect human
rights and addressing the humanitarian challenges of
post-conflict reconstruction. ECOWAS has established
a Peace Fund to help countries with post-conflict
reconstruction.

A proactive initiative composed of peace
consolidation and post-conflict reconstruction is an
urgent step to prevent conflict backlash in post-conflict
countries. It is also an effective conflict prevention
measure. It is easier and cheaper to invest in peace than
to invest in conflict resolution. This United Nations
initiative will yield greater peace dividends than the
deployment of troops to contain conflicts and wars.
ECOWAS fully supports this new approach by the
United Nations and hopes that West Africa, which has
been a hot spot of conflicts in the world, will be a
major beneficiary of it.

