Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba)(spoke in Spanish):
It is encouraging that the Security Council is using its
meagre powers to at least tackle the terrible humanitarian
situation that has been created in the Balkans. It is also
encouraging that this is occurring at the initiative of the
non-aligned caucus of the Council. I must say that my
delegation deeply shares the legitimate concern for the
victims of this conflict - all those who have died, the
wounded, the orphans, the mothers who have lost their
children, all those suffering from hunger, those who have
lost their homes, their hospitals and their schools, those
who have no means of support, the many lives lost and
the dozens wounded caused by the bombing in Korisa
only a few hours ago.

Cuba shares the suffering of the hundreds of
thousands of refugees and displaced persons and has
offered its full cooperation to alleviate their suffering. In
response to the information from the United States
authorities regarding the decision to use the Guantanamo
base, part of Cuban territory, which it is occupying
illegally and against the will of our people, to temporarily
shelter 20,000 Kosovar refugees, our country agreed not
only to that number, but also to even larger numbers if
possible, offering its willingness to cooperate in caring for
those refugees with our hospital services, medical
personnel and available supplies. With the humility,
altruism and discretion that characterize real humanitarian

 

action, Cuba has offered as long ago as 5 April to
cooperate by contributing 1,000 doctors, completely free of
charge, to take care of the Kosovar refugees.

Each refugee is a human tragedy that cannot be
reduced to cold statistics, much less be used for political
propaganda and headlines in the press. It would be useful
to have official and exhaustive information on how many
refugees have been accepted and under what conditions by
those who are the very ones responsible for what has
occurred. With their vast resources and many sins, NATO
members, as the figures show, appear more inclined to
create refugees rather than receive them.

Neither can it be forgotten that terrible humanitarian
crises are occurring, particularly in Africa, without
receiving the necessary attention of the United Nations, the
international community and the press. Resources
earmarked for dealing with the emergency needs of 11
million people in Africa are less than those already
arranged for some of the Balkan countries.

It is a serious omission that the resolution just adopted
does not say a single word about the urgency of stopping
the bombing of Yugoslavia by the United States and
NATO, which has caused hundreds of civilian deaths and
thousands of wounded and a real humanitarian catastrophe.
The acts of genocide in the form of deliberate bombing of
civilian targets and systematic actions depriving the
population of its means of support must cease immediately.
No type of agreement can be accepted, nor should the
Security Council adopt in any way the so-called agreement
of the Group of Eight, as long as the bombing continues.

Cuba reiterates its vigorous condemnation of the
bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade, which
caused deaths, wounded and the destruction of the building,
and reaffirms the need for an impartial, urgent and
exhaustive investigation, the immediate publication of its
results, the severe punishment of those responsible and the
Security Council's continuing attention to the matter, an
obligation that falls within its competence in compliance
with the United Nations Charter.

