Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): We
are grateful to you, Mr. President, for bringing the
critical issue of post-conflict institution-building to the
Council today. We have much to learn from your
experience, as well of that of East Timor. I welcome
the presence of the Deputy Prime Minister, as well as,
earlier in the day, the Secretary-General.

Helping build institutions is at the heart of
building peace. Without security for the State and
people, the economy and public services cannot
operate. Without revenue, there will be nothing with
which to pay for government services and functions
and no confidence in the financial Viability of the State.
Without the rule of law, there will be no accountability.
And there is a need to build the institutional capacity to
resolve conflict peacefully.

The process of building institutions is not solely a
technical exercise, but also a complex political one. It
is often a core part of a peace agreement and is key in
shaping the relationship between the State and society.
It will also determine the level of confidence in the
peace process and the extent to which public
expectations are met. Achieving progress, particularly
in the security and justice sectors, is a prerequisite for
the sustainable withdrawal of peacekeepers.

But the process of building institutions is also a
prerequisite for broader conflict prevention. Fragility
and conflict are symptoms of institutional failure to
manage stress, such as resource scarcity, climate
change, corruption or organized crime.

The year ahead will again be a very challenging
year for the United Nations in supporting institution-
building. Challenges include supporting the needs of
post-referendum Sudan, extending the protection of
civilians and the rule of law in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and expanding protection and
access to justice in Liberia outside of the capital - for
which the Peacebuilding Commission will play a key
role.

But blockages in peacebuilding are all too often
due to failures or delays in institution-building. Those
may be due to political reasons. But they are also due
to continuing weaknesses in the ability of the United
Nations to provide assistance.

There are five issues that I believe we need to
focus on if we are to succeed this year.

First, time is critical. There needs to be the
political and bureaucratic will to deliver on time and
with sufficient scale to meet the volume of needs. That
applies internally to the United Nations system but
equally to Members States, such as through their
engagement on the boards. Business as usual is not
enough.

Secondly, United Nations support for justice and
security sector reform needs to be much more
effective. For that, there needs to be clear delineation
of who has comparative advantage for which roles, so
that we can invest in getting the predictable and
accountable response required. That should reflect the
right balance between immediate stabilization
requirements and longer-term institution-building.

Thirdly, planning between peacekeeping missions
and the funds and programmes needs to be genuinely
integrated. When this Council mandates a mission, we
need to be confident there is clarity on who within the
United Nations will do what and that the funds and
programmes have the means to ratchet up their
engagement to meet these expectations. This has not
been evident recently. We also want to avoid
peacekeeping troops being pulled into institution-
building activities, for which they are neither trained
nor mandated.

Fourthly, there must be better quality and speed
in civilian deployments. We look forward to the
civilian capacity review, and we also look forward to
the World Development Report, which will give further
insight into how to improve our record in
peacebuilding.

Finally, we need to give much greater focus to the
perspectives and experiences of the countries
themselves. We need to be better at assessing and
tapping into existing capacities and to ensure assistance
builds - rather than surpasses - national capabilities.

We welcome the formation of the new grouping
of 17 fragile and conflict-affected countries - the
so-called Group of Seven Plus that is chaired by East
Timor - to provide that voice and feed into the
International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and

ll-21268
Statebuilding. We would be wise to listen to their
emerging findings during the course of the year.
Fragile and conflict-affected States are perhaps the best
judge of, and advocate for, the performance of the
United Nations and the international community.

