Mr. Ohin (Togo) (spoke in French): I should like
to begin by wishing you, Sir, a cordial welcome to New
York and conveying to you the warm greetings of your
counterpart in Togo, President Faure Essozimna
Gnassingbe. Your presence at the United Nations today
reflects your interest in the issue of counter-terrorism,
which remains an ongoing concern and a major
challenge to all States. I should therefore like to thank
your country, Azerbaijan, for having chosen the theme
of today's debate and to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.

I should also like to reiterate our warmest thanks
to the United States delegation for its outstanding work
in the very busy month of April. Lastly, I thank the
Secretary-General not only for his briefing on the issue
at hand, but also for the various actions that have been
undertaken under United Nations auspices to promote
the fight against terrorism.

Terrorism remains one of the greatest threats to
the peace and security of peoples and nations. The
attacks, abductions, hostage-taking, hijackings of
aircraft and killings committed and claimed by
terrorists are serious violations of human rights,
including the rights to life and to live free from fear.
The declared desire of terrorists to acquire weapons of
mass destruction heightens the gravity of the threat
posed by a scourge to which all continents and
countries are exposed.

Terrorists adapt to measures adopted by States to
counter them and to that end use new technologies not
only as tools for training, recruitment and the financing
and planning of attacks, but also as propaganda media
to broadcast and justify their actions. These threats
have grown increasingly complex and compelled our
States to devote significant resources to fighting
terrorism at a time when they are already facing many
critical challenges linked to the fight against poverty
and inequality.

Africa, like the other continents, has known and
lived with terrorism. It has paid a heavy price for
criminal acts, such as those increasingly perpetrated in
Nigeria and the Sahel region by the Islamic sects of
Boko Haram, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and other
criminal groups. The same applies to the terrorist acts
being committed in Somalia, Kenya and Tanzania - in
a word, everywhere where fundamentalist groups have
chosen this way of making themselves heard.

It is important to note that terrorism in Africa is
often fuelled by religious fundamentalism and ethnicity.
Based on beliefs and dogmas, on the one hand, and on
a sense of common ancestry, on the other, it is in every
case the violent expression of intransigence and
intolerance towards citizens on a continent that is
otherwise characterized more markedly than anywhere
else by religious and cultural syncretism.

In Africa, terrorist groups increasingly exploit
one of the continent's vulnerabilities - its immense
State territories, where a lack of control favours the
establishment of training camps. Given that reality and
the rise in such actions, in the course of its presidency
of the Security Council in February Togo drew the
international community's attention to the threats that
continue to be posed by the transnational organized
crime that is clearly linked to terrorism in West Africa
and the Sahel region (see S/PV.6717).

We cannot overemphasize that, regardless of the
reasons offered by the authors of such acts, there can
be no justification for terrorist acts perpetrated against
people and public and private property. We must
therefore combat the scourge by all legal means.

Aware of the threat looming over our countries,
Togo has made counter-terrorism a major priority of its
security policy, which is fully aligned with the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Important measures have
been taken to strengthen existing legal institutional
mechanisms. For instance, on 6 July 2007 we enacted a
law against money-laundering, and another on
7 September 2009 against the financing of terrorism,
allowing my country to join relevant international
conventions. However, the key measure was our
establishment on March 2008 of a national cell for the
processing of financial information, whose role
consists, inter alia, of detecting and halting money-
12-32940
laundering activities and of coordinating national
counter-terrorism mechanisms.

At the subregional level, Togo participates in the
legal apparatus adopted by the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) to coordinate the
fight against this scourge. These include the Protocol
for the Establishment of a Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution, Peace and
Security, aimed at strengthening subregional cooperation
in several fields, including international terrorism; the
Intergovernmental Action Group against Money
Laundering in West Africa, which was created in 1999
and whose mandate was revised in 2006 to incorporate
counter-terrorism financing; the Conflict Prevention
Framework adopted in January 2008 to help the
subregion to address the interrelated challenges of
cross-border crime, the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, and political, security and economic
governance; and the first Regional Action Plan of 2009
on drug trafficking, organized crime and drug abuse.

These subregional structures, which reflect the
commitment of the leaders of West Africa to tackling
terrorism, have complemented and strengthened the
many legal instruments and mechanisms that the
African Union has adopted to facilitate and promote
concerted and effective action against terrorism. These
measures include the adoption of the 1999 Algiers
Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism and its 2004 Protocol Additional, and the
establishment of the African Centre for the Study and
Research on Terrorism, which form a framework for
promoting interaction and cooperation among African
States and regional mechanisms.

The fight against terrorism calls for hard work
based on, among other things, collective action and
intelligence sharing to find and identify the
perpetrators of the threat, to pinpoint their locations
and to understand their strategies and goals. That work,
which requires numerous skills and significant funding,
cannot be carried out without cooperation. National
initiatives must therefore complement those of other
nations and fall within a framework of bilateral,
regional and international cooperation and sharing of
lessons learned.

Fortunately, the international community has at
its disposal many legal mechanisms and instruments
for the maintenance of peace and security that can for
the most part be used in the fight against terrorism. The
adoption of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004); the 16 global United Nations conventions
to combat specific forms of terrorism around the
world; and the 2006 United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy - all of which call for international
actions to prevent and punish terrorist acts - speak for
the resolute international will to fight terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations.

Through the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy -
on which all counter-terrorism initiatives are founded -
the international community has strengthened its
capacities in surveillance, cooperation, coordination
and harmonization of policies and practices for the
prevention and suppression of terrorism.

Today, the greatest challenge for the international
community is not to adopt a judicial framework for the
fight against terrorism. Rather, it lies in our ability to
enact in a coordinated, efficient and effective way the
many regional, continental and global instruments
already in place. We must demonstrate a greater and
unwavering resolve to prevent and combat terrorism,
because when it takes root it can strike any and every
country.

In that regard, the report of the High-level Panel
on Threats, Challenges and Change (A/59/565, annex),
convened by former Secretary-General Kofi Annan in
2003, states that what threatens the security of any
nation threatens the security of all nations, weak or
strong. No State, no matter how powerful, can face
alone the border-defying threat of terrorism.
Cooperation must be our guiding principle in our fight
to safeguard domestic and international security.
Ongoing cooperation offers the advantages of sharing
information about types of terrorist attacks and of
finding ways to cut off its funding and weakening its
networks. Synergy and information-sharing among the
various institutions engaged in the fight, as well as
technical and financial aid, are essential in the short
and medium terms to eradicating this relentless threat
to all nations and all peoples.

The most vulnerable countries, and those with the
most limited resources, require capacity-building in
surveillance, effective monitoring of the movement of
people and goods across their borders, detecting
prohibited items, confiscating dangerous materials and
depriving terrorists of safe havens.

It is sad to note that one of the assets terrorists
enjoy is their networks actively cooperate within one
another, whereas States are often slow to find their way
to mutually beneficial cooperation. Togo believes that
only joint initiatives at the bilateral, regional and
international levels - all the while respecting the
principles of independence and territorial integrity -
offer hope for an effective fight against terrorism.

