Mr. Zannier: The report before the Council
today (S/2010/401) covers the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from 16 March 2010 to 15 July 2010.
Overall, since the last Council meeting on UNMIK in
mid-May (see S/PV.6314), the situation in Kosovo has
been relatively stable, although, as we saw most
recently in early July, the potential for instability,
especially in northern Kosovo, remains. Insufficient
progress towards reconciliation between the
communities and the unresolved issues that hamper
such reconciliation, coupled with slow economic
development, continue to present the risk of social
unrest. For its part, UNMIK continues to implement its
mandate in a status-neutral manner, assisting Kosovo's
communities, interacting with the institutions in
Pristina and the other key stakeholders in Kosovo, with
the Government in Belgrade and with other regional
and international actors.

An important development since I last addressed
the Council was the issuance of the much-awaited
10-47134
International Court of Justice advisory opinion on
22 July. Until then, the anticipation surrounding the
imminent delivery of the opinion hindered efforts to
properly resolve the issues between Belgrade and
Pristine which, if resolved, would have a positive
impact in Kosovo and on the region. The issuance of
the Court's opinion should therefore now open a new
phase and allow Belgrade and Pristina to engage in a
constructive dialogue with a view to the resolution of
these issues. Reactions to the opinion on the ground,
both in Belgrade and Pristina, as well as among
Kosovo's communities, were predominantly measured.

This dialogue is very important for the stability
and development of the region. The Secretary-General
and the European Union (EU) High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy have exchanged
letters noting the vital role of the EU in promoting the
dialogue against the background of the European
perspective for the region, and have agreed to
coordinate efforts in this regard. The United Nations
preliminary legal assessment is that the opinion does
not affect the status of UNMIK or a status-neutral
policy. Indeed, the judgment confirms the applicability
of resolution 1244 (1999).

On the internal political front, the new Kosovo
Serb majority municipalities established following the
Pristina-sponsored elections of November 2009 are
consolidating their administrative structures and have
begun engaging with their parent municipality for the
transfer of municipal records. Time will show how
effective the new municipalities are in addressing the
needs of the populations they serve.

The reporting period also saw municipal elections
in Kosovo organized by the Kosovo authorities in the
new predominantly Kosovo Serb-inhabited
municipality of Partesh/Partes, and by Belgrade in
Novoberde/Novo Brdo in northern Mitrovica. The
voting proceeded without incident at all three locations
despite Serbian opposition to the Pristina-organized
election, which, however, did not discourage a large
turnout by Serbian voters in Partesh/Partes, and
Pristina's objections to those organized by Belgrade.
Nevertheless, on the day of the elections in northern
Mitrovica, a large crowd of Kosovo Albanians gathered
to protest the election and faced off across the Iber/Ibar
river with a significant crowd of Kosovo Serbs. While
a confrontation was averted by prompt reaction by
Kosovo police, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), the incident demonstrated how quickly a
critical situation can develop in and around northern
Kosovo.

In fact, as discussions in the Council on 6 July
demonstrated (see S/PV.6353), the situation in the
North remains of major concern, and steps are
constantly required, through consultations and
dialogue, to ensure security and stability. A number of
explosions causing property damage in April and May
and clashes between Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo
Serb teenagers in June were followed by violence in
northern Mitrovica prompted by the opening of a civil
service centre by the Ministry of Interior of Kosovo in
July.

In his report to the Council of 6 April
(S/2010/ 169), the Secretary-General stated his concern
over the risk of tensions should the implementation of
policies and strategies for northern Kosovo not take
place in conditions of transparency and dialogue with
local communities and all relative stakeholders. Recent
violence in northern Mitrovica reminds us of the need
for all sides to commit to dialogue as a necessary
precondition for addressing the challenges faced in
northern Kosovo. Kosovo's communities are going to
have to work together to rebuild the trust that has been
destroyed. I therefore wish to reiterate the Secretary-
General's call on all parties to exercise restraint and to
adopt a constructive, cooperative and consultative
approach to the resolution of issues in northern
Kosovo.

Where we have a process of consultations, there
is a chance for positive developments. I hope that
continuing dialogue will finally result in progress in re-
establishing multi-ethnic courts and fully fledged
customs controls in northern Kosovo. Unfortunately,
discussions of these issues have quickly become mired
in sovereignty issues and political considerations,
which have impeded progress.

Dialogue appears to be bearing fruit in the
northern Mitrovica suburb of Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani,
where last summer the Kosovo Serb and Kosovo
Albanian communities were coming into regular
conflict over returns and reconstruction. This year, the
building season has so far been without incident. As of
15 July, Kosovo Albanians had completed 20 houses in
this area and 20 families had returned to their homes.
At the same time, the construction of five new
buildings by Kosovo Serbs is reaching completion.
UNMIK has been facilitating meetings at which
representatives of the two communities have discussed
practical issues of common interest, such as electricity,
water and the like.

I am also pleased to report that there has been
progress in the long-delayed process of relocation of
the Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian community of
internally displaced persons living in Cesmin Lug and
Osterode camps in northern Mitrovica. The
construction of 50 houses for the most endangered
families from the camps, funded by the United States
Agency for International Development, is all but
complete, and the families are scheduled to move in
from 15 August.

However, overall progress on returns is still too
slow, as highlighted in the Secretary-General's report,
and there is a need for greater focus on reconciliation
between the communities, as demonstrated most
recently by the incidents following the spontaneous
return of 23 Kosovo Serb families to the village of
Zallq/Zac, in north-western Kosovo, where five people
are still considered missing from the conflict.

In April, I reported on the disturbing display of
active local resistance to these returns, including
through repeated physical attacks against the returnees,
which have been condemned by the Kosovo authorities
and all key stakeholders in Kosovo, including KFOR
Commander Lieutenant General Bentler, European
Union Special Representative Feith and myself. As the
reconstruction of houses for the returnees started on
9 July with funds provided by the Kosovo authorities,
it is to be hoped that the welcoming messages from the
Kosovo authorities will help quell the lingering
hostility among some members of the receiving
community. On another occasion, during the 28 June
Vidovdan celebrations at Gazimestan, the call for peace
and justice sounded by Metropolitan Amfllohije of the
Serbian Orthodox Church was marred by participants
singing anti-Albanian songs containing hate speech.

In my last address to the Council (see S/PV.6314), I raised the issue of the disconnection of
telecommunication service providers using Serbian
dialing codes and operating in Kosovo without a
license, which led to serious disruptions in the
communication infrastructure in minority areas and
provoked retaliatory action against licensed
transmitters in northern Kosovo. Since then, the
Kosovo authorities have taken steps to lessen the
impact of the disconnections on minority communities
and Belgrade has partially restored the Serbian cellular
network in Kosovo. While efforts to resolve the issue
through dialogue have not yet met with success, the
Kosovo Telecommunications Regulatory Authority's
decision not to effect further disconnections during this
time helped decrease tensions and deserves
appreciation.

Another unresolved issue relates to the Kosovo
Ministry of Justice's decision last year to deal with
mutual legal assistance requests from non-recognizing
States directly, rather than through UNMIK. In
consequence, during this reporting period the Serbian
Ministry of Justice returned some 1,500 such requests
to EULEX, all of them unprocessed. This is another
example of political considerations negatively affecting
the right of citizens to Government services. It is in
order to address such needs that UNMIK continues to
provide document certification services for Kosovo
residents relating to civil status, pension and education,
and to facilitate the provision of international legal
assistance when requested.

Similarly, UNMIK continues to provide its
facilitation in the vitally important area of regional
cooperation and, despite setbacks and difficulties due
to status-related considerations, has in most cases been
able to assist in facilitating the participation of the
Kosovo institutions in regional and international
forums and mechanisms. However, such facilitation
continues to be ad hoc and subject to the prevailing
political climate, and the Kosovo authorities have
become more emphatic in their view that UNMIK
facilitation may undermine their declared sovereign
status. Facilitating the participation of the Kosovo
authorities in one of the key mechanisms for regional
economic development, the Central European Free
Trade Agreement, has been particularly challenging.
Nevertheless, I have continued to engage with both
Belgrade and Pristina, as well as with regional leaders
and with the European Commission, which sponsors
many of the regional initiatives, in order to try to craft
solutions that allow for maximal cooperation under
current circumstances.

UNMIK has also continued to provide its good
offices in order to learn the fate of the 1,862
individuals whom the International Committee of the
Red Cross estimates remain missing from the conflict
and its aftermath. While there has been encouraging
cooperation between Serbia's war crimes prosecutor's
10-47134
office, EULEX, and the Pristina-Belgrade Working
Group on Missing Persons in the identification of
possible mass grave sites in southern Serbia, again
little progress has resulted from this. Finding and
identifying the missing is a crucial part of the
reconciliation process, as families feel unable to
resume normal life until they know the fate of their
loved ones.

Under the direction of the Reconstruction
Implementation Commission, work was completed on
two of the Serbian Orthodox religious sites damaged or
destroyed during the March 2004 violence, and
cooperation within the Commission between Belgrade
and Pristina has continued. However, the
Commission's funding will run out at the end of this
year, and there remains work to be done. I would
therefore appeal to all interested parties to find the
means that would allow the Commission to continue its
important work.

Finally, I would like to inform the Council that,
with the United Nations Kosovo team, we have
completed our draft United Nations strategic
framework for Kosovo as a plan for marshaling the
resources of the United Nations family in Kosovo to
meet our common goal of peace consolidation, which
we are now submitting to Headquarters. We intend to
focus through joint efforts on the protection of human
rights, the fostering of good governance, encouraging
returns, and addressing various aspects of the situation
in the North.

In closing, on behalf of all UNMIK staff, I wish
to thank the Council for its support. We are strongly
committed to ensuring continued peace and stability in
Kosovo and in the region, and we will remain engaged
with all sides in order to encourage dialogue, help
defuse tensions and maintain peace and stability on the
ground, in close coordination with EULEX and KFOR.

