Mr. Duale (Somalia): First and foremost, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. At the same time, I
wish through you to extend our thanks and appreciation
to your predecessor.

Those members of the Council who have spoken at
this meeting have had much to say in particular about the
recent historic achievements in Somalia, including the
nomination of 10 Cabinet ministers. Among these are
two women, one of whom is my boss, the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs. Furthermore,
the 10 members of the Cabinet were selected without
regard to the 4.5 power-sharing issue. The members
represent the five groups of Somali society, with two
ministers for each, without discrimination or regard
for the part of the country or clan that the minister
comes from. Moreover, we hope that, as the Speaker of
Parliament has promised, the Cabinet will be approved
as soon as it is presented to the Parliament.

All that remarkable progress was achieved with
the unfailing, sincere and brotherly support of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
the Ethiopian forces, with the support, of course,
of the Security Council, the United Nations and the
international community.

It is now a matter of nation-building and establishing
a Government in a country that for 21 years had
practically no effective central Government, or even
regional Governments that really functioned - instead
there were militias governing every area. Rebuilding
must be the major objective of everyone in Somalia.
We therefore welcome the fact that AMISOM. will
be strengthened and given the support it needs,
as requested especially by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and as accepted by the
Somali Government.

I hope that the Security Council will not limit
itself to this three-month extension. We hope to see
a future extension of at least one year, with all the
support required for AMISOM. and the Somali National
Security Forces so that they can in due course take
over responsibility for the country's security and
stabilization.

