Mr. Hashi (Somalia): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for convening this wrap-up session on the
African dimension in the work of the Security Council.
We congratulate you and other Council members on
this initiative, which shows the importance your
delegation and your country attach to African issues. I
would also like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation for the establishment of the Security
Council Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which serves as a
useful forum to discuss conflict in Africa.

There has been a marked decline in inter-State
wars, thanks to the realization that peaceful resolution
of inter-State conflicts is in the long-term interest of
the concerned States. The recognition of that by States
that respect the norms of international law in inter-
State relations has contributed to this decline. The
Security Council's role in this regard is commendable.

On the other hand, the international community
has witnessed a dramatic rise in the frequency of civil
war, especially in Africa. There are some common
denominators in the root causes of those conflicts. We
will note a few of them: underdevelopment and
poverty; inequitable sharing of power and national
wealth; lack of good governance, leading in most cases
to authoritarian rule and violations of human rights; the
self-interested orientation of neighbouring States,
which creates uncontrollable cycles of instability; and
the flow of weapons and non-observance of sanctions,
especially arms embargoes. Conflict situations like that
in my own country, Somalia, can be averted if the
international community addresses those and other
issues in a timely and appropriate manner.

The international community has achieved
considerable success in the resolution of some
conflicts, while at the same time inexplicably failing
with others. We acknowledge that the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security lies with the Security Council. However, we
have to ask ourselves honest questions so that we can
fully appreciate the human dimension of conflicts and
not necessarily the strategic interests of States
Members of the United Nations.

What does it take for the Security Council to be
seriously seized of a conflict situation in Africa? What
triggers Security Council action in conflict prevention
and/or resolution? Is it the Council's obligation under
the Charter to preserve international peace and
security? Is it a question of humanitarian intervention,
as in the case of my country, Somalia, during the
United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM), at
the height of the civil war and the famine? Must there
be big power interests with historical links to the
countries in conflict, or economic or other strategic
considerations? Or must there be a combination of
some or all of the issues I have just mentioned?
Admittedly, there can be no uniform approach or an
agreed-upon model. But I have raised these questions
because the response of the Security Council in dealing
with different conflicts in Africa varies.

Recent history has shown that when conflict
resolution is sponsored by a State or a group of States,
the chances of support for intervention in that conflict
are enhanced. But what happens to a country when
there is no major "sponsor", as is the case with my
country? Let us take the example of Somalia. The
United Nations estimates that 500,000 people have
been killed during the civil war, that 1.5 million people
have been internally displaced or are in refugee camps
in neighbouring countries, and that 1.2 million are
dispersed in the diaspora. That is a total of 3.2 million
Somalis either dead, displaced, in refugees camps or
part of the diaspora. How many more have to die or be
displaced or dispersed before the Council becomes
seriously engaged in a conflict like that of my country?
I urge Council members to give serious consideration
to this situation.

The other dynamic in addressing conflicts in
Africa is the emerging role of regional and subregional
organizations. Admittedly, an enhanced role for those
organizations is welcome. The "Somalia-Rwanda
syndrome" has contributed to those ad hoc
arrangements, where regional and subregional
organizations act under Chapter VIII of the Charter. In
fact, fewer than half of all peacekeeping operations
since 1997 have been undertaken by the United
Nations; the majority of peacekeeping operations have
been assumed by either regional or subregional
organizations. There is a greater margin for success
where regional actors set aside their varying interests
in the conflict and agree - in a unified and cohesive
manner - to resolve that conflict. The Economic
Community of West African States is a good example
of that.

However, as good as that may sound, there are
certain constraints that severely limit the
interventionist role of regional and subregional
organizations. Those include: lack of adequate military
capacity for intervention in conflicts where peace-
enforcement and peacekeeping are necessary; lack of
adequate financial resources and logistical support;
inadequate institutional capacity to engage in peace-
enforcement and peacekeeping operations; conflicts of
interest among States members of the regional or
subregional organization; and lack of cooperation with
sanctions regimes, in particular where arms embargoes
are involved.

The African Union's efforts to create the
capacities necessary for deployment in African
conflicts must be supported and enhanced. The
international community must put in place the
resources necessary for the creation and strengthening
of the capacities necessary for deployment in conflict
areas of Africa.

I urge the Security Council to address all
conflicts with equal attention. I trust that the Council
will continue its primary task of preserving peace and
security.

