Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom):
Mr. President, I am particularly pleased to welcome
you. I am grateful to the Secretary-General for his
report and to the Special Representative for his
briefing, for his outstanding and, I think, impartial
leadership of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and for
the integrity that he brings to his work. It is good to
welcome Mr. Covic back, and I thank him for his
intervention.

The United Kingdom associates itself with the
European Union statement to be delivered
subsequently by the representative of Luxembourg.

The United Kingdom shares the Secretary-
General's assessment that progress in implementing the
standards for Kosovo has continued since his last
report, although it is clear that further and continuing
progress will be required. Kosovo's institutions reacted
quickly and calmly in electing a new Government after
the indictment by the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) of former Prime
Minister Haradinaj. The Belgrade Government's calls
for calm following that indictment also helped. That
voluntary resignation and surrender to the Tribunal is
an example of cooperation with the ICTY, which others
should certainly follow.

I have four points on priorities for the coming
months.

First, the United Kingdom welcomes the
Secretary-General's recommendations to begin this
summer a comprehensive review of Kosovo's progress.
We look forward to the early appointment of a special
envoy to conduct that review. The outcome of the
comprehensive review is not predetermined.
Demonstrable progress in the standards implementation
process must continue up to, during and beyond the
review. It remains up to the Provisional Institutions and
all of Kosovo's communities, with UNMIK's help, to
make progress on standards if the review is to decide
that it is possible to move to the next stage and to start
discussing Kosovo's future status, as provided for in
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

However, standards are much more than just a
means to future status discussions. They represent
fundamental issues which will be decisive for the
future of Kosovo and its people, irrespective of issues
of status.

Secondly, decentralization, while not formally
one of the standards, is a key measure of progress and
an important element in reassuring minorities. It is
therefore disappointing that there has been little
progress on the Government's five decentralization
pilot projects since the last time the Council discussed
Kosovo, in February. As the Contact Group made clear
to Prime Minister Kosumi on 25 May, progress on
those pilot projects before and during the
comprehensive review will be a factor in determining
the outcome of that review.
Thirdly, Kosovo Serbs need to be allowed to play
a full part in the political life of Kosovo. I did not say
that Kosovo Serbs should play a full part in the life of
Kosovo. That, I hope, is obvious. I said they should be
allowed to play a full part.

The United Kingdom welcomes the resumption of
the direct dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on
energy, missing persons and transport. Kosovo Serb
participation this week in the decentralization working
groups is also encouraging. In our view, the authorities
in Belgrade should now be actively encouraging
Kosovo Serbs to take their rightful place in Kosovo's
Government institutions. The only way for Kosovo
Serb interests to be fully reflected and addressed now
and in the future is through the full engagement of
Kosovo Serbs in Kosovo's political life.

I like what the Special Representative said when
he noted that the fault was not in Kosovo but that the
victims were. I also listened to and heard the specific
points made by Mr. Covic. But it struck me that the
best way to address shortcomings is not across this
Chamber. Instead, the Serb interest would be better
pursued through constructive engagement by Belgrade
and if Belgrade encouraged and empowered the Serbs
in Kosovo to take their full part in the different
processes within Kosovo.

Fourthly, the United Kingdom fully supports the
Special Representative's emphasis on the importance
of restructuring the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
Ambassador Kai Eide first brought this to the
Council's attention in his report of August 2004
(S/2004/932, annex I, enclosure), and we look forward
to action beginning on that soon.

In conclusion, the Secretary-General's report
(S/2005/335) and the Special Representative's
technical assessment contained in its annex I give
cause for qualified optimism. But there can be no room
for complacency; there is much more hard work ahead.
But Mr. Covic's perception of, for example, freedom of
movement for minorities in Kosovo does not seem to
us to be borne out by the situation on the ground as
reflected by the empirical data in the technical
assessment annexed to the Secretary-General's
report- an assessment which I did not consider
actually to have been "embellished". I use that word
because Mr. Covic used it I think, three times. We do
not consider it to have been embellished. The trend
remains positive, and the Provisional Institutions
should continue to work hard on making the
implementation of standards of tangible benefit to all
Kosovars.

When final status discussions begin, it is clear
that an independent Kosovo is one option to be
considered. But it is equally clear that Kosovo's final
status, whatever it is to be, must be negotiated, must be
fair to the interests of all communities in Kosovo and
must promote regional stability and multi-ethnicity.

For its part, the United Kingdom, in the Contact
Group, in the Council, in the European Union and in
the region, will continue to work to build a stable,
sustainable European future for Kosovo and for the
region as a whole, a future in which we very much
hope that Serbia and Montenegro too will assume its
rightful place within the European family.

