Mr. Satoh (Japan): I would like to thank you, Sir,
for giving me the opportunity to participate in today's
discussion on this important issue.

Although it has been more than a decade since the
ceasefire was achieved in the Gulf, the international
community has yet to witness the full implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 687 (1991), which stipulated the conditions
for a formal ceasefire, nor have the provisions of
resolution 1284 (1999), which seeks to gain Iraq's
cooperation with the United Nations, been
implemented.

The current impasse, in which no progress can be
made towards the implementation of the resolutions, is
a source of profound concern to us. We must remember
what is at stake: the peace and stability of the Middle
East region. A primary objective of the Council's
resolutions is to ensure that Iraq no longer has the
capacity to pose a threat to its neighbouring states.
Also at stake is the credibility of international efforts
for the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. As all know, Japan has been a strong
advocate for the non-proliferation and eventual
elimination of weapons of mass destruction.

At the same time, we share with the international
community the concern for the plight of the Iraqi
people. We believe that there is a need to make
adjustments to the current sanctions regime in order to
alleviate their suffering, while retaining the objectives
of the Council's resolutions. It is in this context that we
fully support the ongoing efforts of the Council to
modify the current sanctions regime in line with
resolution 1352 (2001), which was adopted
unanimously. We will support any step to ease the
suffering of the Iraqi people that does not compromise
our common objective of resolving the disarmament
issue in Iraq.

I would like to add here that the interested States
in the region should be consulted in the process of
formulating the specifics of the new sanctions regime.
Their cooperation is essential in order to ensure the
effective implementation of such a new regime.

Japan, which has retained its bilateral diplomatic
relations with Iraq throughout the past decade, has
continuously sought to persuade the Government of
Iraq to implement the relevant resolutions and to
cooperate with the United Nations, particularly with
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission. Regrettably, such efforts by us
and other members of the international community
have so far reaped no discernible results.

We would therefore like to take this opportunity
once again to call on the Government of Iraq to
cooperate with the United Nations and to implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions as soon as
possible. In this context, we hope that the dialogue
between Iraq and the United Nations will be
maintained.

I would also to take this opportunity to urge all
members of the Council, particularly the permanent
members, to make further efforts to act together to
resolve the situation. In dealing with an issue as
difficult as the Iraqi situation, it is crucial that the
Council act in unity. Unless the Council speaks with
one voice, the prospect for breaking the current
impasse will not improve.
We look forward to the day when Iraq can
normalize its relationship with the international
community. This will be possible only when the
provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions
are implemented. We sincerely hope that this will be
achieved without further delay.

