Mr. IliicheV (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank you personally,
Mr. President, and the whole Uruguayan delegation for
your skilful and effective presidency of the Council for
January.

This month saw a full agenda. We had a thorough
consideration of a number of African topics: Mali, the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, Cote d'Ivoire and the
situations in Darfur and West Africa. We sent a Security
Council mission to Burundi and the headquarters of
the African Union, a positive result of which was the
President of Burundi's affirmation of his willingness
and openness to accept international support for his
country's efforts to find a solution to the crisis there.
We should take advantage of the opportunity. That
solid list shows that the majority of the Council's work
has been focused on African problems.

I would particularly like to note the Security
Council's adoption on 25 January of resolution 2261
(2016), establishing a United Nations mission in
Colombia. We believe that the progress the parties have
made in settling their 50-year conflict and the decision
to invite the further facilitation of the United Nations
constitute an important, perhaps even historic event
not only for Colombians but for the region as a whole.
Moscow is keeping a keen eye on the course of the
negotiations and will maintain its steadfast support to
reaching a speedy conclusion to the peace process.

Over the past month, the Council has considered
the humanitarian aspects of the internal armed conflict
in Syria three times. There can be no doubt that we
must not relax our attention to the situation there, given
the extremely grave consequences that the conflict,
the terrorist atrocities and the attempts of certain
external actors to forcibly redraw the centuries-old
ethno-religious map of Syria have had for the civilian
population. However, we believe that this is not a case
where the quantity of meetings reflects their quality.
To start with, once the plight of the residents of the
besieged cities became the subject of the Council's
intense attention, it was treated in a very one-sided and
biased way. Secondly, behind this activity there clearly
lurks a wish to distract attention from fundamental
issues of settlement and perhaps even to sabotage the
start of talks in Geneva. We must realize that without
the comprehensive political solution that we are all
hoping for, the humanitarian situation will not improve.

Unfortunately, we are compelled to conclude that
from time to time some delegations exploit their status
as members of the Council to politicize and put a
propagandistic spin on their own particular priorities,
rather than working quietly and painstakingly on the
maintenance of international peace and security within
the Council's authority under the Charter of the United
Nations. That applies in particular to the Arria Formula
meeting held a few days ago on the global challenge of
accounting for missing persons from conflict, human
rights abuses, disasters, organized crime, migration
and other involuntary causes. There is no justification
for the artificial tying of this topic to the work of the
Security Council. There was no prior consultation of
Council members on the need for such a meeting, and
most were simply presented with a fait accompli. We
believe that this undermines the collective principles of
the work of the Security Council.

Incidentally, that collective approach helps to
improve the effectiveness of the Council's activities,
including such important tools as mission visits. In any
case, there is nothing to prevent individual Council
members from visiting countries they are interested in
in their national capacity. We would like to point out that
Arria Formula meetings are supposed to be informal
confidential occasions for a frank exchange of views
in private on the issues that fall under the Security
Council's remit. Unfortunately, we are increasingly
seeing individual Council members abusing the format
by making use ofit to push their own initiatives or those
of their proxy organizations. Such events should be held
on the margins, not paid for under the Organization's
budget.

In conclusion, I would like to express our thanks to
the outgoing Director of the Security Council Affairs
Division, Mr. Movses Abelian, for his assistance and his
facilitation of the Council's work, and to congratulate
him on his promotion. I would also like to wish the
incoming Venezuelan presidency of the Council every
success in carrying out its functions.

