At the outset, I would like to congratulate Estonia on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of May and to thank it, along with Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, for convening this virtual open debate to discuss the Council's working methods. We are pleased to see the practice of convening an annual open debate on this important issue continue, in keeping with paragraph 100 of presidential note S/2017/507, despite the exceptional circumstances we are currently facing. The State of Kuwait also aligns itself with the statement circulated by the representative of New Zealand on behalf of a number of former elected members of the Security Council. As we are all aware, the Security Council, the United Nations and the entire international community are facing an unprecedented global health crisis in its battle against the coronavirus disease pandemic. And with unprecedented circumstances come unprecedented working methods. In that connection, we applaud China, the Dominican Republic and Estonia, which have consecutively presided over the Council since the outbreak escalated in mid-March, for their efforts to ensure that the Council is able to meet and conduct its business remotely since the pandemic has forced the United Nations, its staff, Member States and the entire city to temporarily shut down and work remotely in an effort to help curb the spread of the virus. We are also pleased to see that the Dominican Republic managed to hold a virtual wrap-up session at the end of its presidency. We thank both the Dominican Republic and Estonia for circulating papers on the working methods of the Security Council that contain guidelines outlining how their delegations intend to conduct the Council's work remotely during their respective presidencies. This meeting marks the first time the State of Kuwait has participated in an open debate of the Security Council on its working methods since the end of its non-permanent membership for the 2018-2019 term, during which it chaired the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions. That experience culminated in the adoption of eight presidential notes on 27 December 2019 that contained various provisions aimed at increasing the Council's transparency and efficiency, including the transparency of informal meetings and activities of the Council, the selection process for subsidiary body Chairs and Council visiting missions, the timeline for approval of the annual report, as well as some additional proposals to improve the preparedness of incoming newly-elected members, among other issues. From 17 to 19 January 2020, Kuwait organized a joint informal retreat on the Council's working methods along with Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the current chair of the Informal Working Group, in Kingstown. At the meeting, Council members engaged in active discussions on the Group's programme of work for the current year and on ways to achieve balance in the Council's work between transparency and efficiency. An informal summary of the retreat was prepared by Kuwait and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and issued as document S/2020/172. From my personal experience as a former Chair of the Informal Working Group, and based on the discussions that took place during the aforementioned retreat, I can say with certainty that concrete and effective change in the working methods of the Council can only be achieved through cooperation and a genuine desire of all its members. Today's open debate and its joint organization by Estonia, in its dual capacity as President of the Council for this month and Vice-Chair of the Informal Working Group, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the Chair of the Informal Working Group is a unique precedent and a positive example of what can be achieved when Council members cooperate and support one another. So are the precedents set and progress made thus far by China, the Dominican Republic and Estonia in dealing with the pandemic's repercussions on the Council's work by adapting to the current circumstances, including through agreement on a process to vote on draft resolutions electronically, among other steps. Those are all examples of the Council ensuring the efficiency of its work while simultaneously taking steps to improve its transparency. However, while the Council has made considerable progress in enhancing its transparency and efficiency in recent years, much remains to be done to ensure that the progress achieved thus far is not undermined. First and foremost, we must stress the importance of ensuring the full implementation of note 507, in addition to the eight presidential notes that were agreed in December 2019. While innovation and progress are important, we must also be mindful not to forget the important provisions that have already been negotiated and agreed. In addition, we feel that it is important to continue the discussions on the issue of penholdership and develop the process for the fair allocation of responsibilities among members of the Security Council, as more work remains to be done to ensure the active and equitable participation of all members in the decision-making process, bearing in mind that this issue has been discussed at length within the Informal Working Group in recent years, including during Kuwait's membership. We hope to see concrete results in the near future. Another important issue to consider is the question of due process within the context of the Council's subsidiary bodies, including the role of the Ombudsperson in that regard, particularly since this is an issue of great importance to many Member States outside the Council. We also urge Council members to ensure that the annual report is agreed upon and issued within the time frame outlined in presidential note S/2017/507 so that the General Assembly is able to consider and discuss it in a timely manner. In that vein, we would like to recall Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations, which clearly states that the Security Council carries out its duties on behalf of all Member States. We would therefore like to stress that the responsibility for ensuring that the Council is held accountable for its actions and its proper functioning in line with its mandate, including through its working methods, rests with the wider membership. In conclusion, we urge all Council members to continue adapting the working methods of the Council, as needed, based on the evolution of the current conditions, while maintaining high standards of transparency and accountability, including by continuing efforts to agree on press releases after virtual meetings, in order to ensure the participation of concerned and affected countries and relevant organizations in related Council meetings, and to continue to ensure that all official Council documents are made available to the rest of the United Nations membership in a timely manner, in addition to any documents related to the Council's working methods. We also reiterate Kuwait's support for a more transparent, efficient and accountable Council through the efforts of its members, particularly in the context of the work of the Informal Working Group under the able chairmanship of Ambassador Inga Rhonda King of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and express our readiness to assist and support these efforts in any way possible.
