Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): As one of the last speakers
of the day, Madam President, allow me to commend you
on your exceptional stamina and patience. We also wish
to thank the Lithuanian presidency for convening this
important and timely debate, as well as to congratulate
it on the unanimous adoption of today's resolution
2222 (2015), which condemns all violations and abuses
committed against journalists and strongly deplores
impunity for such acts. 1 would also like to welcome
and thank the journalists who came here today to share
with us their own personal experiences.

Cyprus aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union and Wishes to
make the following remarks in its national capacity.

We recall that the call for freedom of information
came in one of the very first resolutions of the General
Assembly. Freedom of information is a fundamental
human right, a cornerstone of all the freedoms and
values promoted and defended by the United Nations. It
is guaranteed by article 19 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and constitutes an essential pillar of
any healthy society. The freedom of the press is also
enshrined in the European Convention on Human
Rights, in which article 10 provides that

"Everyone has the right to freedom of
expression. This right shall include freedom to hold
opinions and to receive and impart information and
ideas without interference by public authority and
regardless of frontiers."

It is therefore incumbent upon all Governments to
respect the right ofindividuals to hold opinions without
interference, and the freedom of the press to collect,
distribute, analyze and disseminate information
without any kind of interference or fear of violence
or persecution. It is impossible to have a genuinely
democratic society without freedom of the media.
As journalists continue to be imprisoned and killed
in the four corners of the globe, it is important to
recommit ourselves to this very basic freedom and to
foster an independent and pluralistic media, which is
prerequisite to democracy, peace and development. As
the Secretary-General states in his synthesis report on
the post-2015 development agenda,

"Press freedom and access to information, freedom
of expression, assembly and association are enablers
of sustainable development." (A/69/700, para. 79)

The year 2014 was yet another deadly one for
journalists around the world. As reported by the
Committee to Protect Journalists, a total of60journalists
were killed globally in relation to their work, with an
unusual proportion of those killed being members of
the international press who had crossed borders to
cover conflicts and dangerous situations all over the
world. It is indicated that, reflecting the increasingly
volatile nature of conflict zones in which journalists
are often deliberately targeted, nearly one quarter of
those killed that year were members of the international
press, which is double the proportion reported in recent
years. The majority of the victims, however, still remain
local press covering local stories. About 68 per cent of
the journalists killed in 2014 covered politics, with the
next deadliest beat for reporters being war, at 60 per
cent, followed by human rights, at 55 per cent.

The horrific terrorist attacks in Paris and
Copenhagen, the barbaric beheadings of journalists
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, and the
journalists killed while trying to cover a story in a
conflict zones show that the threat to journalists and free
expression is not an isolated phenomenon but a global
one and that, indeed, no place is really safe. It is for this
reason that Governments should redouble their efforts
and take measures that aim at preventing violence and
promoting a safe environment for journalists, in order
that they can perform their duties freely and without
fear. Attacks against the press should be met with zero
tolerance. All acts against the freedom of the media
must be investigated swiftly, and the perpetrators
must be held accountable and brought to justice. It is
unacceptable that the majority of assassinations of
journalists have yet to be properly investigated and
punished.

The United Nations, as the embodiment of our
fundamental freedoms, values and principles, can
also play its part in the global efforts to promote the
protection of journalists, freedom of the press and
putting an end to the regime of quasi-impunity for the
perpetrators of acts of violence against journalists. In
that regard, the important role of the Security Council is
especially important in engaging actively and standing
up against the suppression of the freedom of the media
wherever and whenever it occurs.

In conclusion, allow me to say that my country
joins with all those who fight for the prevalence of the
freedom of the press, for pluralism and unhindered
access to information and for protecting journalists
and their work globally. It is high time to move away
from theoretical declarations and to engage in concrete
actions.

