Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Jan Kubis and his team in Afghanistan for all
their efforts of recent months.

(spoke in English)

The past few months have shown the strength of the
commitment of the Afghan people and the international
community to the democratic process in Afghanistan.
That has not been an easy road. We were initially
buoyed by the excellent turnout of Afghan men and
women in the April 2014 presidential election and the
run-off vote in June, in spite of threats of disruption,
and then were disappointed and concerned by the
allegations of fraud, which threatened to undermine
confidence in the democratic process. While there are
still issues to be resolved, we recognize our unified and
unprecedented effort in the election audit observation
process supporting that historic event.

This effort has been remarkable, both in scale and
in the level of resources applied. Canadian election
observers joined hundreds of colleagues from the
international community to work with their Afghan
counterparts on a full-scale audit of the election. We are
proud of the cooperation of the international community
and the Afghan people in this historical undertaking. We
especially commend the United Nations coordination
of this complex and very challenging task.
(spoke in French)

We urge parties on all sides in Afghanistan to put
aside their differences and to focus on what brings them
together - working towards a safer, more secure and
more prosperous future for all Afghans. We remain
steadfast in our commitment to the Afghan people in
our support of these efforts.

As NATO leaders acknowledged earlier this
month, despite continuing challenges, the Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF) have demonstrated
that they are an effective force, gaining the respect and
confidence of the Afghan people in the battle against
the insurgents. The ANSF will take full responsibility
for Afghanistan's security by the end of 2014, which is
an example of the real and tangible progress achieved
through the shared efforts carried out in the framework
of the mission of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF). The international community has
helped to train over 335,000 ANSF personnel; that is
an extraordinary achievement. With the ISAF mission
ending this year, the need to ensure that the ANSF is
trained and equipped to protect and secure Afghanistan
is greater than ever.

The international community's support to
Afghanistan will endure beyond ISAF, including
through its collective contribution to the financial
sustainment of the ANSF from 2015 to 2017. To that
end, we strongly urge the Government of Afghanistan
to sign the United States-Afghanistan bilateral security
agreement and to conclude the NATO Afghanistan
status of forces agreement as soon as possible. Those
agreements are essential to enabling the international
community to plan for the next phase of military
assistance to Afghanistan and to maintaining strict
accountability and transparency measures for the
sustainment of international funding to the ANSF.

(spoke in English)

Canada remains committed to supporting the ANSF,
including the Afghan National Army and the Afghan
National Police, in order to strengthen its capacity to
respond to threats and provide security for the Afghan
people. We will therefore contribute $330 million over
three years to the NATO fund for the ANSF, starting in
2015, subject to overall conditionality of transparency,
accountability and cost-effectiveness. That will help
to ensure lasting results for the hard-won progress that
Canadians have made in Afghanistan. We welcome
the international community donors' renewal of their
financial commitments to supporting the Government
of Afghanistan in sustaining a sufficient and capable
ANSF.

Our funding builds on the legacy of Canada's
substantial efforts to promote the rule of law and
develop capable, professional security forces in which
Afghans can take pride. More than 40,000 members of
the Canadian Armed Forces have served in Afghanistan
for over the past 12 years. In the Afghan province of
Kandahar, Canadians have trained and mentored the
Afghan National Army and the Afghan National Police.
Canada provided up to 950 military personnel at a time
in the NATO Training Mission-Afghanistan to help
train the ANSF, and our civilian police have trained
and mentored approximately 23,000 effectives of the
Afghan National Police over the past 11 years.

Afghanistan's new leadership will face a number
of urgent issues. Leaders will need to move quickly
to address the range of economic challenges facing
it, particularly given the significant impact of recent
events, such as the electoral uncertainty on business
and financial investment confidence. Gross domestic
product growth has slowed considerably due to reduced
economic activity, and will likely decline further
with the expected reduction in international aid and
spending after 2014, thereby putting further pressure on
Government finances. We hope to see the Government
turn its efforts to improvements that will encourage
economic growth and investment, including through
the development of its extractive sector. We also need
to see robust efforts by the Afghan Government to
increase accountability and transparency across all its
ministries.

Canada will continue to help Afghans build
Afghanistan into a viable country that is better governed,
more stable and secure through investing in: the future
of Afghan children and youth through programming in
education and health, including for maternal, newborn
and child health; advancing security, the rule of law
and human rights through support and training to the
ANSF, and the civil and political participation and
economic empowerment of women; promoting regional
diplomacy, and through humanitarian assistance.
Canada's $227 million in development assistance
between 2014 and 2017, committed to in Tokyo in 2012,
is contingent upon the achievement of essential reforms
by the new Government of Afghanistan. Canada
encourages the new Afghan leadership to redouble
efforts to fulfil its commitments under the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework.

Afghans have a right to chart a course forward to
build the future they demand - free of the country's
warlords, free of regional interference, which only
leads to chaos, and free of the endemic corruption that
must be routed at every part of national life. It is clear
that with the range of challenges ahead, the resolve
and commitment of the Government must be strong.
The strength of Afghanistan lies in its people: those
who support and strive for a safer, more secure and
prosperous future in a country where all their views are
represented and all their voices are heard. That includes
Afghanistan's women, who are a vibrant, vital and equal
part of Afghan society. We call on Afghanistan's new
leadership to truly respect its citizens, particularly by
promoting and protecting the rights of women and girls.

We call upon the new Government to work actively
towards increasing the participation of women in
Afghanistan Government institutions at all levels, in
accordance with its commitment on resolution 1325
(2000). We also call for the government to meet its
international commitments by supporting the passage
and implementation of the Elimination of Violence
Against Women Law, to ensure the protection of Afghan
women and girls from all forms of violence and abuse,
and children from early and forced marriage.

We will continue to stand with the Afghan people
as they strive for a safee, more secure and prosperous
future for their country. This decade of transformation
will see both changes and challenges for Afghanistan,
its partners and the region. We remain steadfast in
our commitment to Afghanistan. Canada calls on
Afghanistan's leaders to work for, and with, all Afghans
to improve security, bolster democracy, increase
transparency and protect the human rights of all those
within its borders.

