Mr. Fedotov: May I commend you, Mr. President,
on bringing this very important and urgent matter
to a meeting of the Security Council. I also thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Burkina Faso, Mr. Barry, forjoining us.

I thank the Council for this opportunity to
discuss how the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) is supporting, and can further
support, the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
countries to work together for security, stability and
sustainable development.

UNODC is proud to have been a trusted partner
of the G-5 Sahel since its inception, namely, through
our programme contributing to the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. The UNODC Sahel
programme is focused on enhancing the accessibility,
efficiency and accountability of criminal justice
systems to counter drug trafficking, as well as other
forms of trafficking and organized crime, terrorism
and corruption. That responds directly to the security
and governance objectives set forth in the regional
integrated strategy and is being implemented with
neighbouring Maghreb countries, namely, Algeria and
Morocco. UNODC puts great stock in our strategic
partnership with the G-5 Sahel, which remains a top
priority of our work in the field.

The G-5 Sahel secretariat and member States
requested in 2017 that UNODC support development
of a police component for the Joint Force to promote
transparent, efficient and accountable judicial
proceedings in the fight against organized crime and
terrorism. Working with our G-5 Sahel partners, as well
as with other countries and international organizations,
we held consultations that resulted in the agreement of
a conceptual and organizational framework, as well as
principles for operationalizing the police component.
As a result, investigative units have been established
across the region.

UNODC has held numerous training workshops
for the military, law enforcement and the judiciary
to strengthen coordination between the Joint Force
and the Sahel criminal justice systems, safeguard
human rights and prevent violations. The G-S Sahel
countries have achieved some notable results with our
support, addressing, in particular, regional judicial
cooperation and mutual legal assistance, firearms-
marking, investigation of terrorism financing, illicit
trafficking at airports and the resolution of backlogged
cases involving terrorism suspects in overdue
pretrial detention.

The results were made possible thanks to support
from the Governments of Germany, Japan, the United
States, the Netherlands, Denmark, Norway, Belgium
and France, as well as the European Union. Our G-S
Sahel partners deserve a great deal of credit for their
commitment to advancing efforts through the Joint
Force in a fragile security environment.

Looking forward, in View of the Burkina Faso
presidency of the G-5 Sahel, UNODC seeks to further
develop its support to the country and its neighbours.
Nonetheless, we must be clear that many daunting
challenges remain. There are, in particular, three areas
where we urgently require the support of Member States
to implement the police component of the Joint Force.

First, in the field of forensics, we need to provide
equipment and training for law enforcement officers
on crime scene investigation, addressing, in particular,
evidence gathered by military personnel.

Secondly, we need support to further promote
integrity measures within the Joint Force and national
justice systems, with the ultimate objective of
reinforcing trust between people and their defence and
security forces.

Thirdly, we need to increase support to integrate
women into the security structures of the G-5 Sahel
member States and do more to enable and highlight the
contributions of women in the fight against terrorism
and transnational organized crime in the Sahel.

The police component of the Joint Force of the
G-5 Sahel recognizes that in order to be sustainable
and effective, security responses must respect human
rights and promote justice. It represents an important
and innovative mechanism to combat terrorism and
transnational organized crime, and, at the same time,
restore trust. I am grateful to the Council for bringing
attention to the challenges we face in achieving those
important objectives.

Predictable funding and the determined political
commitment of the G-5 Sahel and the international
community remain prerequisites for effective action.
The UNODC is committed to working with all our
partners to strengthen governance, security and
development towards a safer, healthier and more
prosperous Sahel.

