Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this briefing on the Syrian
issue, which has taken up so much of your presidency
in the month of February. My delegation also thanks
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his briefing.

In voting in favour of resolution 2268 (2016),
submitted by the American and Russian delegations,
my delegations has once again evidenced its
commitment and contribution to the arduous search for
a comprehensive, lasting solution to the terrible Syrian
tragedy in its humanitarian, security and political
dimensions. We welcome the spirit of cooperation
shown by the co-Chairs of the International Syria
Support Group - the United States of America
and the Russian Federation - in the drafting of the
resolution, which certainly represents a glimmer of
hope, however tenuous, for the beleaguered Syrian
people, who no longer know where to turn. The
resolution is concise in that it pertains to the terms by
which the cessation of hostilities is to be observed. It
is now past midnight in Damascus, and we hope that
the ceasefire will be effective and open up the way
for other confidence-building measures as part of the
political process in Syria. We welcome the fact that the
resolution reiterates the priority of prusing the fight
against terrorism and that, in that context, the cessation
of hostilities will not apply to the terrorist groups
identified by the United Nations, such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front, in
conformity with resolution 2254 (2015).

Bearing in mind the recent positive steps forward
made in the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
besieged and hard-to-access areas, we are also pleased
to note that the resolution proposes a broad actions to
respond to this dimension, particularly the facilitation
of humanitarian access under the International Syria
Support Group task force, as well as unimpeded
access to all parts of Syria, particularly in areas listed
in the text. That is why the delegation of Senegal
calls on the parties concerned to fully respect the
cessation of hostilities in order to strengthen other
confidence-building measures aimed at achieving a
ceasefire throughout Syria with the support of the
international community. In addition to the exchange
of information in the framework of the task force,
Senegal awaits with interest specific proposals on the
monitoring mechanisms which the Secretary-General
is to submit to the Security Council.

In the light of all this and the need to support
the actions of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and to send a strong
message to the parties responsible for one of the gravest
humanitarian tragedies of our time, my country decided
to give its full support to resolution 2268 (2016). Once
again, we thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and
offer him the full support of the delegation of Senegal
in his very complex and sensitive task, in the hope that
the resolution we have just adopted will make his task
less difficult when the inter-Syrian negotiations resume
on 7 March.

