Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on behalf of my Government, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April. I also wish to pay tribute to your
predecessor for his very successful work during the course
of the last month.

My delegation warmly welcomes the Secretary
General's positive report on Angola and reiterates its
appreciation for the efforts of the Special Representative,
Maitre Blondin Beye. The commitment to and support of
both Secretary-General Kofi Annan and Mr. Beye for the
peace process in Angola continue to be important catalysts
for a new era of peace and economic and social progress in
Angola.

When we last addressed this body in February, a goal
was set for all parties to show more commitment to the
peace process. Our hopes were focused on the swearing in
of UNITA deputies and the formation of a Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation as a next step in a
schedule of goals and timetables voluntarily agreed upon by
the Government of Angola and UNITA. While we were
encouraged by some of the steps which both parties had
taken to restore the momentum for the peace process, we
remained pessimistic and expressed our concerns over the
delays in implementing the outstanding political and
military issues.

Today, we are happy that, more than ever before, the
prospects for lasting peace in Angola have been
significantly advanced: the approval by the National
Assembly of the legislation concerning the special status of
the UNITA leader, Mr. Savimbi, the swearing in of UNITA
deputies in the National Assembly and the inauguration of
the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation on 11
April 1997 are commendable efforts and decisive steps
towards the completion and full implementation of other
aspects of the Lusaka Protocol.

We commend all the parties for showing
commitment and rededicating themselves to peace,
stability and prosperity in Angola. Most of all, we
congratulate the women and men of Angola for their
sacrifices and efforts. Despite various obstacles that
threatened the fragile peace process, they never faltered
in their quest for peaceful national reconciliation. We
share the Secretary-General's hope that tangible and rapid
progress can now be made towards completing the
implementation of the other aspects of the Lusaka
Protocol in the spirit of cooperation and mutual
accommodation which both parties have so far
demonstrated. We thus remain confident that the Angolan
peace process will never again be threatened by
procrastination on the part of either party.

Given that the major goal of establishing a
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation has
now been achieved, the international community should
sustain its support for the people of Angola. At this
decisive point, an extension of the mandate of UNAVEM
III up to 30 June 1997 is necessary to ensure that Angola
establishes one army and one police force for one united
Angola. My delegation thus welcomes the extension of
the mandate of UN AVEM. III and supports the transitional
arrangements recommended by the Secretary-General in
his report contained in document S/1997/304.

The Secretary-General's report indicates that there is
still much work that needs to be done before lasting peace
and reconciliation can be achieved in Angola. The
challenges of integrating UNITA soldiers into the national
army and police force and of demobilizing excess
personnel still remain to be resolved, as does the thorny
issue of deserters and absentees. In the light of the
positive developments so far, we urge all the parties to
continue to display the political will to build on their
goodwill and understanding by cooperating in the
remaining tasks leading to a free Angola. The greatest
challenge for the newly established Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation is to pave the way for free
and fair elections by creating the necessary political
conditions and infrastructure for free and democratic
choice. The continued presence of the international
community in Angola in the form of an Observer Mission
after the expiration of the UNAVEM. III mandate is thus
necessary for post-conflict peace-building purposes.

 

In conclusion, my delegation expresses its gratitude to
the international donor community and the countries of the
troika for their valuable support and efforts in assisting the
people of Angola as they strive to attain a long-awaited and
well-deserved peace.

