Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Maurer and Ms. Liu for
their very moving briefings. The United States deeply
appreciates the life-saving work of the International
Committee ofthe Red Cross (ICRC) and Medecins Sans
Frontieres (MSF), and we commend their unstinting
efforts to treat the sick and the wounded in the world's
most brutal and dangerous places. We also pay tribute
to all of their staff members who have made the ultimate
sacrifice in their determination to help others.

As we all know, the creation of the Red Cross and
the norms enshrined in the Geneva Convention can be
traced back to June 1859, when the businessman Henry
Dunant was so disturbed by a battle between France
and Austria that he began a movement for the humane
treatment of the wounded in conflict. In his book A
Memory of Solferino, Dunant recalled a scene of the
battle that inspired him to push for change. He wrote,

"[the] guns crash over the dead and wounded,
strewn pell-mell on the ground. Brains spurt under
the wheels, limbs are broken and torn, bodies
mutilated beyond recognition 4 the soil is literally
puddled with blood, and the plain littered with
human remains".

That was 1859. But let us consider the scene
today in eastern Aleppo in 2016. Early this morning,
contacts inside eastern Aleppo told us - as members
of the Security Council have already heard - that two
hospitals were reportedly hit by air strikes and shells,
killing two patients and injuring many medical staff.
There are obviously very limited options for medical
care for the trapped civilians of eastern Aleppo. One
medical worker told ajournalist this week that non-stop
bombing in eastern Aleppo means that "hospitals
have no more room to receive even one more case". A
radiologist said that they are running short of drugs and
respirators, and do not have baby milk, especially for
newborns. Another doctor, Dr. Ahmed - who was so
afraid of being targeted that he did not wish to use his
full name - told a reporter that "we are carrying out
a large number of amputations just so that patients can
survive, because otherwise we do not have the means
to treat them". Many of the wounded, he continued, are
dying before the doctors" eyes. They feel helpless.
In the streets of eastern Aleppo, people are
frantically digging through the rubble, as we have seen,
with their bare hands to find members of their families
and their children because there are not enough first
responders. There is not enough rescue equipment to go
around. The people of eastern Aleppo are literally dying
in their streets. They are maimed and wounded by air
strikes carried out by Russia and the Al-Assad regime,
and they are unable to receive treatment because of
the medieval siege that Russia and the Syrian regime
have imposed. The plains of Dunant's Solferino have
become the thoroughfares of eastern Aleppo.

We must not become inured to these atrocities as
Russia and the regime carry out this new offensive. We
cannot forget that the tactics used in eastern Aleppo
are the very same ones that the Al-Assad regime
patented years ago and has deployed throughout
Syria, systematically removing medical supplies from
assistance convoys, denying medical evacuations,
bombing hospitals to pieces and killing first responders
in unconscionable double-tap attacks. Since 2011, the
highly respected group, Physicians for Human Rights
has documented 382 attacks on 269 medical facilities in
Syria. Not one week goes by without another report ofa
hospital having been struck. The actions ofthe Al-Asaad
regime and Russia are contrary to the demands of
resolution 2286 (2016), which we unanimously adopted
only five months ago.

This campaign against health-care sites and medical
workers in Syria must end. The protection of medical
facilities and personnel, as well as humanitarian
personnel, continues to be eroded in conflicts around
the world. In South Sudan, one of the world's most
dangerous countries for aid workers, in August alone
the United Nations recorded 64 incidents of violence
against humanitarian workers and the equipment that
they use to deliver care. Last February, an attack on
the protection of civilians site in Malakal destroyed an
international corps and medical facility, and killed two
MSF staff. Humanitarian organizations have recorded
the parties to the conflict killing patients, torching
clinics, stealing medicine and threatening medical
staff. At a minimum, Council members and countries in
the region need to use whatever channels of influence
that they have available to insist that all parties to the

conflict in South Sudan stop this violence against
humanitarian and medical personnel immediately.

In Yemen, the United States shares the grave concern
that MSF has expressed with regard to the attacks that
have struck its medical facilities. The United Nations
has verified 59 attacks affecting hospitals in Yemen in
2015 by all parties. The United States has engaged the
Saudi-led coalition to emphasize the imperative of the
need to take all feasible precautions to avoid harm or,
in any even, minimize harm to civilians and civilian
objects. We have stressed that unacceptable strikes on
schools, hospitals and other civilian objects must stop,
and we call on the coalition to publicly release the
results of the investigations that it has launched into
such incidents.

We also call on the Houthis and their allies to cease
the indiscriminate launch of rockets against Saudi
Arabia and the shelling of civilian areas within Yemen,
causing numerous civilian casualties. All parties need
to comply with international humanitarian law. To
alleviate suffering, the United States urges the parties
to commit to an immediate cessation of hostilities,
enabling humanitarian needs to be addressed without
fear of attack.

Many have also criticized the United States for the
erroneous air strike on an MSF hospital in Kunduz a
year ago. We accept responsibility for the strike and
we have repeatedly expressed our deepest regret for
it. The United States Department of Defense took
full responsibility, conducted a full and transparent
investigation and made the results of that investigation
publically known. We have since taken steps to learn
from Kunduz in order to minimize the likelihood of any
future incidents.

Moreover, in July President Obama released an
executive order on United States policy on pre- and post-
strike measures to address civilian casualties in United
States operations involving the use of force. The policy
is the first of its kind. The executive order commits every
component of the United States Government to work
together towards the goal of reducing civilian casualties
and to be transparent and learn from them when they
do occur. The United States also works actively with
the ICRC and non-governmental organizations to refine
how we distinguish between combatants and civilians.
The United States will continue to do all it can to reduce

civilian casualties and to be transparent about how we
meet that goal.

Let me conclude by focusing on the human
consequences of attacks on and obstruction and
interference in health care in armed conflict. When
people are denied health care today, the consequences
will be felt long, long after current conflicts end. In
Nigeria, for example, vaccines are not being delivered
to areas of fighting between the Government and Boko
Haram. The result is that polio has re-emerged as a
threat to Nigerian children, with two cases discovered
last month. Polio is a disease that was cured in the
1950s. The vaccine is easy to administer and is very
inexpensive. But every single day that vaccines cannot
be delivered, more and more Nigerian children are at
risk of lifelong disability or death, so a new generation
will certainly feel the consequences of the conflict.

So much changes when the children in a conflict
zone are able to access the medical care they desperately
need. Last November, a sniper in eastern Aleppo shot
six-year-old Shaima in the face, blinding her. However,
unlike so many children who are now besieged in
eastern Aleppo, Shaima was able to get out of the city
in November. She told her father, "It is okay that the
sniper hit me - I am not sad. God meant it to be this
way and I know I will get better". Miraculously, with the
help of doctors in Turkey, Shaima was able to survive
and one day she may even be able to see again, once
her family raises enough money for an eye operation.
Shaima went through an unspeakable horror, but access
to medical care will give her a future. As Shaima told a
reporter, "I just want to go back to school. I know I will
be there soon".

Fellow Council members, we must all do more for
the children in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan, Nigeria and
in so many other conflict areas - for the children who
need that same chance.

