Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): First of all, I would like to
thank the Turkish presidency of the Security Council
for convening this important debate on an issue of
special importance to Security Council members and
the general membership alike. No other issue
considered by the United Nations brings together so
many branches of its everyday work, which has
naturally kept it in the focus of this body for many
years.

I would also like to thank Under-Secretaries-
General Alain Le Roy and Susana Malcorra for their
valuable presentations today. I also express our
appreciation for the initiative of the United Kingdom
and France in that field and for the steady work of the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, under its Japanese chairmanship.

We are not saying anything innovative when we
affirm that the international landscape has changed
sharply over the past 20 years, and with it the nature of
contemporary conflict. Traditional peacekeeping as we
have known it has also gone through transformations
and reincarnations, and is nowadays becoming
increasingly robust and multidimensional in its
approach. Peacekeeping missions are moving away
from - if I may put it this way - the old way of
thinking that involved separating forces and
monitoring ceasefires, and are increasingly being
tasked with rebuilding societies from the ground up.
That is a reality, and we commend both the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the
Department of Field Support (DFS) for factoring this
new reality into their organizational and operational
preparations.

Cognizant of this new reality on the ground and
of the need to strengthen unity and cohesion amongst
all stakeholders in order to make the future of
peacekeeping as successful as possible, especially in
the light of the challenges we are facing, we should
like to highlight some issues that we feel need further
attention.

Whenever we approach the question of
contemporary peacekeeping in a holistic manner, it
would be remiss not to mention the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) and other United Nations documents that
have followed, including the recently distributed
executive brief contained in the DPKO/DFS New
Horizon non-paper. We support the guidelines provided
in these documents, especially given the fact that the
United Nations acts under the premise that conflict
cannot be resolved first and foremost by military and
seeks rather to address problems through their root
causes.

Croatia fully supports the notion that lasting
peace and security can be built only through adherence
to the three interlinked and firmly grounded basic
pillars of security, development and the protection of
human rights. That having been said, it should also be
stressed that there is no one-size-fits-all peacekeeping
operation: each new mission needs to be tailored to the
concrete conditions and to the political realities on the
ground. A clear political strategy and integrated
mission planning are extremely important to that end
and should include the provision of a precisely defined
mandate with clear and achievable benchmarks and
goals and with a clear exit strategy.

As stated, Croatia believes that the most
promising approach to peacekeeping operations is an
integrated and comprehensive one that brings together
the various United Nations departments and agencies
in working towards a common goal. The contemporary
role of peacekeeping is not only to re-establish and
provide continued security in the area of operation;
ultimately operations are there to enable Governments
and societies to resolve their own problems in a self-
sufficient manner, so that the role of the international
community can gradually be reduced to that of an
adviser. Local ownership should be the overarching
demand of both the host country and the international
community. That, of course, also includes the
development of local security forces, the importance of
which we have seen first-hand during Security Council
visits to a number of countries.

That having been said, development is of crucial
importance for the long-term success of peacekeeping
operations. If the foundations of future prosperity are
not built into the mandates of peacekeeping operations
from the beginning - and by this we mean long-term
issues such as the protection of civilians, the
strengthening of civil society, security sector reform,
including the strengthening of police and judicial
forces, and economic revitalization and development -
repeated recourse to violence can be and quite often is
probable. Croatia has paid a great deal of attention to
these issues and has, in fact, deployed some civil-sector
experts to places such as Iraq and Afghanistan.

Croatia considers the training and education of
peacekeeping personnel to be another key aspect of the
eventual success of any peacekeeping operation. Since
2001, Croatia has conducted education and
pre-deployment training of Croatian and foreign
officers at the United Nations-certified International
Military Operations Training Centre near Zagreb, while
since 2006 a similar international course has been
regularly organized for United Nations police officers.
That latter course has been certified by the United
Nations since 2008.

Croatia particularly supports all the proposals
aimed at greater coordination and strengthened
relations between the Security Council and troop- and
police-contributing countries (TCCS and PCCs). That
aspect is crucial, as TCCS and PCCs must have
confidence that their contribution will be fully
appreciated and that conditions will be created for
them to fully express their respective interests. It is
clearly counterproductive to plan a peacekeeping
operation without the unambiguous support of a core
number of nations willing to provide troops for the
proposed mission.

Croatia also believes that, in order to share the
burden imposed by peacekeeping, the United Nations
should strengthen its cooperation with regional
organizations and improve cooperation between United
Nations agencies and other international agencies
active on the ground. Since the majority of United
Nations peacekeeping takes place in Africa, we believe
that cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States is particular important.

Before concluding, we would like to highlight
one final issue, especially in the light of the ever-
increasing burdens, both financial and logistical, being
placed on United Nations peacekeeping and its troop-
contributors. Much has been written and discussed
regarding the issue of multidimensional versus
traditional peacekeeping, but little work has been done
on the possibility of promoting the idea of preventive
peacekeeping. We have one concrete example: that of
the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) in Macedonia, which proved to be very
successful in defusing a tense political and military
situation and in preventing the outbreak of violent
conflict. We need to ask ourselves the perennial
questions of whether prevention is better than cure and
how much we can potentially save - foremost in lives,
but also in financial and logistical resources - if we
act pre-emptively in situations that have the potential
to seriously challenge international peace and security.

