Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank you, Sir, for your initiative in convening this
public information meeting on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I also wish to welcome the presence among us
here today of the Secretary-General and to thank him
for his important statement.

Allow me to pay a heartfelt tribute to
Ambassador Kamel Morjane, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Thanks to his
determination, wisdom and talent as an experienced
diplomat, Ambassador Morjane has succeeded in
creating what had seemed unthinkable at the outset: a
climate of trust and cooperation between the United
Nations and the authorities of all those involved in the
highly complex conflict in the Congo. We thank
Ambassador Morjane very warmly and, through him,
the sisterly Republic of Tunisia for its diplomacy. Our
best wishes for success in his new duties go to
Ambassador Morjane.

Since the beginning of the year, we have
considered with cautious optimism the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My delegation
remains optimistic and believes that, today more than
ever, we need to move forward despite the serious
difficulties that we continue to encounter in this
process, in particular with regard to disengagement, the
demilitarization of Kisangani and disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement, reintegration and
repatriation. Allow me to address each of these issues.

First, concerning the disengagement of forces, in
particular in Equateur Province, we urge the Movement
for the Liberation of the Congo to abide by its own
commitments and to demonstrate understanding with
regard to the civil administration of evacuated
localities. Beyond disengagement, however, there is an
imperative need for progress towards the total
withdrawal of foreign forces from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and towards disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement, reintegration and
repatriation. For my delegation, the total withdrawal of
foreign forces and disarmament, demobilization,
resettlement, reintegration and repatriation must be the
primary objectives for establishing lasting and
definitive peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Secondly, with respect to the question of the
demilitarization of the city of Kisangani - which is
required by resolution 1304 (2000), adopted more than
a year ago, under Chapter VII of the Charter - the
Security Council should plan to take the measures
necessary to put an end to that unacceptable and
dangerous situation.

Moreover, we ask that the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) be strengthened in Kisangani,
inter alia, by the despatch of two additional battalions.
We would be equally in favour of any proposal
designed to make Kisangani, once demilitarized, a
symbolic city by allowing it, for example, to host the
inter-Congolese dialogue and the headquarters of the
Joint Military Commission.

Thirdly, with respect to disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement, reintegration and
repatriation, we welcome the recent meeting between
Presidents Kabila and Kagame on this question. We
feel that the encouraging results of that meeting should
be supported by the United Nations. In this regard, we
note with satisfaction that MONUC is currently
working on a comprehensive plan on this issue, which
indeed remains a genuine threat to the entire peace
process in the region, for without disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement, reintegration and
repatriation there will be no withdrawal of foreign
forces from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
therefore fully agree that MONUC should play a
guiding and lead role in disarmament, demobilization,
resettlement, reintegration and repatriation. We must be
clear that the parties, despite their political will, can
never achieve that alone. The United Nations and the
donor community must actively contribute to that end.

I cannot conclude this overview without referring
to the issue of the plundering of the natural resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has
continued despite the Council's presidential statement
of 3 May 2001. We note the new membership of the
Panel of Experts on that question and await with
interest the addendum to the report. In the meantime,
we reaffirm our firm condemnation of the ongoing
pillage of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which, according to credible
sources, is the principal reason for the continuation of
the conflict and for serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

If we have refrained today from placing the inter-
Congolese dialogue among the current difficulties, it is
simply because we consider the report of the 9 July
meeting to be of a purely technical nature. We
nevertheless reiterate our urgent appeal to all of the
parties to do their utmost to ensure that the meeting of
20 August is a true success in order to permit the
launching of the inter-Congolese dialogue, which
remains the other key to the settlement.

In conclusion, I have to say that we must prepare,
here and now and without procrastination, for the third
phase of the expansion of MONUC, which has been
urgently requested by the Political Committee of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. In this regard, as recalled
by the Ambassador of Bangladesh, we all witnessed the
difference that was made by the expansion of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone on that ground
in that country.

Finally, I recall once again that any peace process
must be accompanied by economic assistance. In that
context, we welcome the launching of the economic
dimension of MONUC with the resumption of
navigation on the Congo River. We reiterate the appeal
made to the donor community for local projects of
rapid impact to be established so as to improve the
daily lives of thousands of Congolese, who have
suffered too much the pains of a war that, after all, is
not their own.

