Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome the President of
Switzerland to the Security Council in his capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We thank him for
his comprehensive briefing.

The Russian Federation has consistently supported
developing and improving cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
mechanisms on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular Chapter VIII. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE should be
rest on that same foundation.

Cooperation between the two organizations is
regular and multilateral in nature. It covers all aspects
of security, as well as cross-dimensional issues. The
OSCE complements the work of the United Nations and
facilitates the implementation of mechanisms agreed at
the global level in its area of regional responsibility and
as part of its mandate.

Russia intends to cooperate constructively with
the Swiss Chairperson-in-Office, who, we trust,
will implement a balanced course in the interests
of all Member States. In general, we support the
Chairperson-in-Office's three priorities for 2014,
namely, strengthening security and stability, improving
people's lives and reinforcing the capacities of the
OSCE. The programme of work in those three OSCE
dimensions appears to be balanced, covering the
military, political, economic, environmental and
humanitarian spheres.

We note the willingness of the Chairperson-in-
Office to take into account Russian priorities and
approaches, including combating transnational threats
such as terrorism and drug trafficking, protecting the
rights of national minorities, supporting traditional
values and combating neo-Nazism and extremism,
as well as OSCE reform, including rationalizing the
election monitoring work carried out by the Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.

In the context of providing regional stability and
removing existing dividing lines, we think that the
OSCE could be called upon to harmonize integration
processes in Western and Eastern Europe and to ensure
freedom of movement, including the streamlining of
visa regimes, particularly as the OSCE was originally
established to remove such dividing lines.

As part of the "Helsinki+40" process, in particular
with a view to ensuring the development of European
cooperation and security principles and to adapting the
OSCE to the challenges of the twenty-first century,
we reaffirm our readiness to consider the possibility
of organizing an OSCE summit in 2015, if substantial
results in those areas are achieved.

We support developing the interaction between
the United Nations and the OSCE on the basis of the
2006 declaration on cooperation. We believe that the
OSCE, bearing in mind the coordinating role of the
United Nations, can make a significant contribution
to international efforts to ensure peace and security
in its area of responsibility. In our view, the greatest
potential is for cooperation on combating transnational
threats, international terrorism, organized crime and
illegal drug trafficking. We note the high level of
practical interaction between the OSCE secretariat's
transnational threats department and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. Their joint initiatives are
yielding concrete results.

In our view, at the heart of the cooperation in that
area should be efforts to combine the comparative
advantages of each organization, namely, the regional
format of the OSCE and the global capacities of the
United Nations, thereby avoiding duplication and
wasting resources, in particular in regions where
both organizations are very active. That is the case,
for example, in Central Asia. The priority areas
for cooperation are well known: combating drug
trafficking and the illegal trade in small arms and
light weapons, cooperation on implementing resolution
1540 (2004) and fighting terrorism, organized crime,
corruption, money laundering, human trafficking and
illegal migration.

It is clear that the added value of the OSCE lies also
in its ability to tackle humanitarian issues, including
combating human trafficking and illegal migration
and encouraging tolerance and inter-civilizational
dialogue. It can also help to combat xenophobia and
discrimination, in particular in terms of ensuring the
rights of national, religious and language minorities,
which, as we know, is a particularly serious problem in
a number of European countries.

We note the prospects for cooperation on a
relatively new track for the OSCE, namely, developing
confidence-building measures and using information
and communications technologies, where the Vienna-
based organization complements global United Nations
efforts in the area of international information security.

At the same time, we are alarmed by attempts to
introduce into OSCE practice monitoring mechanisms
similar to those set up at the United Nations and
to implement, through the OSCE, non-consensual
documents of the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council. We are concerned about the intention
of some countries to incorporate concepts derived from
resolution 1325 (2000) into the work of the OSCE,
despite the absence of armed conflict in its territory.

Moreover, United Nations-OSCE cooperation does
not cover a large number of important problems where
there is significant room for increased cooperation,
including ensuring the rights of children, which is
an area in which the United Nations has extensive
experience. Another such area is protecting traditional
values, which is a subject under consideration by the
Human Rights Council.

The situation in Ukraine was mentioned in the
briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office and in a number
of other statements we heard today, but it is still not
clear how violent, non-constitutional regime change
in that country is consistent with OSCE principles,
or indeed the rule of law, which is such a fashionable
subject to speak about in the Council.

The OSCE Chairperson-in-Office spoke
approvingly of the 21 February agreement, which
was signed by a number of representatives, such as
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Germany, Poland
and France, and allegedly by the representative of
the Russian Federation. I would like to make it clear
that the Russian representative to the talks on that
agreement did not sign it. There were misgivings
that the 21 February agreement would serve only as a
smokescreen for subsequent unconstitutional action,
and that is indeed what transpired.

I would now like to share with the participants in
today's Security Council meeting a bit of the text of the
statement released by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation with regard to the situation in
Ukraine. The Russian Federation is seriously concerned
by developments in Ukraine. The 21 February agreement
is not being implemented, despite the fact that its signing
was witnessed by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, Poland and France. The United States, the
European Union and other international organizations
welcomed that document. The rioting militants have
not been disarmed. They refuse to leave the streets of
the city, which they are effectively in control of, or to
leave administrative buildings. Their acts of violence
continue.

We are surprised that a number of European
politicians have already been quick to state that
presidential elections will be held in Ukraine in May,
although the 21 February agreement provides that
elections should take place only after the conclusion of
constitutional reform. It is clear that, for the success
of that reform, all political forces in Ukraine from all
regions of the country must take part, and its results
should be put to a referendum. We believe in the need to
fully reflect the concerns of deputies from the eastern
and southern parts of Ukraine, Crimea and Sevastopol,
which were presented at the meeting in Krakow, Poland,
on 22 February.

We are particularly concerned about the legitimacy of
the actions being taken by the Ukrainian Supreme Rada.
Basing their actions merely on simple revolutionary
expediency, they are issuing so-called decisions and
laws there, including some geared towards infringing
on the humanitarian rights of Russian and other national
minorities living in Ukraine. There have been calls for
a virtual ban on the Russian language, the impeachment
of leaders, the dissolution of parties and organizations,
the closing of certain unwelcome media stations and
the lifting of restrictions on neo-Nazi propaganda.
There is a policy of muzzling dissidents in various
regions of Ukraine through dictatorial and sometimes
terrorist methods. There are now threats being made
against Orthodox shrines. National radicals continue to
vandalize memorials in various cities in Ukraine and,
in some European capitals, their supporters have been
vandalizing memorials to Soviet troops. Such events
are undermining the 21 February agreement. They
discredit its initiators and guarantors and pose a threat
to civil peace, the stability of society and civil security.

We must note that we see no concern, in the
position of several of our Western partners, for the fate
of Ukraine, but rather a unilateral geopolitical agenda.
We hear no principled condemnation of the acts of
extremists, including of neo-Nazi and anti-Semitic
manifestations. Furthermore, whether deliberately or
not, such actions are being further encouraged.

We get the lasting impression that the 21 February
agreement, with the tacit consent of its foreign
sponsors, is being used as a smokescreen for promoting
forced regime change in Ukraine by creating facts on
the ground, without any kind of wish to seek out a
common Ukrainian consensus that is in the interest of
national reconciliation. We are particularly concerned
by attempts to get international structures, including
the United Nations Secretariat, to support that line of
reasoning.
We call on all parties in the crisis in Ukraine to
show maximum responsibility, not allow any further
deterioration in the situation, return the situation to
the legal track and crack down on the activities of all
extremists.

