Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, I wish at the outset to thank
you for your kind words. I will always be at your
disposal.

This is the first time that we are taking the floor
in the Security Council following the end of our term
of office as a non-permanent member. I should like to
thank you for having convened this meeting and to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
for this month. I wish also to extend to your
predecessor our gratitude for the efforts he made
during the past month.

We would like also to take this opportunity to
congratulate the new members - Algeria, Benin,
Brazil, the Philippines and Romania - on their
election and on having begun their participation in the
work of the Council for the period 2004-2005. We wish
them every success in their efforts to help the
international community to achieve international peace
and security.

We listened attentively to the presentation of the
second oral report of the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning the Taliban and Al Qaeda - n accordance
with paragraph 14 of resolution 1455 (2003) - which
detailed the work of the Committee. In that regard, we
would like to commend Ambassador Mufioz for the
outstanding manner in which he has discharged his

responsibilities, and we express our gratitude to him
and to his Mission for their contribution to the success
of the work of this Committee.

The efforts made by the Committee are part and
parcel of international efforts to combat terrorism. It is
becoming increasingly important in the context of the
anti-terrorism efforts of the Security Council and the
United Nations. The Committee has done a great deal
to improve its methods of work; indeed, the listing is
now easier to use. Moreover, detailed consideration
was given to the reports of Member States submitted
pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003). The reports of the
Monitoring Group represent an important mechanism
for assessing compliance by States with the relevant
resolutions.

Nonetheless, the Committee's task has been
difficult, and here I should like to make the following
comments on the work of the Committee and of the
Monitoring Group.

First, there is a need to review the analytical
capacity of the Committee. The Committee and the
Monitoring Group should have firsthand information.
Moreover, we should focus on analysing the
Committee's activities.

Furthermore, the Committee must be impartial
and ensure transparency in considering information
obtained from various sources. Full cooperation and
assistance on the part of Member States is therefore
necessary.

Secondly, I should like to highlight the
importance of reports submitted by Member States,
which constitute the major source of information for
the Committee and the Group in dealing with threats,
as well as the need to provide assistance to countries in
combating such threats.

Thirdly, visits to States made by the Chairman of
the Committee and its members have proved extremely
useful in the process of conducting a dialogue with
those States. In fact, the importance of those visits has
been demonstrated in several areas, because members
have had the opportunity to ask questions and obtain
further information relevant to the work of the
Committee. Furthermore, the Chairman can thereby
ascertain what steps are being taken by those States to
improve the situation.

Fourthly, my delegation supports cooperation
between the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, within the framework of their respective
mandates, because each constitutes an important
mechanism with respect to Security Council action
against terrorism.

In this connection, we reiterate the importance of
coordination between the two in order to avoid any
overlap and to give them a greater capacity to act
against terrorism, especially by defining clearly the
areas where each may work.

Syria, on behalf of the Arab Group, last year
submitted a draft resolution on the question of
eliminating weapons of mass destruction in the Middle
East. Among the important elements in that draft
resolution was not to allow terrorist organizations -
Al Qaeda and the Taliban, for example - to obtain
weapons of mass destruction. Syria's draft resolution,
which was supported by the Arab Group, is still being
considered in the Council, and we hope that
circumstances will allow for the adoption of this
important resolution, with all Member States
cooperating with the Council.

Finally, my delegation quite agrees that the
serious threat inherent in the Taliban and Al Qaeda
should be the main concern of the international
community. We support the comments on the
innovations needed to find effective tools to face up to
these threats and to combat this eminent danger
effectively. In this connection, we look forward to the
new draft resolution, which will be adopted by the
Council in the near future. We hope it will take into
account all the concerns expressed - for example,
annual reconsideration of sanctions in order to be able
to adapt and consequently improve them.

