Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Let me
begin by saying how much we appreciated the very
clear briefing by Under-Secretary-General Pascoe. The
situation in Gaza has been of growing concern for
many months, and the latest escalation is extremely
grave. We share Israel's frustration and its anger at the
continued rocket and mortar attacks aimed at its
civilians, as described by the Israeli representative
today.

Israel has a right to defend itself from such
attacks. But it is not acceptable that Israel should
respond to these attacks by taking action that is
designed to cause suffering to the civilian population
of Gaza. The British Government cannot condone
Israeli closure of the crossings. We have taken note of
the announcement yesterday by the Israeli Defence
Minister that Gaza would immediately begin to receive
fuel for electricity and humanitarian aid. That is a
welcome step. But it is crucial that further steps be
taken to halt the rapid deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. We call on Israel to work with all
parties to reopen the crossings and to allow basic
humanitarian supplies and civilian trade to flow.

There is a peace process in place. The recent
meeting in Annapolis gave us reason to hope that there
could be an end in sight to this conflict, and we support
the goal of an agreement in 2008. It is encouraging that
bilateral meetings between Israelis and Palestinians
have continued. However, the political process does
not take place in a vacuum. There is a very real risk
that the deteriorating security and humanitarian
situation will undermine the progress being made at the
political level.

The Security Council must play its role in
persuading the parties of the need to break this cycle of
violence. The rocket attacks by Palestinian militants in
Gaza into Israel are unacceptable. The number of
Palestinian civilian casualties caused by Israeli military
action is unacceptable. People on both sides are
suffering. Israel has legitimate security concerns, but
the solution is not to cut off supplies. Similarly, the
Palestinian argument is not advanced by launching
rocket and mortar attacks. The actions of both sides are
counterproductive to the stated objectives of the
leaders of both sides. Neither justice for Palestinians
nor security for Israel will be achieved by firing
rockets and cutting off fuel.

The Palestinians must address Israel's security
concerns, and the Israelis must take steps to reverse the
current humanitarian situation. My Government has
provided significant humanitarian assistance and
financial aid, and we will continue to do so. But it is
clear that money will not be enough. There needs to be
strong leadership at the political level to move forward,
and we look to Prime Minister Olmert and President
Abbas to provide that leadership.

