Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China has been following closely the developments in
Venezuela. China supports the Venezuelan Government
in its efforts to uphold its national sovereignty,
independence and stability, and believes that
Venezuela's affairs should be handled independently by
the Venezuelan people themselves. China calls on the
Venezuelan Government and opposition parties to seek
a political solution through dialogue and consultation,
within their constitutional and legal framework.
China's position on the Security Council's
involvement in the Venezuelan issue has been consistent
and clear. Our point of departure is, as always, to
uphold the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations
and the basic norms governing international relations,
promote a peaceful settlement of the Venezuelan issue
and maintain long-term peace and development in
Latin America.

China opposes any interference by external forces
in Venezuela's internal affairs; military intervention in
Venezuela; and the use of the so-called humanitarian
issue to achieve political aims. History has shown
repeatedly that unilateral sanctions only further
complicate situations and affect people's daily lives.
They do not help resolve problems or bring peace to
a country.

On the one hand, we hear fine words about caring
about the well-being of Venezuelans, while, on the
other, we see increasingly tighter sanctions on the
country. These two things are not consistent, and the
underlying motive is dubious.

To help the Venezuelan people overcome their
temporary difficulties, China has decided to provide
emergency aid consisting ofcivilian goods to Venezuela;
the relevant supplies are on their way to Venezuela in
batches. On 29 March, the first batch of medicines
and medical supplies was delivered to the Venezuelan
Government. China's assistance to Venezuela is in
keeping with its long-held principles on foreign aid.
It is intended to help the Venezuelan people overcome
the negative impacts of external interference and
sanctions, with no political conditions attached. China
will continue its cooperation with Venezuela, based
on the principles of mutual respect, equality, mutual
benefit and common development, for the greater well-
being of the two peoples.

Peace and stability in Venezuela is in the
fundamental interests of the country and its people, and
it also serves the common interests of all parties. We
hope that the international community will take steps
that are truly conducive to the stability and economic
development in Venezuela as well as better livelihoods
for its people; provide constructive assistance to the
country on the basis of respect for the sovereignty of
Venezuela; and promote the effective settlement of the
relevant issues as soon as possible.

We hope that the countries concerned will promptly
lift the unilateral sanctions on Venezuela, create the
conditions for its economic and social development
to return to normal, and lend help and support to the
country, in accordance with the basic principles of
United Nations humanitarian assistance.

Earlier in his intervention, the United States
representative levelled unfounded accusations
concerning China's position on this agenda item,
which China categorically rejects. As is common
knowledge, China has all along maintained friendly
and cooperative relations with other countries around
the world, Venezuela included, on the basis of the five
principles of peaceful coexistence.

We support the people of various countries in
independently choosing a development path that caters
to their national realities. We never interfere in other
countries' internal affairs or impose our will on other
countries. States members of the Security Council
should faithfully abide by the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and universally
recognized norms of international relations, and they
should show genuine respect for the choices made by
the peoples of other countries to take concrete steps
that are conducive to the well-being of the people of
Venezuela, rather than the opposite.

