Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): I should like to begin
by extending the appreciation of the Indonesian
delegation to you, Madam President, for convening the
meeting today on the item before us, which reflects the
renewed determination of the Council to protect
children from the ravages of armed conflict.

My delegation also commends the Secretary-
General for his timely report in document S/2000/712.
It portrays a poignant picture of the devastating impact
of the ongoing conflicts on children, in terms of both
their magnitude and their long-term impact. It contains
a series of recommendations the implementation of
which will remove children from harm's way and from
being deliberately targeted, in gross violation of
universally accepted norms, precepts and principles.

My delegation has noted with deep concern the
increasing use of children in armed conflict. It has been
estimated that more than 300,000 children under the
age of 18 are now being used as soldiers in conflicts in
various regions of the world. Those conflicts have
claimed the lives of more than 2 million children,
maimed or injured 6 million, orphaned 1 million and
traumatized countless others; they have resulted in
children accounting for more than half of the world's
24 million refugees.

My delegation has in the past supported concerted
international efforts to alleviate the suffering of
children dragged into conflicts. Indonesia is a signatory
of the 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which upholds the political, socio-economic and civil
rights of children, and it strongly supports the Optional
Protocol which strengthens that Convention by calling
for a minimum age of 18 for participation in hostilities.
Regrettably, however, even today the recruitment and
deployment of children as soldiers continues. Hence,
the international community should speak with one
voice and insist on 18 as the minimum acceptable age
for participation in armed conflicts, which would make
a tangible difference to the fate of children exposed to
danger on the ground, where more than 250,000
children under that age have taken part in more than 30
armed conflicts in various parts of the world and where
children have represented 40 per cent of all victims of
such conflicts.

The failure to curb the clandestine flow of small
arms and light weapons across borders has taken a
disproportionate toll on children in intra-State strife,
and has ultimately led to greater insecurity and
destabilization. The proliferation and easy availability
of these arms have made it possible even for young
children to become perpetrators of violence. This
ominous situation calls for concerted efforts at the
national, regional and global levels to curb the illicit
transfer of these arms. Indonesia remains hopeful that
the forthcoming United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, to be held next year, will adopt measures
that will fully take into account the interests and the
protection of children.

The rights of children in armed conflicts should
also be acknowledged as an explicit priority, and
should be firmly entrenched in peacemaking, peace-
building and conflict-resolution processes, as well as in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plans.
Such a programme of assistance is critically important
to consolidate peace and to support rehabilitation
capacity.

The wilful denial of humanitarian assistance to
children has a devastating impact on such children,
who have a fundamental right to aid under international
humanitarian law. Children are not only the
instruments of warfare, but also its victims. They are
not fully aware of the reasons for and the objectives of
the armed conflicts in which they are often forced to
participate. It therefore stands to reason that parties
involved in conflicts should facilitate unhindered
access by personnel involved in humanitarian missions
to children unwittingly caught up in armed conflicts.

Landmines are indiscriminate weapons which do
not distinguish between soldier and civilian, friend and
foe, adult and child. It is an irony that those who suffer
most are not the active combatants, but civilians,
especially women and children. While demining is the
only alternative for eliminating the dangers posed by
landmines, effective and comprehensive mine
awareness programmes focusing on children should be
vigorously pursued.

Furthermore, sanctions imposed on Governments
or on armed factions have a disproportionately negative
impact on children in terms of weakening essential
infrastructures, especially those relating to education,
health and employment opportunities. While it is
difficult to quantify the short-term and long-term costs
for the future of children, my delegation agrees with
the suggestion put forward by Malaysia, New Zealand
and India, that efforts should be made to relieve the
suffering of children living under sanctions regimes by
providing for humanitarian exemptions so that children
will not be deprived of access to basic necessities of
life throughout a conflict.

In sum, the future of humanity depends on
children. The use of children in armed conflicts casts a
shadow on their future, for children who are exposed to
violence often carry fear and hatred in their hearts and
minds, which has profound long-term effects. Due to
the large number of children involved in and victimized
by conflicts around the world, the children's future is at
stake owing to their limited opportunity to embark
upon productive careers. Hence, much needs to be done
to alleviate their suffering and to ensure their rightful
place in their societies through adequate support
programmes. The grim alternative would be a
potentially serious situation if the international
community failed to take timely and adequate steps to
deal with this problem.

I would be remiss in my duty ifI concluded this
statement without commending the role played by the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, and
by the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund, Ms. Carol Bellamy, who have made
significant contributions to uplifting the lives of less
fortunate children, for many of whom life will now be
worth living. Member States are duty-bound to extend
their cooperation in fulfilling the mandate entrusted to
them.

