Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Mr. President, at

the outset, may I commend your delegation for

organizing this debate, which should enable us to

examine the possibilities of advancing the cause of
peace in the Middle East.

We also wish to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his excellent and comprehensive
report on the Middle East, which unquestionably
constitutes the most volatile region in the world and,
by implication, the major threat to international peace
and security.

The situations in Iraq and Lebanon, coupled with
the Iranian nuclear programme, are sources of major
concern to the international community. We also share
the Secretary-General's observation that the failure to
achieve a just and comprehensive solution to the long-
festering Arab-Israel conflict remains the major
underlying source of frustration and instability in the
region.

On Lebanon, the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) makes us
cautiously optimistic that the cessation of hostilities,
which has so far been maintained without serious
incident, will continue to hold. We are encouraged that
the withdrawal of Israeli forces from southern
Lebanon, in coordination with the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, has proceeded satisfactorily
and that, in parallel, the Lebanese army has been
deployed in the area south of the Litani River and
along the Blue Line, leading to the stabilization of the
security and military situation in the area.

While we acknowledge those positive
developments, we are also mindful of the need for
Israel and Lebanon to commit themselves further to the
implementation of a permanent ceasefire based on the
full acceptance of the relevant provisions of the Taif
Accords and of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680
(2006).

After the lengthy period of Violence between
Palestine and Israel, the mutual ceasefire agreed on
between President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert
has brought relief to those genuinely interested in
peace in the Middle East. It is our expectation that the
two sides will refrain from Violence, endeavour to
maintain the ceasefire, and ensure a sustained period of
calm that the people of Palestine and Israel seek and
deserve.

As part of the much-needed confidence-building
steps, we urge Israel to consider reversing the financial
ban on the Palestinian Authority and to release the
accrued taxes and duties due to the latter. That act
would certainly assist the Administration in meeting its
financial obligations and bring succour to the
Palestinian people, who have suffered greatly from the
consequences of the withholding of funds.

The Secretary-General's recommendation for the
Quartet and the Security Council to explore the
feasibility of consolidating the ceasefire within an
international framework deserves serious
consideration. He has called for a stronger international
role in order to halt the violence and create political
space for negotiations.

The elements mentioned in his report, which
include consolidating the ceasefire by working with the
parties to define its parameters and rules and extending
it to the West Bank, the monitoring of the ceasefire and
the promotion of unconditional and open-ended talks
between the Israeli Prime Minister and the President of
the Palestinian Authority, are options worth pursuing.

We remain concerned that the tireless efforts of
the Palestinians to form a Government of national
unity have failed to bear fruit. In the larger interest of
their people, we again urge the Palestinian Authority
and Hamas to cooperate to achieve that goal.

The complete satisfaction of the respective
dreams or presumed rights of the Israelis and
Palestinians may not be possible, which calls for
realism and flexibility on both sides. We therefore urge
the Quartet members, which are the sponsors of the
road map, to act in concert to revitalize the Israeli-
Palestinian peace process. In that regard, they may
want to bear in mind the Secretary-General's
recommendation that they find a way to institutionalize
their consultations with the relevant regional partners
and engage the parties directly in their deliberations. It
should also be possible for the Quartet to look again at
the road map with a View to restating its basic goals,
principles and end destination.

We are attracted by the proposition that a regional
approach is needed to resolve the various crises and
conflicts in the Middle East today, not least because
progress in each area is to a large extent dependent on
progress in others, as eloquently stated in the
Secretary-General's report. In that regard, we should
also learn lessons from past and recent developments at
the international level. It has become evident that
power without legitimacy breeds only disaffection,
chaos and resistance, and that military supremacy
alone cannot offer the desired security.

A sober and objective analysis of the Secretary-
General's report can only lead to the conclusion that
any attempt to continue with half-baked or temporary
solutions would not be feasible. We are convinced that
only a peace agreement whose parameters are well
known and enjoy widespread international support can
bring peace and security between Israel and the Arab
and Muslim world, and make a regional system of
security possible.

The Security Council bears an onerous
responsibility in the search for comprehensive peace in
the Middle East and must continue to work
assiduously, in concert with others, towards the
settlement of the Palestinian problem, which is at the
core of the Middle East question, on the basis of its
own resolutions, the Arab peace initiative and a
revitalized road map. It therefore behooves the
international community to encourage the parties to
compromise and learn to live side by side, as envisaged
in the two-State solution.

Finally, Sir, we thank your delegation for
preparing the draft presidential statement, which we
fully support.

