The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the
conclusions of the London Meeting on supporting
the Palestinian Authority, on 1 March. The
Council supports the objectives of the London
Meeting to help the Palestinian leadership
strengthen the institutions needed for a viable and
independent Palestinian State.

"The Security Council hopes that the London
Meeting will be part of the longer-term process of
international support to the Palestinian people
and the Palestinian Authority and a contribution
to helping both sides implement the road map
endorsed by the Security Council in resolution
1515 (2003) and agreed to by the parties as the
path towards a lasting comprehensive negotiated
settlement to the Middle East conflict, based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002).

"The Security Council stresses the crucial
importance of security, good governance and
development of the Palestinian economy. In this
context, the Council welcomes President Abbas's
comprehensive plan presented at the London
Meeting for strengthening the Palestinian
Authority's institutions in these three areas.

"The Security Council stresses the key role
of the international community in assisting the
Palestinian Authority in taking forward this plan.
The Council welcomes the international
community's commitments to respond to the
plans of the Palestinian Authority by providing
financial and political support. The Council
recognizes the important role of the Quartet in
international efforts aimed at providing assistance
to the Palestinian Authority in the fields of
the

security, economic development and governance.

"The Security Council supports the
proposals for follow-up to the London Meeting
and looks forward to their early implementation.

"The Security Council supports the Joint
Statement of the Quartet issued following the
meeting of the Quartet in the margins of the
London Meeting, and looks forward to the
Quartet's active engagement over the
forthcoming period, while recognizing also the
important role of other interested parties.

"The Security Council reiterates its call for full
respect by the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority of understandings reached
at the Sharm el-Sheikh summit on 8 February, in
particular that all Palestinians will stop all acts of
violence against all Israelis everywhere and that
Israel will cease all its military activities against
all Palestinians everywhere.

"The Security Council reiterates its call on both
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to ensure
continued progress in the peace process towards
full implementation of the road map in direct
contact with the Quartet. It stresses the need for
concerted and sustained action by the Palestinian
Authority to fulfil its security-related
commitments and welcomes in this context
President Abbas's commitment to exert every
effort towards that end. The Council stresses also
the need for Israel to implement its road map
commitments.

"The Security Council reiterates its demand for
immediate cessation of all acts of violence,
including all acts of terror, provocation,
incitement and destruction.

"The Security Council reiterates its commitment
to the vision of two States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/12.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.
