Ms. Edjang Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, my delegation would like to
thank Kuwait for calling this emergency meeting on the
Middle East, specifically due to the gravity of recent
events on the border between Israel and the Gaza Strip.
We also thank you, Madam President, for the swift
convocation of the Council. We also thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov for his succinct, clear, exhaustive and very
alarming presentation.

We all witnessed yesterday's bloody events in
the Gaza Strip, shared by media the world over.
Estimates put the number of lives lost at more than 50,
including those of children, and the number of injured
Palestinians at more than 2,500, 1,300 of them shot
by Israeli Defence Forces troops. Taken together with
the death and damage wrought since the Great March
of Return began, in late March, jeopardizes hopes for
peace, security and stability in Gaza. My delegation
regrets this situation and these deaths, and we urge the
international community to remedy the situation.

As we said in the previous emergency meeting (see S/PV.8219), on 30 March, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea calls on the parties to refrain from any act that
could lead to violence. Acts of violence must cease
immediately and definitively, and both parties must
comply with international law as set out in the various
resolutions of the United Nations.

These incidents not only increase existing tensions
on the Palestinian question, but also exacerbate the long-
standing socioeconomic and humanitarian instability
beseting the population of Gaza. This is clear from the
request for emergency medical aid from neighbouring
Egypt and the possible transfer of the wounded.

Equatorial Guinea views the historic claims of the
Palestinians to bejust, in accordance with the numerous
statements of the African Union on the matter. We also
believe that Israel has the right to live in peace and
security. Israel must recognize that, just as its right to
exist cannot be denied, neither can that of Palestine.
Only in this way can two independent States coexist
with Jerusalem as their shared capital. Both of the
parties must therefore comply with international law as
expressed in the various relevant resolutions.

In addressing the Palestinian question, we cannot
ignore the important role of countries with political
influence in the Middle East, which can, and should, play
a prominent mediating role between the belligerents,
promoting, among other things, the implementation of
resolutions emanating from the Organization in which
we have all invested our trust with regard to preventing
and resolving the world's conflicts.

