Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We come
to the Security Council once again to debate the report
of the International Independent Investigation
Commission (IIIC) on the assassination of the martyred
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri. We must renew our thanks
and appreciation to the Council for having so closely
followed this question since the first days following the
major earthquake of the assassination of the late Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri.

Allow me to express our thanks also to the IIIC,
to its Commissioner and its members. We commend
their tireless efforts and their perseverance. Allow me
to pay special tribute to Mr. Serge Brammertz, who
enjoys wide respect and appreciation.

We believe that the report before us reflects
professional, precise work. We welcome the progress
on the various aspects of the investigation into the
assassination of Mr. Hariri, as well as the other crimes
within the Commission's terms of reference. We hope
that progress in the investigation will continue and that
cooperation with all relevant parties will strengthen
and improve.

With the continuing investigation, the
Government of Lebanon, in cooperation with the
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, Mr. Nicolas
Michel, and his assistants, is working to set up a court
with an international character, which we hope will
find support and assistance from the Council. The idea
of such a court enjoys firm and wide unanimity in
Lebanon and is of utmost importance to the Lebanese
people. Lebanon hopes that it will no longer be a place
for political assassination, a situation that we have long
suffered.

Finally, I should like to renew our thanks to
Mr. Brammertz and his assistants. We stress that just as
Lebanon was able, with the help of the Council, to rid
itself of Israeli aggression, it will continue to insist on
the complete uncovering of the truth of this major
crime of the killing of Prime Minister Hariri and his
companions, as well as crimes before and following
that assassination. The prosecution of those implicated
in the assassination of the late Prime Minister in a
court with an international character is desirable. We
rely once again on the will and insistence of our people
as expressed in its Government and on the Security
Council and all those who uphold justice in the world.
06-54337
