Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland rarely addresses the Security Council, but
today we believe that a statement is necessary because
Switzerland is mentioned in the report of the Panel of
Experts established by resolution 1306 (2000)
concerning Sierra Leone.

At the outset, I would stress that my Government,
too, is concerned by the situation in Sierra Leone and
by the resulting instability throughout the region. We
support the efforts of the United Nations and the
Economic Community of West African States to
provide a speedy and lasting solution to these
problems.

Switzerland particularly welcomes the various
measures adopted by the Security Council to put an end
to the conflict and to promote peace and stability in the
region. We believe that United Nations sanctions
aimed, inter alia, at eliminating the economic bases that
allow the conflict situation to persist are an important
instrument for attaining these goals.
In order to make these sanctions truly effective,
we need to be mindful of the risk of their being
circumvented. This problem is particularly relevant
with regard to the illicit importation of rough diamonds
from Sierra Leone. In this respect, I wish to recall that
my Government has not only fully implemented all the
recommendations ofthe Security Council, but has gone
even further in many spheres. It has, inter alia, taken
additional steps to enforce more effectively the
sanctions regime in the free ports and has drawn up a
list of countries that are potentially vulnerable to the
diamond traffic that sustains conflict. These countries
require increased vigilance.

The Swiss Government therefore regrets the fact
that the report of the Panel of Experts e contrary to
the recent, similar report on sanctions against
UNITA- refers in a partial and incomplete way to the
measures taken by Switzerland in this area, which are
detailed in the annex to the letter that I have addressed
to the President of the Security Council in document
S/2000/1232.

Allow me to add that my country supports
international efforts to design a global certification
system to prevent trade in conflict diamonds. We
welcome the General Assembly's adoption last
December of the resolution on the role of diamonds, as
well as the efforts that have been made by participants
in the "Kimberley Process". That Process has clearly
received a mandate from the General Assembly to
continue its work in this direction. Switzerland intends
to be actively involved in these efforts.

In conclusion, I would stress that my Government
attaches great importance to the promotion of peace
and stability in Sierra Leone and neighbouring
countries. At stake are not only the security of the
people, but sustainable development throughout the
entire region.

