Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Iwould
first like to thank your delegation, Mr. President, for
organizing today's open debate, which definitely
constitutes a valuable contribution to the process of
reforming our peacekeeping operations and builds
on other discussions that we have had in the past
few months, while at the same time contributing to
September's forthcoming high-level general debate.
I am also grateful for the briefings from Mrs. Amina
Mohammed, the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Youssef
Mahmoud, co-author of the report (see S/2015/446) of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
and Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, former Chair of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture. The contributions they
have made today through their briefings contain a
cumulative weight of reflection that makes the poor
thoughts I will be sharing today pale in comparison.

The nature, origin and characteristics of the
issues on the Security Council's agenda today are
very different from those that were on its agendas in
previous years. New threats to international peace and
security require responses that are tailored to these
challenges. In that regard, peacekeeping operations are
one of various tools, perhaps the most visible, available
to the Security Council in addressing these threats. For
some years now, Member States have been working
to adapt peacekeeping operations to the complexities
of today's conflicts. We therefore note that we have
moved from traditional missions to the increasing use
of multidimensional missions mandated with new tasks
and often focused on building and sustaining peace.

The contribution of peacekeeping operations to
the global strategy for building and sustaining peace
is undeniable. This can be seen in what has been
achieved by various missions in recent years, such
as the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL),
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
These Missions have fulfilled a wide variety of tasks,
such as helping host countries to define priorities and
essential strategies for peacebuilding, helping to create
an environment that enables competent national and
international bodies to carry out peacebuilding tasks
and pre-peacebuilding tasks that help countries lay the
foundations for peace and reduce their risk of falling
back into conflict.

We must also recognize that peacekeeping
operations can and should contribute more to the goal
of sustaining peace. We already have a wide frame of
reference on this topic. We have a number of primary
documents which have been issued following various
reviews of the United Nations peace and security
architecture; various resolutions, both of the General
Assembly and the Security Council; and the results
of the deliberations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.

Allow me elaborate some considerations that
are of special importance to Uruguay with regard to
contributing to peacekeeping operations with a view to
sustaining peace.

In designing and planning the deployment of a
peacekeeping operation, it is important to conduct an
exhaustive analysis of the operational environment in
which the peacekeeping operation will be developed
and the real possibilities of achieving the established
objectives, as that is a key factor in determining its
possible deployment. Once the deployment is decided,
it is important to establish clear and achievable goals,
the fulfilment of which will make it possible to plan the
drawdown strategy of the mission and thereby prevent
the creation of dependency and, at the same time,
develop national capacities.

It is also crucial that peacekeeping staff be properly
skilled, trained and prepared to execute all the tasks
specified in the mandate. In that sense, national
restrictions - so-called caveats - whether they are
stated or, worse, not stated; the absence of effective
command and control; a refusal to obey orders; a lack
of response to attacks against civilians and insufficient
equipment cannot be tolerated, as they negatively affect
shared responsibility in order to effectively comply
with the mandates.

Furthermore, political solutions must always guide
the design and deployment of peacekeeping operations.
Coordination between peacekeeping operations, the
Peacebuilding Commission, United Nations country
teams and the various development bodies working
on the ground must be strengthened with a view to
ensuring greater efficiency and effectiveness in critical
tasks for peacebuilding and responding to urgent
development needs. It is also essential to provide the
necessary resources to attain the proposed objectives.
The transition processes should ensure that the
achievements obtained during the peace process are
notjeopardized.

In conclusion, I would like to refer to the case
of Liberia as a clear example of a transition to the
presence of the United Nations on the ground. The
United Nations system and its international partners
have deployed many efforts to ensure the success of
the transition of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
Responsibilities in the area of security were transferred
to the Government over a year ago and the country
is currently experiencing calm while, at the same
time, presidential and legislative elections are being
prepared, which will be held in the coming months.
Also, the Liberia peacebuilding configuration is doing
a commendable job in the area of establishing long-
term capacity and stability.

For its part, UNMIL has adapted its mandate
based on changes in the situation on the ground and
has progressively reduced the number of people on
the ground, thereby guaranteeing peace until now.
As a counterpart, the Government of Liberia has
progressively assumed its responsibilities as a sovereign
country. We hope that this transition will be concluded
successfully and that the United Nations can use this
case as an example to follow in the future.

