Mr. Shinyo (Japan): Allow me, first, to join other
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for your
initiative to convene this meeting with representatives
from many regional and subregional organizations.
Through the strengthening of the capacities of regional
and subregional organizations and the experience
accumulated between the United Nations and those
organizations beginning in the late 1990s, the United
Nations relationship with regional and subregional
organizations has produced significant developments
on the ground. It is my hope that the discussion today
will build on past open debates in the Security Council
and lead to concrete steps towards the further
enhancement of such cooperation.

I would like to begin with the issue of conflict
prevention. Conflict prevention requires continuous
efforts, and thus it is often difficult to discern clear
signs of success. In such circumstances, the role of
regional and subregional organizations is crucial in
complementing the work of the Council and supporting
the good offices of the Secretary-General. Those
organizations closely monitor a situation on an ongoing
basis and practice active preventive diplomacy based

on a strong interest in and deep knowledge of the
particular region. A well-known example of such
cooperation is the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) field missions and
groups such as the OSCE Minsk Group. Japan is
counting on regional organizations and initiatives to
increase their role in mediation and preventive
diplomacy in Asia, the Middle East and Africa. It is
essential in that field to institutionalize the cooperation
between regional organizations and the Secretariat
through frequent communications, information
sharing - including in those areas where there is no
United Nations presence - and the establishment of a
closer working relationship among the field offices. In
that context, we welcome the fact that some
organizations recently have developed memorandums
of understanding and declarations with the United
Nations, and hope that such arrangements will also
help to eliminate administrative obstacles to further
cooperation.

The contribution of regional organizations such
as the African Union, the European Union and NATO
in the field of peacekeeping has been outstanding.
There can be no doubt about the importance of the role
of regional organizations in that area. Once a threat to
the peace and security of a region has emerged, the
ability of regional organizations to deploy capable
troops swiftly and at the right time, at the request of
the Security Council and through consultation with the
United Nations, is a great asset for the Council, as well
as for the international community at large, in
responding effectively to a crisis. We welcome the
variety brought to the modality of engagement by
regional organizations, such as the deployment of
police forces and military or police advisors to support
security sector reform.

I would like to mention one related issue. With
regard to the currently pressing issue of the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the Japanese delegation
strongly hopes for the acceleration of the preparations
and believes that further cooperation among the
various actors, including the Government of the Sudan,
is important to that end.

The United Nations and the international
community must make active use of those efforts by
regional and subregional organizations and support
them to the maximum extent. The true exercise of
ownership consists in regional organizations' having

the ability to sustain their own activities. The
international community must render assistance by
promoting the decision-making and operational
capacity-building of those organizations. In that
context, the African Union secretariat's efforts to
enhance its capacity, with the support of the United
Nations Secretariat, are welcomed.

Japan believes that the sharing of knowledge and
experiences among organizations is useful and should
therefore be promoted among regional organizations.
We encourage, in that regard, advancing the
institutionalization of cooperation not only with the
United Nations, but also among regional and
subregional organizations themselves.

As regards support for the peacekeeping
operations conducted by regional organizations, in
principle every organization should be responsible for
its own costs. When the United Nations examines the
possibility of offering financial support, the Council
should consider the advisability and modality of
support on a case-by-case basis, taking into account
whether such support would be consistent with the
principles that govern United Nations peacekeeping
operations, while making an effort to obtain the views
of major States that are not members of the Council -
in particular, major financial contributors - so as to
ensure transparency. In addition, once a peacekeeping
operation has been deployed, the same rules and
standards for its management as those in place at the
United Nations should be strictly applied.

Peacebuilding is another area in which Japan
believes regional and subregional organizations can
make a contribution. Peacebuilding requires a holistic
and integrated approach and the participation of all the
stakeholders in the process. The Peacebuilding
Commission was established precisely to ensure such
an approach. It should be noted that the Commission is
a unique and open organization, insofar as it includes
regional and subregional organizations as members in
its country-specific meetings, as well as member States
selected from among various groups. As the Chair for
the second year of the Commission's work, Japan
encourages regional organizations to contribute to a
more effective response on the part of the international
community by providing their knowledge and
assessment to the Commission, where appropriate. In
that context, I am pleased by the decision of the
Commission to invite the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region to the country-specific meeting
on Burundi, and welcome its active participation in the
work of the Commission. We also welcome the
language related to the Peacebuilding Commission that
is incorporated in today's presidential statement.

Allow me also to touch briefly on the issue of
counter-terrorism. That is an area in which regional
and subregional organizations can also play an
important role by implementing the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. In Asia, the
framework of regional cooperation, with the
Association of South-East Asian Nations at its centre,
is enhancing its efforts in that field, and Japan has been
actively supporting those efforts.

The Government of Japan has always paid close
attention to the root causes of conflicts and taken an
approach that respects regional ownership, as well as
making financial contributions through the United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security, the United
Nations Democracy Fund and the Peacebuilding Fund.
We have been promoting peace consolidation in Africa
through the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD) process, which included the
TICAD Conference on Consolidation of Peace at Addis
Ababa in February 2006. We will hold the Fourth
Tokyo International Conference on African
Development in May next year, followed by the G8
Hokkaido Toyako summit in July. Japan intends to
continuously present the challenges in Africa as a
priority area and to further enhance its cooperation
with Africa.

In addition to those initiatives, we intend to
continue to extend bilateral and multilateral assistance
in such areas as the collection of small arms;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and the
response to landmines, as well as to provide support to
the African Union and subregional organizations in
Africa for capacity-building. We will also continue our
consideration of the possibility of offering further
assistance to strengthen the peacekeeping capacity of
Africa. Through those endeavours, Japan will remain
actively engaged in the issue of conflict prevention and
resolution.

