Ms. Bragg: I thank the Council for the
opportunity to brief its members this morning on the
humanitarian situation in Somalia.

Since our last briefing of 26 July, the magnitude
of the crisis has become even greater. A little less than
two weeks ago, the United Nations declared a famine
in two regions in Somalia and warned that urgent
action needed to be taken to prevent famine from
spreading further. On 3 August, the Food and

Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Food
Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit announced that
famine thresholds had been surpassed in the three
additional areas of southern Somalia, in Middle
Shabelle, the Afgoye corridor internally displaced
persons (IDPs) settlement and the Mogadishu IDP
community.

Nationwide, 3.7 million people are in crisis, with
3.2 million people in need of immediate life-saving
assistance, of whom 2.8 million are in south-central
Somalia. That is twice the entire population of
Manhattan. Children are the most affected by the crisis,
and an estimated 1.25 million children across southern
Somalia are in urgent need of life-saving assistance.
Tens of thousands of children have already died, and
many more will die in the coming days unless aid is
provided to them.

The under-five mortality rate is higher than 4 per
10,000 per day in all areas of the south, peaking at
13 per 10,000 per day in the riverine and agro-pastoral
areas of Lower Shabelle and among Afgoye and
Mogadishu IDPs. Let me illustrate what 13 per 10,000
per day actually means. It means that by the time I go
to bed tonight, 13 people, six of whom would be under
5 years of age, would have died, and tomorrow 13 will
also die. That will continue the day after that unless we
can reverse the trend. And this is only in one
community of 10,000. As we all know, the IDP
community is a great deal larger than that in the famine
area.

According to the Food Security and Nutrition
Analysis Unit, the current situation represents the most
severe humanitarian crisis in the world today, and
Africa's worst food security crisis since Somalia's
famine of 1991 and 1992. We have not yet seen the
peak of the crisis, as further deterioration is considered
likely given the very high levels of both severe acute
malnutrition and under-five mortality in combination
with an expectation of a continued increase in local
cereal prices and a below-average rainy season harvest.

The drought crisis has generated displacement on
a large scale within Somalia, as well as refugee
outflows into Kenya and Ethiopia. An estimated
100,000 people, fleeing drought and famine, have
reached Mogadishu over the past two months alone in
search of food, water and shelter. In addition to the
370,000 people who were already displaced to the
capital, to date the overall number of IDPs in Somalia

is estimated at 1.5 million. An estimated 410,000 IDPs
are located in the 15 kilometre stretch of road in the
Afgoye corridor outside Mogadishu.

Since 1 August, an estimated 1,500 Somali
refugees have crossed the border into Kenya on a daily
basis. In Ethiopia, the number of refugees has
decreased from over 1,000 to an average of 270 people
a day.

A massive multisectoral response is critical to
prevent additional deaths and total livelihood and
social collapse. Health interventions are as important
as the provision of food aid or therapeutic feeding, in
particular since, with the start of the rains in October,
the risk of epidemic disease due to a lack of access to
potable water is likely to increase.

In recent weeks, some progress has been made in
scaling up the response. For example, on 4 August, the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
announced the increase of its emergency operations in
central and southern Somalia to assist more than
1 million people affected by drought and conflict. The
ICRC has been the only organization allowed to
conduct food distribution in Al-Shabaab areas since the
suspension of World Food Programme (WFP)
operations in January 2010.

In areas under the control of Al-Shabaab, the
United Nations and its partners continue to negotiate
access with local authorities and communities to reach
new areas and move closer to the people affected. In
July, following assessment missions to two newly
accessible areas in the Gedo area, where spontaneous
settlements are springing up due to the increased
movement of people, we have seen an increase in the
delivery of life-saving assistance to the most needy,
including, for example, a wet-feeding programme
providing 25,000 meals per day for five days, starting
2 August.

UNICEF is boosting its supply pipeline to
support the existing supplementary feeding centres,
stabilization centres and therapeutic feeding centres.
Blanket supplementary feeding is meanwhile scheduled
to start this week, with priority given to operations in
famine-affected regions, including in Lower Shabelle.
Supplies will assist an estimated 154,000 people.
Since 27 July, 97 tons of supplies have been
airlifted to Mogadishu, Gedo and Lower Juba to treat
some 34,000 malnourished children under five years of
age for one month. High-energy biscuits have also been
airlifted to the areas of Gedo and Lower Juba to feed
60,000 people.

Emergency measles campaigns targeting more
than 72,000 children aged six months to 15 years are
under way in accessible districts in the Gedo region,
while negotiations are under way with local authorities
to secure access to additional areas. A measles
vaccination campaign targeting 40,000 children under
five years of age was completed in Mogadishu.
Furthermore, a health campaign targeting 215,000
children under five years of age with measles and polio
vaccines was carried out along the Somali-Kenyan
border.

Across southern and central Somalia, sanitation
activities have reached almost 340,000 people. Water
interventions, such as borehole rehabilitation and water
trucking, have reached over 817,000 people.

In Mogadishu this week, an Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees airlift
carrying 31 tons of shelter material and some 2,500
emergency assistance packages for thousands of
displaced people landed in the capital, for the first time
in five years.

However, humanitarian operations in Mogadishu
remain complex, and the scaling up of activities is not
a quick endeavour. Humanitarian actors are still
assessing the implications of the withdrawal of
Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu. It remains unclear if this
move is a complete pull-out or a change of tactics on
the part of Al-Shabaab, or how this new scenario will
affect overall security and our ability to deliver
humanitarian aid.

Furthermore, the capacity of the local civilian
administration in supporting the delivery of aid and
ensuring the security of IDP sites remains weak. Last
Friday, for example, 10 people were shot dead at an
IDP site in the area under the control of the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the
African Union Mission in Somalia, when local clan
militias attempted to loot resources destined for IDPs.

Earlier this week, on 8 August, the Humanitarian
Coordinator met with the Prime Minister in
Mogadishu, together with the Department of Safety
and Security, WFP, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), to
discuss the scaling up of the humanitarian programme
and improving security at IDP sites.

Last week, the TFG created the Disaster
Management Agency (DMA) to coordinate the
provision of humanitarian assistance. The Prime
Minister reassured the United Nations delegation that
the Government would be able to negotiate secure
access to assist delivery in the camps. However,
technical support will still be required, and OCHA is
now following up with DMA to improve information-
sharing on the delivery of assistance.

At the current juncture, it is of paramount
importance that the capacity of the local administration
be strengthened to allow proper coordination between
the humanitarian community and the Government and
ensure that the Government fully discharges its
responsibilities with regard to the protection of the
civilian population.

I would like to conclude my statement with some
remarks on the funding situation of humanitarian
programmes. To date, the United Nations Consolidated
Appeal for Somalia is funded at 46 per cent.
Humanitarian partners still require more than
$560 million for life-saving assistance. In the region,
we still urgently need $1.3 billion to save lives. Donors
have committed more than $1 billion to the response so
far, and continue to pledge more. We are very grateful,
especially in these difficult economic times. But the
magnitude of human suffering in Somalia today
demands more.

Despite the difficulty of operating in one of the
most conflict-riven countries in the world, we cannot
let people down. Our response must be scaled up, and
the resources to support that effort must be provided.

Every day counts. We believe that tens of
thousands have already died. Hundreds of thousands
face imminent starvation and death. We can act to
prevent further loss of life and ensure the survival of
those who are on the brink of death.

A massive multisectoral response to save lives in
the immediate term and rebuild livelihoods in the
medium-short term are critical. We will continue to
appeal to donors to provide the resources needed to
respond to the crisis. We expect assistance needs to
continue for the rest of this year, if not longer.

As we have stressed over recent weeks, this is the
most severe food crisis emergency in the world right
now. We must treat it with the urgency it demands.

