Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Ms. Heidi Grau and Mr. Halit Cevik for their briefings. On the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the Minsk agreements, Indonesia would like to highlight the following three points. First, we must uphold respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. Indonesia reaffirms its principled and consistent position that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States are fundamental principles of relations among nations, including in Ukraine. Indonesia is therefore against any actions of annexation of any sovereign country or territory. That is a clear violation of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. Secondly, there must be full adherence to, and implementation of, the Minsk agreements, which constitute the legal basis for achieving a political solution and provide a road map for settling the conflict in Ukraine. Indonesia supports the full implementation of the agreements, in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter. We encourage the relevant stakeholders to uphold those commitments fully. That will be a crucial confidence-booster to ultimately pave the way for a political solution and restore peace and stability in the affected areas. Indonesia also takes note of the work carried out by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Trilateral Contact Group in the implementation of the agreements. We call on all parties to immediately cease hostilities and commit to fully respecting the ceasefire and refraining from provocations that could lead to more tension. In line with the Minsk agreements, the parties should refrain from actions that could be viewed as provocative and further impede a peaceful resolution. Thirdly, conflicts must be peacefully settled. Indonesia reiterates its call on all the parties concerned to exercise the utmost restraint, manage the crisis responsibly, promote a peaceful settlement and uphold respect for international law. We call on them to achieve a comprehensive and balanced solution through dialogue, as stipulated in Article 33 of the Charter. In doing so, Indonesia encourages the States concerned to take necessary measures to de-escalate tensions. We are against any actions that exacerbate hostilities and deteriorate the already fragile situation on the ground.Let me end by reiterating that Indonesia will fully support all constructive efforts aimed at resolving the conflict in Ukraine peacefully, in accordance with international law and Charter principles. We once again urge a peaceful solution to the crisis in Ukraine according to the relevant Security Council resolutions and the agreements signed by the parties involved.
