Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Thank
you, Mr. President, for your expression of condolences.

I would like to welcome Special Representative
Kubis back to the Council and thank him for his
briefing. On behalf of my Government, I also extend
our appreciation to the staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
entire United Nations country team for their efforts,
which have been crucial contributions as Afghans
have made significant advances for their country. We
also welcome Ambassador Tanin and thank him once
again for both his valuable comments and valuable
engagement.

We can see evidence of the transformational
changes in Afghanistan in the United Nations 2013
Human Development Index. Since 2000, Afghanistan's
score in the Index has improved by nearly 60 per cent,
more than any other country. Without Iosing sight of
the remarkable transformation Afghanistan has made
in the past 12 years, today I would like to address the
ongoing security, political and economic transition.

On the security side, with the help from the
United States military and our many allies, the Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF) have assumed
lead responsibility for security country-wide. That
milestone also signalled a shift in the International
Security Assistance Forces' primary mission from
combat to training, advising and assisting the ANSF.
In that connection, the outcome of recent deliberations
by the loya jirga on the United States-Afghanistan
bilateral security agreement shows that the Afghan
people overwhelmingly support the partnership that
has brought us this far and want very much to sustain it.

Concluding the bilateral security agreement
promptly would be an important signal to Afghans that
their interests will be protected and that their concerns
about the future will be addressed. The United States
is committed, in the spirit of the bilateral security
agreement, to remain a strong partner in support of
the Afghan people's effort to achieve lasting peace,
security and development.

Turning to the political transition, my Government
is encouraged by the progress Afghans have made
in preparing for the April 2014 elections. Two key
electoral laws have been enacted. Election and
complaints commissioners have been appointed. A
list of candidates has been finalized, and each of the
presidential tickets represents a broad-based coalition,
which is critical to ensuring that all groups have a stake
in both the process and its outcome.

Like the United Nations and other countries that
have been supporting Afghanistan's development,
the United States strongly supports that democratic
process, but I emphasize that we neither endorse nor
favour any individual party or candidate. The choice
of president and provincial officials rests, as it should,
entirely with the Afghan people. The United States will
continue to assist the Afghan Government, especially
its electoral authorities, as well as the Parliament and
civil society, in their efforts to strengthen the electoral
system and prevent fraud. It is our profound hope that
the April presidential balloting will prove to be a truly
unifying moment for the Afghan people - an event
that will both consolidate recent gains and provide a
sturdy platform in future for improved governance.

Economically, the United States and our
international partners have in the past decade made a
substantial contribution to Afghanistan's progress. For
example, we have built or rehabilitated more than 3,000
kilometres of road, laid fibre-optic cables that connect
Afghans to one another and other countries, and made
it easier for Afghans to obtain access to basic health
and educational services. Looking ahead, we strongly
support a vision for regional cooperation called the New
Silk Road. Secretary Kerry announced our backing just
last week for the CASA-IOOO transmission line project,
which will allow existing hydroelectric generation
capacity in Central Asia to be used in Afghanistan
and Pakistan. We appreciate the efforts of the World
Bank and the Islamic Development Bank to advance
CASA-IOOO, and hope that other donors will join us in
supporting this promising initiative.

More generally, we are convinced that expanding
connections to its Central Asian neighbours will
greatly enhance Afghanistan's ability to diversify its
economy, increase trade and create more and better
opportunities for its people. Accordingly, we fully
endorse Afghanistan's goal of acceding to the World
Trade Organization in 2014.

The progress Afghanistan has made has been
built in part on the contributions of development
professionals and humanitarian personnel, helping
the local population on projects of every description.
Their effort can entail severe risks. Already this year,
there have been more than 230 incidents of violence
directed at such personnel, imperilling both Afghans
and the international staff and volunteers who work in
partnership with them. Just three weeks ago, separate
attacks Uruzgan and Faryab provinces claimed the lives
of nine aid workers. My Government extends its sincere
condolences to the families of the victims of all such
attacks. We call on all parties in Afghanistan to respect
the neutrality and basic human rights of humanitarian
and development workers.

Finally, with an eye to continuity, my Government
hopes that the Council will approve, in March 2014, a
one-year renewal of UNAMA's mandate. The Mission
continues to play a vital role in Afghanistan and we
see no need to alter the time frame or scope of its
core mandate at this time. We must also ensure that
UNAMA has adequate resources to carry out its many
important priorities, which include the coordination
of humanitarian and other assistance, support for
regional diplomacy, the political process, human
rights monitoring, institution-building and capacity
development.

In conclusion, I would like to cite the words of
a leader whose legacy has been much on our minds.
"In the history of nations", observed Nelson Mandela,
"generations have made their mark through their
acumen to appreciate critical turning points and, with
determination and creativity, to seize the moment".
Today, the leaders of Afghanistan and their people and
the international community all have choices to make.
My Government hopes that we will Choose to seize the
moment now so that in 2014 we may continue working
in partnership - lasting partnership - on behalf of a
safer, more prosperous and more united Afghanistan.

