Ms. Guo Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I would like to thank President Meron,
Prosecutor Brammertz, President Joensen and
Prosecutor Jallow for their briefings on the work of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. I would like to make the following
points.

First, since June the two Tribunals have overcome
such difficulties as staff retention, worked hard to
implement the completion strategy, and made steady
progress in their relevant work. The ICTR continues
to successfully transfer cases to Rwanda. Other trials
will be completed by the end of this year on schedule.
The appeals are expected to be completed by the end of
2014. China appreciates this.

We note that, despite great effort on the part of the
ICTY, many trials have been delayed. The trials and
appeals cannot be completed within the time limit set
by resolution 1966 (2010). We understand that there
may be many different reasons for delays in cases,
but we still expect the ICTY to further improve the
efficiency and timeliness of its work. Moreover, China
also notes the controversy caused by a recent appeal
judgement of the ICTY. The ICTY should adhere to
the principles of impartiality, independence and the
rule of law in its work to ensure justice and make a
positive contribution to maintaining regional stability
and ethnic reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia.

Secondly, a branch of the Residual Mechanism
for the ICTR began functioning officially on 1 July
2012. Right now, the ICTR is transitioning smoothly
to the Residual Mechanism. Some traditional functions
have been handed over. The Residual Mechanism has
also submitted its first report to the Security Council
(S/2012/849, annex I), which we welcome. Tracking
and apprehending the three high-level fugitives from
the ICTR is one of the challenges confronting the
Rwanda branch of the Mechanism. We hope that this
endeavour will achieve early progress. We encourage
Kenya, Zimbabwe and other countries to cooperate
with the Mechanism, and we thank them for their
cooperation thus far. On 1 July 2013, the ICTY branch
of the Residual Mechanism will also begin functioning.
China hopes that the ICTY can, in accordance with
the requirements laid out in Council resolutions, make
appropriate arrangements for its work so as to ensure
a smooth start to the functioning of the Residual
Mechanism.

Thirdly, China appreciates the cooperation of
Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Rwanda
with the two Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism. We
call on those countries, where possible, to demonstrate
political will and to work with the two Tribunals in
enforcing judgements and relocating those acquitted.
We also hope that, where possible, the two Tribunals
can pay a positive role in strengthening national
capacity-building in the region.

Finally, I take this opportunity to thank Guatemala,
as Chairman of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, and the United Nations Office
of Legal Affairs for their work.

