The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Kuwait.

At the outset, I join other Council members in
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Modibo Toure, for his valuable briefing.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Mauro Vieira for his briefing as the chief
of Guinea-Bissau Configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We commend their efforts to support
security, stability and socioeconomic development in
Guinea-Bissau.

We have been following the recent political
developments there and regret the fact that none of
the provisions of the Conakry Agreement have been
implemented since signing it in October 2016. It is
unacceptable that there has so far been no appointment
of Prime Minister who enjoys consensus by the relevant
two parties, which is critical to implementing other
items of the Agreement.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau differs from other
cases before the Security Council in having no security
aspects. Unfortunately, however, the impasse has lasted
more than a year, and it is the people of Guinea-Bissau
who are suffering the consequences. In that regard,
we commend the steps that the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) has taken to
advance the political process, including measures for
the imposition of sanctions on those obstructing the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement, as well
as the decision to extend the mandate of its Mission
in Guinea-Bissau until the end of March. We want to
emphasize the relevance of the role of such regional
organizations in resolving regional issues.

The efforts of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
deserve support, since it is dealing with a difficult
and complicated political situation. However, we hope
that it will be able to make progress during the coming
period with respect to conducting legislative elections
this year and presidential elections next.

The legislative and presidential elections, to be
held in 2018 and 2019 respectively, must take place
within the specific time frame. We therefore call on
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, along with all stakeholders in Guinea-
Bissau, such as the European Union, the African Union,
ECOWAS and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, to spare no efforts towards that end. We also
call on the Government of Guinea-Bissau to ensure
its citizens' full participation in the elections, as well
as security and freedom of expression and assembly
for all.

The cooperation between UNIOGBIS and civil-
society organizations in promoting and developing
the role of women in Guinea-Bissau is very positive.
We hope that UNIOGBIS will make a greater effort
to guarantee the full participation of all components
of the society, especially women and young people, in
the next political process and will continue to promote
other aspects of its mandate until the current impasse
is resolved.

In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of the
Conakry Agreement as the basic reference for resolving
this political crisis in Guinea-Bissau, and the efforts
of ECOWAS and President Alpha Conde' of Guinea
to advance the political process in order to maintain
the security and stability of Guinea-Bissau and the
region. We stand ready to cooperate with Cote d'Ivoire
in preparing a draft resolution for the extension of the
UNIOGBIS mandate, in response to a request by the
Secretary-General. We also support the issuance of a
Press Statement to clarify the unified position of the
Council regarding the situation in Guinea-Bissau.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Guinea-Bissau.

