Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): First,
I wish to associate myself with previous speakers in
conveying to Ambassador Traore our congratulations
on the dedication, skill and tact with which he and his
team conduced the Council's work during the difficult
month of March.

Secondly, I wish to convey to you, Mr. President,
my delegation's sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. You can count on my delegation's full
cooperation.

Finally, I wish to say how deeply grateful we are
to you for having organized this open meeting on the
activities of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
one of its characteristics precisely being transparency.

Today's discussion allows us to take stock of
what the CTC has done since its creation. What we
observe now and our overview of the work done attests
once again to our solidarity and desire to cooperate at
the world level against this transnational plague. It also
gives us the necessary means to together take a look at
the future. No State and no society can deny that
terrorism is one of the threats to world peace and
security. Terrorism wants to impose itself and its logic
on us. To accept this logic would mean abdicating our
responsibilities and renouncing all of our basic human
values. But it is our refusal to do so that is the very
basis of the global coalition to combat terrorism. The
clearest example of this refusal is resolution 1373
(2001) of 28 September 2001, in which the Security
Council established the CTC and entrusted to it
implementation of the resolution.

In the face of this menace, our common security
will be best assured only if we fight together, in a well-
considered, resolute manner. We are convinced that the
United Nations is the appropriate legal and institutional
framework for the development of the anti-terrorist
campaign; the CTC is a clear reflection of this.

My delegation has repeatedly stressed that
terrorists of all stripes are trying to take advantage of
the technological and logistical disparities between our
respective States and of gaps in international
legislation. Efforts in this area are necessary and
urgent, because the current legal machinery, although
pluridimensional, nonetheless remains sectoral and
therefore incomplete.

The delegation of Cameroon would like to
express its regret at the fact that that the Ad Hoc
Committee of the General Assembly established by
resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996 was unable, at
its seventh session, held here last week, to resolve
pending matters concerning the elaboration of a draft
comprehensive convention against terrorism and of a
draft international convention on the suppression of
nuclear terrorism.

The point can never be overemphasized that the
pernicious and widespread threat posed by terrorism
makes it incumbent upon us to strengthen our spirit of
solidarity and to promote international cooperation, in
order to ensure that information is disseminated more
widely and to enable us to draw on the experience of
various structures whose activities deal with counter-
terrorism. That is what the CTC has been skilfully
endeavouring to do since its establishment, with the
assistance of a panel of experts that is particularly
competent and professional.

Thanks to the work of the CTC, States have
become increasingly aware of what terrorism means
and of the need to strengthen their capacity to counter
this scourge. This has also made it possible to establish
a useful dialogue among international, regional and
subregional organizations. In this respect, we welcome
the results achieved by these organizations at the 6
March meeting held here at United Nations
Headquarters.

Cameroon welcomes the broadly positive
outcome of the work of the CTC. This outcome is due
to the resolve, determination and creativity of an entire
team, masterfully led by Sir Jeremy Greenstock. The
President of the Security Council has just stressed, with
particular eloquence, Sir Jeremy's leadership and great
diplomatic skill, as well as his profound conviction as
to the role of the United Nations in countering
terrorism. My delegation would echo those sentiments,
and we wish to pay him well-deserved tribute.

In the statement he made earlier, Sir Jeremy did
not merely give us an overall assessment. True to his
high standards, at each stage, and whenever necessary,
he made extremely constructive comments and
suggestions on ways to improve the work of the
Committee established by resolution 1373 (2001).

In its 18 months of existence, the Committee has
received an impressive number of reports - more than
343. As the Ambassador of France stressed, this is
unheard of in the United Nations. This is proof of the
outstanding cooperation between the Committee and
the States Members of our world Organization. We
urge those States that have not yet submitted their
reports to do so as soon as possible, because, while we
recognize the need for each State to work at its own
pace in drafting its reports, it is important that all
should abide by the set timetable.

As Ambassador Inocencio Arias of Spain
prepares to take over from Sir Jeremy, I wish to assure
him of the full cooperation of my delegation in his
complex and highly politically sensitive task. We are
already thinking about follow-up of the principal
guidelines set out in resolution 1456 (2003), adopted
by our foreign ministers last January; the
recommendations that emerged from the special
meeting of our Committee with international, regional
and subregional organizations; and the necessary
dialogue with other United Nations committees whose
activities intersect with the work of the CTC.

With regard to the new programme for the next
90 days, when we move to the concrete phase of the
Committee's work, we need the full support of
everyone here. The plan's objectives are ambitious and
its approach pragmatic. We commend the fact that the
programme has taken on board one of our major
concerns: the question of assistance. Cameroon has
always maintained that greater emphasis and more
resources should be devoted to assistance if we want to
achieve our goals.

I wish to reiterate the appeal made here on 20
January 2003 by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cameroon that the various donors and technical
contributors increase significantly increase and in a
simplified form their assistance to countries that need
that it.

Under resolution 1373 (2001), adopted under
Chapter VII, all States have obligations that they must
meet. Cameroon, for its part, fully supports the
measures taken by the United Nations to eliminate
international terrorism, as contained in resolution 1373
(2001). The two reports submitted by my Government
make clear our determination to discharge our
obligations under that resolution.

For our struggle to lead to victory, it must
encompass the fight against poverty, famine and
injustice. It is clear also that the best long-term strategy
to isolate and eliminate terrorism lies in the promotion
of democracy and social justice through the right to
development.
Terrorism, under whatever pretext, is
unacceptable. Nothing can justify barbaric acts that
inflict untold suffering on people; they are an assault
on human dignity.

At the Millennium Summit, we committed
ourselves to freeing peoples from fear of all kinds. Let
us keep to that course.

