The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Cameroon.

Cameroon fully associates itself with the
statement made this morning by His Excellency
Mr. Rodolphe Adada, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Cooperation and Francophonie of the Congo, on behalf
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS). I will, therefore, be brief, particularly since I
am the last speaker on the list and I am eager to resume
my presidential functions.

Heeding the appeal of the Security Council,
Central Africa has come before the Council for give
and take, for synergy for the restoration and
maintenance of peace through development and
conflict prevention, management and settlement.
Central Africa has come before the Security Council to
say what it is, to voice its faith in cooperation with the
United Nations and the Security Council in particular
and to state its expectations.

Central Africa has come to tell us what it is: a
region racked by conflict to be sure; but also, first and
foremost, a region organizing itself in order to develop
in peace and stability. Central Africa is at the heart of
Africa. It is a strategic geopolitical grouping with
enormous natural resources - mining, agricultural and
water: enormous resources give rise to greed, which is
not always good for the subregion.

Central Africa gives the impression that it does
not know how to live from its wealth, and that it is an
area where development is thwarted because of so
many conflicts. That point was made by all previous
speakers. Seven of the 11 ECCAS countries are
experiencing or just beginning to emerge from
particularly devastating conflicts.

There has been so much loss of human life, and
so much communication and production infrastructure
destroyed. What a waste for that unique biodiversity
that is so useful for the preservation and the balance of
the world's ecosystem.

Yes, Central Africa is a region racked by conflict.
But that situation is not inevitable. Even if it were,
Central Africa would reject that inevitability. It would
reject it because it has said no to war and no to
conflict. Central Africa would reject that inevitability
because it ultimately wants to live on its resources in
peace and stability. That is the second feature of
Central Africa: it is a region organized for peace and
development.

Hence the revitalization of ECCAS. Hence also
the establishment of institutions that promote peace:
the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa,
bolstered by the Central African Early Warning
System, the Central African Multinational Force and
the Defence and Security Commission. Central Africa,
which has come before the Security Council, is
therefore a partner that can meet the requirements of
Article 52 and Article 53 of the Charter, which promote
conflict settlement at the regional level. The point now
is to strengthen the structures that have been
established and to encourage joint action with the
United Nations.

Having told the Council what it is, Central Africa
takes the opportunity of this discussion - and this is
the second point of my statement - to profess its faith
in cooperation with the United Nations and earnestly to
appeal for cooperation with the entire United Nations
system. How could it be otherwise?

The tasks of development and peace require
enormous resources and action by many actors; hence
the need for coordination between the Security Council
and the subregional organizations. How could it be
otherwise when, as the Secretary-General has said, the
maintenance of peace has assumed a regional
dimension?

"It is only natural that African States are
expected to play a leading role in their own back
yards, and in many instances they have risen
bravely to the challenge.

"What is not natural, or indeed fair, is to
expect Africans to carry out these tasks without
help." (S/PV.408], p. 3)

That is what the Secretary-General stated to the
Council on 15 December 1999.

The Millennium Declaration becomes so relevant:
there, our heads of State or Government committed
themselves, inter alia, to sustaining regional and
subregional mechanisms for preventing conflict and
promoting political stability. Based on that Declaration,
and confident in the solemn commitments undertaken
by those heads of State or Government, Central Africa
wishes to state its expectations. That is the third and
final point of my statement. The heads of State or
Government spoke at the Millennium Summit, and they
spoke well. Now is the time to act. At the 13
September 2002 meeting between President Bush and
Central African heads of State in New York, the
President of Cameroon, His Excellency Mr. Paul Biya,
outlined areas for international cooperation to maintain
peace and security in our subregion.
For the sake of clarity and conciseness, I will
cluster them into two areas. The first area of
cooperation is capacity-building in the subregion-
through troop-training, exchanges of personnel and
arrangements for logistic partnerships and increased
access to and capacity to rapidly deploy stocks -
through the establishment of cooperation with the other
African subregional bodies. I wish to be clear that
Central Africa is the only region whose members
belong to several groupings, which shows how central
its position is.

Finally, thanks to the operationalization of
COPAX, the Early Warning Mechanism (MARAC) and
the Central African Multinational Force (FOMAC), the
Council - through its unanimous support for the
deployment of an international observer force on the
Chad border with the Central African Republic - has
charted a course for our efforts.

My second point relates to support for the peace
agreements. In all regions of the world - and
Cameroon made this very point in this Chamber on 15
December 1999 - the signing of a peace agreement is
always accompanied by funding to help resolve
pending issues. We all know that when war comes
calling, peace and development leave by the back door.
The many conflicts besetting Central Africa have torn
asunder the social and economic fabric of the
subregion. The need for demobilization,
demilitarization, reconstruction and reintegration, as
advocated by the United Nations in similar situations,
becomes very important here. Any final restoration of
peace to the region is largely dependent on this.

In this respect, the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme proposed by the World
Bank should therefore be welcomed. Its prompt
implementation would enable the countries of Central
Africa to rebuild their economies and to make up for
lost time. All of this requires a visible physical
presence of the United Nations in Central Africa.

That is why we believe that the United Nations
should build its strategy around an assessment of the
situation that is based not on the view from First
Avenue but on local perspectives - right there, on the
ground, in Central Africa. Hence the importance and
the urgency of dispatching an inter-agency mission to
the field.

I listened very carefully to the statement made by
the representative of Singapore. His statement makes
even more relevant the proposal made by Cameroon in
the Council in December 1999 and in January 2002 to
establish in the Secretariat a structure to follow up on
African issues. In this respect, our Organization could
make use of the very successful experiences of the
World Bank.

Central Africa would like to take advantage of its
enormous resources in conditions of peace and
stability. It would like to be able to play its role as a
linchpin and a pillar for African integration, and it is
banking in this respect on the cooperation and the
strong, resolute and concrete support of the
international community and in particular of the United
Nations system.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Members of the Council will recall that during
our consultations, and as the background note states
that was circulated to members before this meeting, it
had been agreed that today's discussion would
conclude with a presidential statement. A draft
statement incorporating the views and observations
made by members during our discussions will be
communicated to them this evening for their
comments.

Meanwhile, it seems to me appropriate 4 given
the presence here of other Members of the
Organization and in particular of Ministers from
Central Africa and of representatives of international
agencies, who have honoured us with their presence
today - to draw some preliminary conclusions from
today's meeting.

The objective of our meeting, as members will
recall, was to study ways and means to strengthen the
very creative partnerships between the United Nations
system and Central Africa, in the perspective of the
Economic Community of Central African States.

Our discussions have identified several causes of
the conflicts that have gripped the region for more than
two decades now. All speakers referred to the
indissociable link between endemic poverty and the
emergence and continuation of conflicts in Central
Africa. Our meeting has confirmed the fact that
improvements are being seen in all the major conflicts
in the subregion, which stems from a more resolute
political commitment on the part of the leaders of
Central Africa and of the other countries concerned.
This new situation requires peace-building measures
such as demobilization, disarmament, reintegration and
reconstruction. All of these steps require major
funding, which can be mobilized only with the support
of the United Nations system and the entire donor
community.

All speakers stated how much they appreciated
the renewed commitment of the World Bank and of the
United Nations Development Programme to assist, in
the short, medium and long term, post-conflict
operations in Central Africa.

The Council has heard the unanimous appeal of
the States of Central Africa for decisive support on the
part of the United Nations for the efforts of the
subregion in the area of the maintenance of peace and
security, and they stressed the importance in this
respect of operationalizing the Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa.

Speakers welcomed the recent initiative of the
States of the Economic and Monetary Community of
Central Africa advocating the establishment of an
international observer and security force in order to
defuse the situation between the Central African
Republic and Chad. The States of Central Africa hope
that the commitments announced today will be
effectively followed up and strengthened. The wish
was expressed to have specific follow-up of this
discussion.

The Council stressed the importance of synergy
in the efforts made, in order to harmonize actions on
the ground - hence the need for a general coordinator
of the United Nations system for Central Africa
garnered considerable support. The meeting called on
the Secretary-General to prepare a detailed report on
the general situation in Central Africa that would take
into account the analyses and conclusions of an inter-
agency assessment mission dispatched to the country as
well as the innovative ideas mentioned during today's
debate.

Finally, I wish to note and to welcome the great
enthusiasm and the great level of participation in this
public meeting on strengthening partnership between
the United Nations system and Central Africa in the
maintenance of peace and security.

I would like to thank all of those who have
contributed to today's debate. Our discussion has
clearly demonstrated that the Security Council and the
Members of the United Nations remain resolute in their
support of the peoples of the United Nations in Central
Africa.

That is very encouraging for the countries of our
region, which, through their representatives, have
expressed - as one of them put it earlier - great
expectations. Our debate has shown that we are all
resolved to act, and to act promptly.

I call upon the Secretariat to begin work so that
results might emerge in the coming months.

There are no further speakers on my list.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
current stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.
