The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Republic of Korea.

My delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman, for his briefing. The Republic of
Korea congratulates Ukraine on holding successful
presidential elections on 25 May. We are pleased to
note that the elections were carried out in a fair and
transparent manner, with a high turnout, despite the
challenging security environment in the eastern part of
the country. We believe that the election represents a
step forward in the de-escalation of tensions.

In the light of that, we call on all sides to respect
the results of the election and cooperate with the newly
elected President and his Government. At the same
time, we condemn election-related violence by illegal
armed groups, including the forced closure of the
district election commission and the intimidation of
election officials.

We hope that the Ukrainian Government will
now take this invaluable opportunity to lead an
inclusive and transparent constitutional process that
reflects the interest of all Ukrainian people, including
minorities. In that regard we welcome President-elect
Petro Poroshenko's announced plan to visit the eastern
regions and to pursue cooperative solutions with all
sides. In addition, the series of round tables as part of
the national dialogue is also a welcome development.
We believe it is essential to any sustainable solution to
the crisis.

Despite the positive steps, we remain deeply
concerned over the continuing escalation of tensions
in eastern Ukraine, including the recent fighting
between the armed separatist groups and Ukrainian
security forces. We are also concerned over abductions
of members of the OSCE monitoring mission near
Donetsk. The safety and security of the members of the
missions must be fully guaranteed.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight that the
stability and prosperity of Ukraine is critical not
only to peace in Europe but also to the international
community. We once again reaffirm our full support
for Ukraine's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

