Mrs. Beckett (United Kingdom): I share in
welcoming you to the chair, Madam President.

Events over the summer have shown once again
the terrible human cost resulting from the lack of
progress towards peace in the Middle East. We have
seen it in Gaza, with over 200 fatalities and an
appalling humanitarian situation, and in Israel, where
rockets continue to fall on civilians. In particular, we
have seen its impact in Lebanon, where this summer's
crisis had its origins in the continuing conflict between
Israel and the Palestinians. The central importance of
peace in the Middle East has never been clearer.

As the British Government has repeatedly
emphasized, there can be no higher priority for the
international community. I welcome this opportunity
for the Security Council to address the issue, and am
grateful to the Arab League for the initiative.
The international community is united in the goal
of a two-State solution. Only a handful of extremists,
who benefit from ongoing conflict, oppose that vision.
I agree with my colleague from Qatar, that we should
reinvigorate the road map, which is the framework for
getting there. Both sides need to meet their obligations
under it. In the Quartet we have a mechanism for
coordinating the international community's
engagement. I welcome the Quartet's statement from
its meeting yesterday, which gives us a clear
framework for moving forward.

So we are not short of vision or mechanisms or
frameworks. What we need are some practical ideas
and, above all, the political will to deliver them. I see
four immediate priorities.

First, contact between the parties must be
resumed. We welcome the commitments made by both
Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas during
Tony Blair's recent visit, to the effect that they were
prepared to meet without conditions. I particularly
welcome the role of Egypt and other Arab States in
working for the release of Corporal Shalit, to help
create the conditions for a productive dialogue.

Secondly, we need a Palestinian Government with
which the international community can engage. That
means one that is based - as my Danish colleague
said - on the Quartet's three principles. President
Abbas is a man of peace and integrity. We support his
efforts to form a national unity Government that will
work for peace with Israel.

Thirdly, we must address the humanitarian crisis
in Gaza. Pending the outcome of negotiations on a
unity Government, the United Kingdom supports an
extension of the temporary international mechanism to
help alleviate the situation. We are working with
European Union and Quartet partners to deliver that.

Then fourthly, we must help develop the
institutions of a future Palestinian State as a means to
build and sustain peace. That is in no way a new idea,
but it remains an important and, increasingly, an urgent
one.

Tony Blair said in Ramallah earlier this month
that we needed real international support for the
process of peacebuilding. We look forward to working
with colleagues in the European Union, the Quartet and
the Arab world in the coming weeks to develop a new
programme aimed at building viable Palestinian
institutions that can help deliver peace with Israel and
prosperity and security for Palestinians. That is a
practical agenda to take us forward. What I believe we
may be hearing, and what I would like to see from this
meeting today, is a clear commitment of the political
will necessary to implement it.

