The President: Following extensive
consultations by Council members, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on their
behalf:
"The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council stresses the
importance of establishing strategies of conflict
prevention.

"The Security Council recognizes the
responsibility for sustainable development issues,
including climate change, conferred upon the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council.

"The Security Council underlines General
Assembly resolution 63/281 of 3 June 2009,
which: reaffirms that the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change

 

(UNFCCC) is the key instrument for addressing
climate change, recalls the provisions of the
UNFCCC, including the acknowledgement that
the global nature of climate change calls for the
widest possible cooperation by all countries and
their participation in an effective and appropriate
international response, in accordance with their
common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities and their social and
economic conditions, and invites the relevant
organs of the United Nations, as appropriate and
within their respective mandates, to intensify
their efforts in considering and addressing
climate change, including its possible security
implications.

"The Security Council notes General
Assembly resolution 65/159 of 20 December
2010, entitled 'Protection of global climate for
present and future generations of humankind'.

"The Security Council notes that, in
response to the request contained in General
Assembly resolution 63/281, the Secretary-
General submitted a report to the General
Assembly on 'Climate change and its possible
security implications' (A/64/350).

"The Security Council expresses its concern
that possible adverse effects of climate change
may, in the long run, aggravate certain existing
threats to international peace and security.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
that possible security implications of loss of
territory of some States caused by sea-level rise
may arise, in particular in small low-lying island
States.

"The Security Council notes that in matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace
and security under its consideration, conflict
analysis and contextual information on, inter alia,
possible security implications of Climate change
is important, when such issues are drivers of
conflict, represent a challenge to the
implementation of Council mandates or endanger
the process of consolidation of peace. In this
regard, the Council requests the Secretary-
General to ensure that his reporting to the
Council contains such contextual information."

 

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2011/15.

I would like to thank all members of the Council
for the cooperation and flexibility shown in the
intensive negotiations over recent days. It led to an
outcome of our debate that is good news.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Kenya.

