Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
congratulates you, Sir, and your friendly country,
Ukraine, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. We wish you
every success as you shoulder the important
responsibilities of the presidency. We moreover thank
you, Sir, and the other members of the Security
Council for your speedy response to the request by the
Arab Group and by the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC) to convene an urgent Council
meeting to discuss escalated repressive Israeli practices
and measures against Palestinian civilians in the
occupied territories.

My delegation wishes also to commend your
predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Said Ben Mustapha,
Permanent Representative of brotherly Tunisia, for his
wise guidance of the Council's work last month.

My delegation endorses the statement made here
last Thursday by the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Emirates on behalf of the Arab Group.
Our return to the Security Council today to speak of the
tragic situation faced by the Palestinian people reflects
our firm belief that it is important for the Council to
shoulder its responsibilities under the Charter and in
the light of the resolutions it has adopted over many
years with a View to resolving the explosive situation
in the Middle East, which poses a threat to
international peace and security. It is also a result of
Israel's stubborn determination to use brutal military
force, and of its disdain for the Palestinians. These are
unique in the modern world in terms of violations of
international law and international humanitarian law,
and especially of the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949.

What is taking place in the towns and villages of
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip in full view of the
world is a terrible massacre, in the fullest meaning of
that word. It is, in fact, methodical genocide. As they
lie asleep in their homes, as they walk in the street, as
they express their inherent right to reject
Israeli occupation and its continued repression,
Palestinians - women, children and old people - are
being killed by the aircraft, tanks and missiles of the
Israeli forces. A document published by the United
States organization International Action Center
indicates that Israel has actually used depleted-uranium
munitions against Palestinian civilians and Palestinian
institutions. That United States organization stresses
that it has proof that the Israeli forces have used
munitions of that kind.

Over these four months, more than 400 children,
women and other innocent civilians have been
martyred as a result of Israel's policy to kill, and more
than 15,000 have been injured; these people suffer
from permanent disabilities that may affect them for
the rest of their lives. What, then, is this international
organization waiting for before it adopts a serious
resolution that will put an end to all such Israeli
practices? Are we waiting for hundreds or thousands
more Palestinians to be killed, or for thousands more to
be injured and permanently disabled? Are we waiting
for more Palestinian homes to be destroyed and their
owners displaced? Are we waiting for the uprooting of
thousands more fruit trees and the destruction of their
environment, and for the land to be turned into a
wasteland?

In practice, permitting Israel to continue its
policies means Palestinian genocide. The Sunday Times
newspaper published an article by its correspondent in
Palestine; this was reprinted in the magazine Al-Insaan,
published by the International Committee of the Red
Cross. It describes the situation faced by the
Palestinians in Hebron in this way:

"When night falls on Hebron, it marks the
beginning of another night of fear and trepidation
for the Palestinian people in that divided city. The
night passes in the hope that we will see a new
dawn that will be more merciful to those people
and to their children, who spend their nights
weeping in terror."

Year by year, day by day, the Middle East peace
process has since the Madrid conference been losing
momentum and motivation. It is very clear to all who
are interested in peace, within our region or outside it,
that Israel's continued occupation of the Arab
territories - under the pretext of a pathological need
for security and on the basis of false allegations - is
the main impediment to the achievement of peace.

The peace process is at a standstill on all its
tracks, because Israel continues to occupy Arab
territories, to reject international legitimacy, to flout
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and to refuse to
implement the principle of land for peace.

We are in strong agreement with what was said in
the Council last Thursday: that the fall of the previous
Israeli Government was the result of what the peace
process has actually achieved. This is very true,
because the previous Israeli Government's policy was
simply to talk about peace, not to take any concrete
steps to achieve it. It claimed to be preparing to
implement those internationally binding resolutions
calling upon it to withdraw from the occupied Arab
territories, but in fact its proposed solutions were a far
cry from those resolutions, as it wants to continue its
occupation and hegemony; maintain control of
occupied Arab territories and Arab holy sites; and
continue with its repression of Arab citizens, stripping
them of their freedom, sovereignty and dignity.

The peace to which all Arabs aspire - as do all
other peace-loving peoples of the world - is one that
would restore to the Arabs their occupied territories
through Israel's full withdrawal to the line of 4 June
1967.

The Syrian Arab Republic would like here to
reiterate its unreserved support for the struggle of the
heroic Palestinian people and for the realization of
their inalienable rights, including the right to return,
the right to self-determination, and the right to
establish an independent state on their national soil,
with Jerusalem as its capital.

The measures taken by Israel in the West Bank
and the Gaza strip, which have led to the partitioning
of the West Bank into 43 cantons and the Gaza strip
into four cantons, are inhuman measures whose main
objective is to restrict the mobility of Palestinian
citizens and to entrench the suffocating economic
blockade, with a View to subjugating the Palestinian
people and to starving them. This has caused the
situation in the Palestinian territories to deteriorate and
has increased tensions, reflecting the real intentions of
the Israeli Government.

The Arab Foreign Ministers, in a communique
dated 12 March 2001, called upon the Security Council
to assume its responsibilities and to take the necessary
measures to protect the Palestinian people and to
prevent any further deterioration of the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. The Foreign Ministers
called on the Security Council to adopt the necessary
resolutions to form an international protection force for
the Palestinian people and to dispatch it, as urgently as
possible, to the occupied Palestinian territories.

The Syrian Arab Republic, which opened the way
for the Middle East peace process, would like to
reiterate once again the Council's continuing obligation
to bring about a comprehensive and just peace in the
region, which should be its strategic option.

I should like also to reiterate that the Council
should take all the necessary measures to see that its
relevant resolutions are implemented, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as any
measures leading to a complete Israeli withdrawal from
the Syrian, Lebanese and Palestinian occupied
territories, in order to bring about a comprehensive and
just peace in the Middle East.

Israel's longstanding policy of repression and
aggression shows no sign of ending. Our people, who
were instrumental in building human civilization, are a
freedom-loving people who support the principles of
sovereignty and independence. They cannot accept
injustice, insults or subjugation to Israeli terrorism.
Peace requires justice, and Israel cannot bring about
peace and security with its continued occupation of
Arab territories. And peace, as I would emphasize once
again, is the only road to security.

