Mr. Spatafora (Italy): First of all, Italy would
like to join others in expressing a warm welcome to
His Excellency Mr. Djibrill Bassole, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso, for being here and for
his comprehensive briefing and very encouraging
remarks. I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the Acting Special Representative, Mr. Abou
Moussa, for his outstanding work at this very delicate
juncture, and to welcome the appointment of
Ambassador Choi as the new Special Representative. I
would also like to welcome the French Secretary of
State, His Excellency Mr. Jean-Marie Bockel, and
thank him for what he has told us. I would also
welcome the Permanent Representative of Cote
d'Ivoire, Ambassador Djedje, to the table. I believe it
is important that he feel the unwavering support of all
members of the Security Council for his country as it
emerges from a period of crisis.

In the light of the briefings given by Deputy
Special Representative Moussa and Minister Bassole, I
believe it is important that we bear in mind the
emphasis placed by Mr. Moussa on vulnerability to
reversals. The Secretary-General was very clear when
he stated in his report that the overall peace process
and the improved security situation will remain fragile
and vulnerable to reversals unless it is underpinned by
concrete progress, et cetera. So I think that we have to
constantly keep in mind that a reversal is possible.

What Minister Bassole told us in that regard was
very encouraging. He said that the shortcomings and
delays have not been caused by a lack of political will.
That is very important. I believe, as Minister Bassole
said in concluding his statement, that it is important to
keep in mind that,

(spoke in French)

"in spite of the slowness in the implementation of
the Ouagadougou political Agreement, and in
spite of the difficulties hope for true, lasting
peace in this country is within reach."

(spoke in English)

Minister Bassole should be aware of the fact that,
as has been said by others, the Security Council and the
international community at large are heavily indebted
to President Compaore and to him, because their
facilitation has been crucial in placing the international
community's involvement in the Ivorian peace process
on a new footing. Let me also say that Burkina Faso's
leadership of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and its service to peace in
Cote d'Ivoire and the wider region epitomize the type
of approach that Italy would like to see increasingly
strengthened by the Council.

In Cote d'Ivoire and beyond, regional ownership
and political dialogue - a skilful use of the political
toolbox - are key to crisis management in Africa.
Like all preceding speakers, I applaud Burkina Faso's
election as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council as a clear acknowledgement that that is also
the view of the wider United Nations membership.

With regard to Cote d'Ivoire, Italy believes that,
so long as the Ouagadougou Agreement is in place and
remains in place - as Minister Bassole assured us it
will - and the Facilitator remains strongly engaged -
and we express our heartfelt appreciation for the
implementation of the Agreement - there is room for
trust. The Security Council should not hesitate to
reflect such trust in its statements and decisions. Here,
we welcome the draft press statement prepared by the
French delegation. We express our thanks for that
statement and look forward to it.

We are not naive. We, too, are concerned by the
problems and delays highlighted by Mr. Moussa and
Minister Bassole and by the Secretary-General in his
report. It is, however, undeniable - and I think I am
capturing the essence of what Mr. Bassole just told
us - that the Ouagadougou Agreement continues to
hold and to be strongly backed by the Ivorian people.
That is the crux of the matter. Certainly, there is still a
long road ahead; we should remain vigilant. But
yesterday's arch-enemies, President Gbagbo and Prime
Minister Soro, are today's leading actors in a genuine
national effort to achieve peace, and that is a real
watershed.

We believe that, in the months ahead, the
Council, with the help of the Secretariat, should
continue to think in depth about the speed, latitude and
sequencing of the changes needed and about how best
the Council can promote concrete steps forward in the
peace process. We think that the voice of the Facilitator
should be the first to be heard throughout this process,
and we would welcome the opportunity to hear
Minister Bassole's View regarding what other things
the United Nations should do to support the
Facilitator's efforts. I will not go further into that,
because Secretary of State Bockel was very clear in
making his point about what more the United Nations
can do and about what it cannot do.

I wish to express one final thought. We hope that
the United Nations can soon host another type of
meeting on Cote d'Ivoire - a meeting at which the
economic, social and humanitarian aspects of the crisis
will be at the centre of our attention. We believe that
the best support we could give to the implementation
of the peace process in Cote d'Ivoire would be to
tangibly convey, through such an initiative, the idea
that the United Nations is ready to place post-conflict
rehabilitation and reconstruction at the centre of its
efforts.

