Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Like others, I would like
to start by expressing our sincere condolences to the
people and the Government of Indonesia following the
plane crash.

We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for his briefing. We express our
appreciation to the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners for their continued work to provide
humanitarian assistance in Syria.

As the Secretary-General stated in his report
(S/2018/947), we are witnessing a reduced level of
hostilities in a number of areas in Syria. Due to the
agreement reached between Russia and Turkey,
military activities have also dramatically decreased in
Idlib. In that regard, we appreciate the continued efforts
of Russia and Turkey and stress the importance of the
sustained implementation of the de-militarization
agreement, which averted a possible humanitarian
catastrophe in Idlib.

Despite those encouraging developments, we also
note with concern that the humanitarian needs in Syria
remain acute. There are some areas, such as Rukban
camp, where humanitarian conditions are grave. In
addition, humanitarian access remains a challenge
in providing aid to hard-to-reach areas, as well as to
places that have seen a change of control. Civilians
also continue to be affected by the direct or indirect
consequences of hostilities.

Amid those conditions, we appreciate that the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners have
reached out to millions, providing life-saving assistance
to those in need through regular programming and
cross-border assistance, which, according to the report
ofthe Secretary-General, remains an indispensable part
of the humanitarian response. As inter-agency convoys
have not been deployed since August, we encourage
the United Nations to continue its communication
and engagement with Syrian authorities to ensure
that humanitarian access to priority areas that change
control is ensured. Furthermore, the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners still require safe, rapid,
unhindered and sustained humanitarian access to
effectively respond to the continued needs of millions
of Syrians. The protection of civilians and civilian
facilities also remains imperative.

Finally, as we discussed last week (see S/PV.8383),
finding a comprehensive and inclusive political
solution, based on resolution 2254 (2015), is the best
way to end the suffering of the Syrian people - hence,
our continued support to Special Envoy De Mistura
as he makes every possible effort to revitalize the
political process, starting with the establishment of
the constitutional committee in his remaining few but
critical weeks. In that regard, we welcome the outcome
of the Quartet summit held in Istanbul on Saturday,
which we believe could contribute to the relaunching of
the political process.

