Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express
Japan's deep gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
important statement to the Security Council today on
his recent visit to Myanmar. We are also grateful to the
Permanent Representative of Myanmar for his
statement.

At the outset, I would like to stress how firmly
Japan supports the good offices effort of the Secretary-
General, assisted by Special Adviser Gambari. As a
country of the region, Japan has followed the situation
in Myanmar with great interest and concern. Based on
our long-standing excellent bilateral relationship, we
are maintaining a close dialogue with the Government
of Myanmar to assist and support the good offices
efforts of the Secretary-General and Mr. Gambari.

The Government of Myanmar has been
implementing a seven-step road map for
democratization. With general elections scheduled for
next year, this is a crucial stage in the democratization
process. The attention of the international community
has recently been focused on the situation surrounding
the trial of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. It is therefore
important and timely for the Secretary-General to visit
Myanmar to personally convey the concerns of the
international community and urge the leadership to
make the democratic process open, inclusive and
internationally credible.

During his visit, the Secretary-General met with
Senior General Than Shwe on two occasions. He called
for the early release of all political prisoners, including
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the resumption of substantive
dialogue between the Government and all political
parties, the holding of inclusive, internationally
credible elections in 2010, an improvement in the
human rights situation, national reconciliation and the
establishment of a national economic forum.

We are certainly disappointed that the
Government of Myanmar did not agree to the
Secretary-General's request to meet with Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi. However, we recognize that the
Secretary-General's visit as a whole was very useful
and necessary. We approve of his decision to make the
visit. The Secretary-General is one of the very few
political leaders who can directly convey the concerns
of the international community to the country's highest
leadership. We welcome the effort of the Secretary-
General to unequivocally convey to the top leaders all
the points of common concern shared by all of us.

As reported in the Council today, the Secretary-
General had a full, detailed and substantive exchange
of views with the leadership on the concrete steps we
would like it to take. He also expressed to the leaders
the support of the United Nations for Myanmar's
efforts. It was also significant that the Secretary-
General could meet all political parties, including the
National League for Democracy and ceasefire groups,
and make a very candid public address in Yangon.

Although there has been no immediate response
to other points addressed by the Secretary-General, we
hope that the Myanmar authorities will seriously
consider all the issues and concerns of the international

community and come up with a positive response in
due course. We share the expectations expressed by the
Secretary-General that the Myanmar Government
should match deeds to its words of promise to
cooperate with the United Nations. We should closely
monitor how the Myanmar Government follows up the
outcome of the Secretary-General's visit.

With regard to the case of Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi, Japan has conveyed its deep concern to
Myanmar's authorities at a high level. We have
appealed to them to take appropriate and lenient
actions. Once there are positive moves by the Myanmar
authorities, it will be important for us to respond
positively with concrete steps on our part, as confirmed
by G-8 leaders at the summit meeting in L'Aquila last
week.

The good offices effort of the Secretary-General
does not end with this one visit. Japan will continue to
support further good offices efforts by the United
Nations. At the same time, we appeal to the Myanmar
Government to take positive steps to advance the
democratic process in an all-inclusive manner.

