Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to address the Security
Council in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
I also wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou
Keita for her comprehensive briefing today.

Guinea-Bissau is facing a critical moment on its
path to consolidating democracy and strengthening its
institutions. In spite of all the difficulties, legislative
elections were successfully held in March. The
country is now preparing for the presidential elections
scheduled for 24 November, with a second round,
if needed, foreseen for 29 December. A peaceful
transition of power would be an historic achievement
for the people of Guinea-Bissau. The steadfast support
of the international community is therefore crucial at
this important juncture.

I welcome the recent appointment of Ms. Rosine
Sori-Coulibaly as the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS). I have already had the opportunity
to hold a fruitful and cordial exchange with her, in
which I reiterated the readiness of the PBC to support
her mission.

The PBC configuration has been closely following
the political situation in Guinea-Bissau and the
planning process for the transition and drawdown
of UNIOGBIS, as mandated by resolution 2458
(2019), adopted on 28 February. During its most
recent meeting, on 6 May, the configuration received
updates from Mr. Jose Viegas Filho, the then Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the UNIOGBIS, and from Mr. Tanou Kone, Permanent
Observer of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) to the United Nations.

Following that meeting, the Peacebuilding
Commission issued a statement calling on the political
stakeholders of Guinea-Bissau to sustain their
commitment to the Conakry Agreement, underscoring
the urgent need for the appointment of a Prime Minister
and stressing the importance of holding transparent,
credible and peaceful presidential elections in 2019, in
accordance with the Constitution of Guinea-Bissau.

The new Government was formed three and a half
months after the election, following the agreement
reached during the Summit of Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS, held on 29 June. The efforts
undertaken by ECOWAS demonstrate its pivotal role
in supporting political stability and the consolidation
of democracy in Guinea-Bissau. The members of the
configuration also welcomed Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) investments in Guinea-Bissau, particularly in the
context of the legislative elections and the UNIOGBIS
drawdown. They stressed the importance of ongoing
PBF projects aimed at empowering women and youth,
especially in the areas of fostering their participation
in political advocacy and decision-making, conflict
resolution and sustaining peace efforts. Finally, they
commended the important work done by the then
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Jose
Viegas Filho, and by the UNIOGBIS staff.

Today, we have heard Assistant Secretary-General
Bintou Keita introduce the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/664). The PBC welcomes the report
and commends the UNIOGBIS team and its leadership,
as well as the Department of Peacebuilding and
Political Affairs, for their support for the country's
peacebuilding efforts and for the progress made in the
planning of the mission's drawdown.

The PBC welcomes the appointment of a new
Prime Minister and the subsequent formation of a
new Government. While taking note that 11 women
have been appointed to the Government, we encourage
further progress towards achieving gender parity
and similar progress in other institutions. We also
encourage the national authorities and the people of
Guinea-Bissau to ensure transparent, credible and
peaceful presidential elections. We thank international
partners who are providing the necessary financial
support for this ballot, and we encourage partners to
consider making further contributions. As I said, that
will represent a milestone towards the stabilization of
Guinea-Bissau.

Please allow me to highlight some key elements
of the report that are particularly relevant to the
peacebuilding agenda.

In that regard, I welcome the work done by
UNIOGBIS in supporting the effective participation
of women in national affairs within the framework of
the women and peace and security agenda. UNIOGBIS
collaborated with the United Nations country team and
the Peacebuilding Fund in contributing to strengthening
the active involvement of women in civil society
consultations and facilitation efforts, thereby helping
to encourage political dialogue in Guinea-Bissau.

Projects funded by the Peacebuilding Fund continue
to play a critical role in supporting political and
institutional stabilization processes in Guinea-Bissau.
Under the Peacebuilding Fund portfolio, consisting
of 10 projects worth $10.9 million, UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations country team have supported the
implementation of mutually reinforcing initiatives,
including on dialogue, national reconciliation and the
strengthening of the justice and media sectors.

The projects contributed to more inclusive and
participatory legislative elections in March by providing
election training for women and youth candidates,
supporting the monitoring of the elections by domestic
observers in collaboration with the European Union,
empowering the media to provide more objective and
non-partisan reporting on the elections, and financing
multiple live radio broadcasts of meetings between the
general public and political candidates.

With regard to the reconfiguration and drawdown
of UNIOGBIS, the PBC has taken note of the guidance
provided by the Security Council in resolution 2458
(2019) of 28 February. In our discussion at the meeting
of 6 May, some PBC members encouraged flexibility
concerning the reconfiguration, referring to the need to
maintain the current configuration of UNIOGBIS until
the conclusion ofthe presidential election. A suggestion
was made to consider past good practices, including
the possibility of supporting the development of a
peacebuilding plan, as was done during the drawdown
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia, as a tool to
support the country after the UNIOGBIS drawdown.

I reiterate the readiness of the PBC to support
the reconfiguration exercise and provide timely and
specific advice to the Security Council in that regard. I
also thank the Peacebuilding Fund for its commitment
to continuing to support key initiatives to ensure that
ongoing peacebuilding priorities supported by the
mission are not left unattended.

The presidential election in November will
complete the electoral cycle in Guinea-Bissau. That,
we expect, should enable the national authorities and
the people of Guinea-Bissau to focus their attention on
the national development agenda and implement the
reforms outlined in the Conakry Agreement. In that
regard, the PBC will continue to serve as a platform
for the country to mobilize international support,
including for the implementation of the development
programmes identified in the Government's strategic
development plan for the period from 2015-2025,
known as Terra Ranka. The PBC will also continue to
support the international community, in consultation
with the Government, in considering ways to strengthen
national institutional capacity to deliver peacebuilding
and development objectives.

1 also plan to visit Guinea-Bissau in October to
engage with the Government and local stakeholders.
The objective and the agenda of the visit will be
discussed with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and PBC members, as per usual
practice. I will share the report of my visit with the
Security Council, in accordance with the PBC advisory
role to the Security Council.

Once again, I thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me the opportunity to brief the Security Council. I look
forward to our continued cooperation in support of
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.

