Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French):
Bulgaria wishes to pay tribute to Norway and to you,
Mr. President, for having included this item on the
Council's agenda. Today's debate is one link in a chain
of activities and initiatives within the United Nations
system devoted to the extremely important question of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The
follow-up to this debate will undoubtedly be extremely
useful.

The aide-memoire that will be adopted shortly is
an extremely useful tool for the Council's work, and I
share the sentiments expressed by others on this
subject. I would like to highlight a few aspects of the
document that we consider extremely important: access
to humanitarian assistance by vulnerable groups of a
population; the importance attached to the special
protection to be given to children and women; the
separation of civilian populations from military
elements in refugee camps; and lastly, the role of the
media.

I would like to emphasize in particular the option
included in the mandate of peacekeeping operations for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for former combatants. It is clear that the
measures planned need to be adapted to specific
conditions in crisis areas. They must be adequately
financed and, above all, they must give due attention to
the reintegration of children who have participated in
conflicts. An instructive and very useful example is the
reintegration of ex-combatants of the Revolutionary
United Front in Sierra Leone. The daily work of the
Council shows us the importance of this problem of
reintegration, seen in crises such as those in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Afghanistan and
elsewhere.

As for the road map, which we await with
interest, I should like to join the delegation of
Singapore in hoping that it will not only be consistent
with the aide-memoire, but will also set out concrete
measures to implement these steps.

Finally, I should like to thank Mr. Kenzo Oshima
for his briefing and for the important coordination
work being done by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and within the United
Nations system. I should like to thank him in particular
for having given us very important examples, including
the Sudan, where the situation is truly intolerable.

I should also like to mention the importance
Bulgaria attaches to the training of humanitarian
personnel for these missions. This might be reflected in
a future update of the aide-memoire. We are also
grateful that the sexual exploitation of children was
mentioned, not only because of the media's strong
interest in it, but also because it is a real problem. The
United Kingdom's idea of establishing a code of
conduct is most welcome.

In conclusion, I should like to say how important
it is that the United Nations continue to coordinate its
efforts with non- governmental organizations in the area
we are discussing today. These organizations play a
very important role in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and my delegation hopes that that role
will be highlighted in the activities of the United
Nations.

