Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Kuwait would like to congratulate China on
assuming the presidency of the Council and to wish
you, Sir, every success in conducting your work during
the remaining days of the month. We would like to
thank you profusely for your initiative in organizing
this substantive debate on the question of reaffirming
the purposes and principles ofthe Charter of the United
Nations under the item "Maintenance of international
peace and security". We would also like to thank you
for the concept note you have prepared for this purpose
(S/2015/87, annex).

There can be no doubt that the wide participation of
Member States is the greatest proof of the importance
of this question and your judicious choice thereof. It
is an opportunity for Kuwait and all Member States
to reaffirm their commitment to the principles and
purposes of the Charter, such as non-interference in
internal affairs, the equality of sovereignty, non-use
or threat of force in settling disputes, seeking a
peaceful settlement of disputes and maintaining good-
neighbourly relations. These principles together form
the foundation of the foreign policy of Kuwait and its
relations with other States.

As we approach the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, the Organization is facing numerous
breaches and serious violations of the principles
of the Charter that have jeopardized regional and
international peace and security. The United Nations
has made a number of achievements in defending the
principles of the Charter when States Members evince
the necessary political will. This was manifest clearly
when the international community, through the Security
Council, stood up against the flagrant aggression
against the State of Kuwait in 1990 and the occupation
by the former Iraqi regime. Kuwait is indebted to the
international community and the Security Council for
this honourable stance championing the lofty principles
of the Charter and international law, which enabled it to
reclaim its sovereignty and independence.

However, in addition to these highlights in the
history of the United Nations and its endeavours to
preserve international peace and security, there have
been crises and conflicts that have reminded us of the
world's shortcomings in abiding by the Charter and
international law. The application of double standards
in dealing with some conflicts, the precedence given to
narrow national interests or the absence of political will
have prolonged many disputes, thereby aggravating the
suffering of people who have given hope of realizing
their legitimate rights to a free and noble life. The
absence of justice and accountability, in addition to
socioeconomic factors, fuels tension and instability
and feelings of hatred, intolerance and extremism.
The question of Palestine is the most vivid illustration
of that. The international community, through the
Security Council, has been unable for five decades to
put an end to the Israeli occupation, which runs counter
to the principles of the Charter and international law.
The real tragedy lies in the failure to compel the
occupying Power to implement the binding resolutions
of the Security Council.

The Syrian crisis, which is entering its fifth year,
provides another illustration of the need to impose
respect for the principles of the Charter and international
law. The gross violations of human rights continue
relentlessly half of the people are either internally
displaced or are refugees site and the major destruction
of the infrastructure on property is indescribable. The
question is: When will the Security Council activate
the tools available to put an end to this humanitarian
tragedy and bring pressure to bear for a political
sentiment ending this crisis, achieving the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and preserving the
unity, sovereignty and independence of Syria? The
Security Council is called upon to activate the tools
available to it to uphold its responsibilities. It is also
called upon to review and evaluate the appropriateness
these tools in achieving the desired objectives.

We welcome the comprehensive review of peacekeeping
operations by the Secretariat. We hope that there will
be increased recourse to the means for the peaceful
settlement of disputes provided for in Chapter VI of the
Charter, such as mediation and arbitration, in addition
to Chapter VIII, which affirms the importance of the
role of regional organizations in this regard.

Before concluding I must refer to the question of
amending the Charter of the United Nations, which is an
extremely delicate and important task. Articles 108 and
109 of the Charter provide for its possible amendment
in accordance with a number of steps and procedures.
Important amendments have been introduced to the
Charter to enhance the capacity of the Security Council
in maintaining international peace and security, most
especially when its membership increased from 6 to 10
in 1963. However, in the light of the major developments
regarding membership, the changes in international
relations and the balance of power, and the major
challenges facing the international community in the
maintenance of international peace and security, all of
these factors underscore the need to reform the Security
Council and improve its working methods.

On the basis of our commitment to the principles
and purposes of the United Nations, especially in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
Kuwait supports the reform of the Council so as to
enhance its capability and effectiveness in discharging
its responsibility and to make it more transparent,
representative and democratic. In this regard, we
reaffirm the importance of granting a permanent seat
to the Group of Arab States in any future expansion
and ensuring representation of Islamic States. We also
contend that the Council reform must take into account
the representation of small States, which account for
more than half of the membership of United Nations.
The membership of the Council should not be confined
to States of a certain qualification but should rather
include those capable of performing the tasks and
upholding the responsibilities under the Charter.
According to Article 24 of the Charter, the Council
acts on behalf of all Member States in maintaining
international peace and security.

