Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): Iwould
like to welcome you to New York, Madam President,
and thank you for presiding over today's open debate.

Today marks International Women's Day. At the
outset, I would like to extend to you, Madam President,
and the other female colleagues present my greetings
for the holiday. On this special occasion, we must
remember the female Blue Helmets who are serving
the peacekeeping cause. As the Council knows, when
Chinese people strive for a better life, women hold
up half of the sky. Chinese women are contributing
to world peace. At this very moment, in Juba, South
Sudan, 14 female peacekeepers are working hard
in the infantry, under the leadership of their team
leader, to help women and children. I would like to
take this opportunity to convey to them and all female
peacekeepers my highest regards.

I would like to thank Mr. Yamamoto for his
briefing and thank Ms. Sarabi and Ms. Safi for their
presentations. China listened attentively to the
statement made by the representative of Afghanistan.

Peace and stability in Afghanistan have a direct
bearing on the well-being of the Afghan people, as
well as on security, stability and prosperity in the
region. The international community should continue
to provide robust support to Afghanistan to respond
to challenges in the political, economic and security
fields. As a traditionally friendly neighbour of
Afghanistan, China supports the country in achieving
peace, security, stability and development as soon as
possible. Afghanistan is an important country on the
route of the Belt and Road Initiative. Resolution 2405
(2018), which was just adopted by the Council, once
again pointed out that all parties should take advantage
of the One Belt One Road Initiative to promote
economic development and regional cooperation in
Afghanistan and help Afghanistan achieve stability
and prosperity and should make concerted efforts to
create a community of shared future for humankind
through dialogue and coordination. In accordance
with the provisions set out in the relevant Council
resolutions, China will continue to work with all parties
to help Afghanistan take advantage of its comparative
advantages at the national level, participate in regional
economic cooperation and connectivity and achieve
economic and social development.

Advancing national reconciliation is the
fundamental way to resolve the question of Afghanistan.
China strongly supports an Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned peace process and reconciliation. We commend
the Afghan Government for its efforts to promote
peace talks. We also support the Afghan Government
in unveiling its reconciliation plan as soon as possible
and reaching agreement on national reconciliation
with armed rebel groups, including the Taliban, and
launching the peace process.

China actively participated in the international
meeting on the Kabul Process in February. We will
continue to make unremitting efforts to push forward
the peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan.
We stand ready to join the international community
to create a favourable external environment for peace
talks between the Government and the Taliban and
contribute to achieving lasting peace and stability
in Afghanistan.

Improving the security situation serves as a basis
for achieving stability in Afghanistan. China supports
the country in strengthening capacity-building in
the security sector. We have taken an active part in
regional counter-terrorism cooperation. In November
2017 China, Afghanistan and Pakistan held trilateral
Vice-Foreign Minister consultations on countering
terrorism. We are now consulting on a trilateral
memorandum of understanding on counter-terrorism
and cooperation.

In December 2017 China hosted the first Foreign
Ministers dialogue with Afghanistan and Pakistan. We
are ready to continue to take advantage of mechanisms
such as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Afghanistan contact group. engage with countries of
the region, including Afghanistan and Pakistan, combat
terrorism, address threats from terrorism and safeguard
regional peace and stability.

Finally, I would like to point out that China
commends the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) on its work and supports
its positive role in helping Afghanistan to promote a
political process that safeguards national security,
fosters economic development, enhances its governance
capacity and provides support to the upcoming
Afghan parliamentary and district council elections.
China will continue to support UNAMA and Special
Representative Yamamoto in their efforts.

