Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Madam, and your delegation for
organizing this important meeting. Our also express
our special appreciation to Prime Minister Pierre-Louis
for joining this debate and for her outstanding
leadership. I would also like to thank President
Clinton, Special Envoy for Haiti, for his cogent
remarks and for his dedication to Haiti. I also thank
Mr. Annabi for his insightful presentation and for his
excellent work in Haiti.

As members of the Council know, Haiti is a top
priority for Canada. During the Council's public debate
on Haiti last April (see S/PV.6101), the international
community had every reason to be proud of progress
achieved in Haiti since 2006, particularly in terms of
security, while remaining aware of the continuing
challenges. In the past few months, a series of events
has provided more opportunities to build on progress
achieved in Haiti. The Washington conference was a
success because it generated high-level commitment
and elicited a number of financial commitments.
President Clinton's appointment as Special Envoy was
another turning point. Canada appreciates the way in
which the Secretary-General has focused international
attention on Haiti, and we applaud his decision to
appoint President Clinton. But the biggest obstacle to
addressing the complex problems facing Haiti and the
magnitude of the work to be done is apathy, which
must be overcome in order to achieve success.

(spoke in French)

In a context such as the one in Haiti, where
everything must be done immediately, it is worthwhile
to set certain priorities. First, progress has been noted
in Haiti over the past few years because there was a
political consensus among Haitian authorities. Given
the multiple challenges the country is facing, it is
essential to maintain that consensus among Haiti's
decision makers in order to work for the common good
of the people. Of course, the role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in that regard
is crucial.

We know that the great majority of Haitians want
reform in order to develop their country and find
reasons to hope. Only those who profit from instability
and insecurity have an interest in maintaining the status
quo. We must all remain vigilant and not be misled by
individuals who seek to continue to profit from a
situation that is unacceptable to the Haitian people.
Maintaining the status quo will only set the stage for
another crisis. Eight United Nations interventions over
the past two decades should be sufficient proof of that.

Secondly, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) must remain in Haiti
for as long as it takes to strengthen the capacity of the
country's institutions and ensure a stable and secure
environment for its citizens. Premature withdrawal
would have devastating consequences and could undo
everything that has been accomplished so far.
MINUSTAH should be able to rely upon the
appropriate resources and mandate to continue to play
its role as successfully as it has to date.

MINUSTAH's work must clearly be paired with
the successful reform of the Haitian National Police
and reform of the judicial and correctional systems.
Canada would also like to highlight how useful the
indicators of progress put forth by the Secretary-
General last year were when the future of MINUSTAH
was being considered. With regard to the police, it will
soon be time to make plans for 2011 and beyond, in
collaboration with the Haitian National Police. The
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/439) has
updated the indicators somewhat, but Canada believes
that those indicators need further fine-tuning.
Nevertheless, we commend the Secretary-General for
having launched that process.

Thirdly, the recent senatorial elections reminded
us of the importance of the success of such events to
the strengthening of democracy. The elections equally
reminded us of the importance of strengthening
parliamentary institutions. The recently established
political consensus must prevail in parliament. Canada
also expects that the strengthening of the parliamentary
system will take place with greater emphasis on
responsibility for development in Haiti and on the
public interest, as the Prime Minister underscored
during this debate.

Canada has the honour of chairing the Economic
and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti.
Last June, the Group released its fifth report
(E/2009/105), which included some of the
recommendations I have just mentioned. The Group
also emphasized the need to reconcile economic
growth objectives with huge gaps in basic services. We
also highlighted connections between issues as varied
as food security, energy, the environment,
landholdings, access to credit and civil registration.
Lastly, the Group wished to see better use of
MINUSTAH engineers to improve the synergy between
the mission's mandate and development needs in Haiti.

The international community has provided
considerable assistance to Haiti, which is must increase
further. While seeking to increase the number of
partners countries that lend their support to Haiti, it is
our responsibility to improve the effectiveness of that
aid through better coordination between donors and the
Government, and through an emphasis on tangible
results that improve the quality of life for Haitians. A
primary objective must be to strengthen the capacities
and abilities of the State and, by extension, its
legitimacy in the eyes of the Haitian people.

Canada will continue to cooperate with Haiti,
fully respecting its Constitution, culture, history and
diversity. We stress the need to work with a united
Haitian people and with national authorities that are
politically inclusive and convinced of the need to move
forward together democratically towards true political,
economic and social development. The progress
achieved in certain areas is encouraging for the future.
Setbacks due to hurricanes and political instability in
2008 may make the scope of the work to be done seem
daunting. However, the international community has no
alternative but to move forward on the question of
Haiti. In conclusion, that is why, despite the extent of
the challenges, Canada remains clearheaded and
confident and determined to continue to contribute to
Haiti's development.

