Mr. Dieng (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
would like to thank the Italian delegation for taking
the initiative to hold today's important meeting, giving
us the opportunity to exchange views directly with the
commanders of the police components of peacekeeping
operations. We are also grateful to Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix and the heads ofthe police components
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur for their informative
briefings. Senegal would especially like to thank
the commanders and their troops and to express its
gratitude for their outstanding performance in complex
and challenging environments.

Today, the importance of the growing role of the
police in peace operations is well established. Their
place and role have undergone many changes since
1960. While traditionally they was used for monitoring,
observing and producing reports, today they have
become key players in multidimensional peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions. An example of that is their
work in protecting civilians in situations of internal
insecurity such as that of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan. The United Nations police also play a
central role in building the capacities of host countries'
security forces. For example, formed police units and
individual police officers have jointly responded to
many needs in Haiti.

In order to take on full responsibility for those
changes in its functions, police components have had
to adapt their structure and organization and revise
their employment processes and doctrines again and
again, and numerous Security Council resolutions and
assessments have been introduced and implemented in
order to increase their operational capacity and role in
supporting countries in crisis. It is against that backdrop
that a complete review of the structure, functions and
capacity of the Police Division was conducted, in line
with the report of the High-level level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO) (see S/2015/446). It
must be underscored that, despite those commendable
efforts, much remains to be done to overcome the
challenges with which we are all familiar - as listed
in the HIPPO report and highlighted by the Security
Council in resolution 2185 (2014). Resolution 2382
(2017), which we adopted today at the initiative of
the Italian delegation, is part and parcel of the efforts
to address the current challenges faced by the Police
Division ofthe Department ofPeacekeeping Operations.

To ensure that our meeting is interactive, as
requested by you, Mr. President, I would like to ask a
few questions. My first question will be directed to all
the Police Commissioners who spoke at today's briefing.

With regard to capacity-building for host-country

security forces, we know that communications play a
key role. Quite often, however, police training officers
do not speak the official language of the host countries.
What measures are Police Commissioners taking to
address that challenge?

I also have a question for the MINUSMA Police
Commissioner. Undoubtedly, the environment in which
the Mission operates requires reliable equipment and
well-trained personnel. What are the main challenges
for police units in combating and preventing crime in
those countries?

With regard to MINUJUSTH, the evaluation report
of the formed police units notes that the Division for
Policy, Evaluation and Training has issued reservations
about the operational capacity of formed police units
made up entirely of women. What are the strengths and
weaknesses of such units? As the evaluation team has
recommended, would it not make more sense to have
mixed-gender formed police units, given that almost all
troop- and police-contributing countries have mixed-
gender units at home?

While not a question, I would like to comment
on the briefing by Ms. Makotose, whom I thank for
her valuable contribution to today's meeting. I take
this opportunity to announce that, as the leading
police-contributing country, with seven units in five
peacekeeping operations, Senegal intends to provide
the United Nations with 26 additional female police
officers. Those officers have already passed tests that
were held in Dakar in August under the All-Female
Selection Assistance and Assessment Team Training
programme, which was financed by the Government of
the United States. That effort provides some insight into
the importance that Senegal attaches to strengthening
the role of women in peacekeeping operations, and in
police activities in particular.

