Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to thank Director Reena Ghelani for her briefing
on the current humanitarian situation in Syria. We
also want to express our appreciation to the United
Nations humanitarian workers for their tireless efforts
in providing assistance in Syria.

We are deeply alarmed by the increase in attacks
and civilian casualties in Idlib, as well as the consequent
additional suffering for many civilians in the Hajin area
caused by air strikes and intense fighting. They are in
an extremely vulnerable position, and it is obvious that
the international community must enhance its efforts
to address the issue, not only by alleviating people's
suffering but also by halting the attacks and hostilities.
In that context, Indonesia would like to focus on the
following points.

First, with regard to the importance of ensuring the
continuation of well-targeted humanitarian assistance,
more than 11.7 million people in Syria depend on such
assistance, which makes the effort daunting but also
crucial. We were therefore delighted to learn that a
second convoy reached Rukban, Where some 41,000
people have received life-saving assistance. Sadly, as
the Secretary-General states in his report (S/2019/157),
eight children have died owing to the dire situation in
the camp, which was exacerbated by the harsh winter
conditions and was something that could and should
have been prevented. With regard to Hajin, it is deeply
disturbing to learn that many civilians have been
reported killed or injured and that thousands have been
displaced from Hajin to the Al-Hol camp. The large
influx into Al-Hol and the current conditions there,
where more than 40,000 people are now living and
thousands more are expected, clearly need particular
attention. We are pleased that the United Nations has
scaled up its efforts by opening a transit centre in
Al-Suwar. However, we need to do more. Sixty-one
children were reported to have died while in transit or
after arriving at the Al-Hol camp. That, too, could and
should have been prevented. We urge all the parties
to the conflict to take all possible measures to protect
civilians, especially women and children, and to ensure
the unhindered delivery of the humanitarian assistance
they need. The urgency of maintaining life-saving
assistance to the millions ofpeople in need ofit in Syria
cannot be overemphasized.

Secondly, Indonesia believes that it is crucial to
ensure the safe and voluntary return of refugees to
their home areas in Syria. In that regard, we share
the call made by Russia, Iran and Turkey during the
tripartite summit in Sochi, on 14 February, concerning
the importance of ensuring the safe and voluntary
return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
All interested parties should be on board with this and
should enhance their coordination, in accordance with
international law and taking into account the interests
of the countries that are hosting refugees.

Thirdly, all parties should redouble their efforts and
respect their commitments to maintaining the existing
ceasefire agreements in order to prevent serious
humanitarian consequences. The Secretary-General's
report has highlighted the risk of military escalation
and the likely catastrophic consequences in Idlib. We
want to reiterate once again that we cannot afford more
setbacks on humanitarian issues. We cannot afford to
see more children losing their parents because of the
crisis, or more people trapped Without food, water
or shelter.

My delegation believes firmly that a normal and
peaceful life for all Syrians is possible. However,
everyone in this Chamber is fully aware that in the
absence of a political solution in line with resolution
2254 (2015), the humanitarian situation will continue
to deteriorate. We can and must avoid that. Indonesia
stands ready to support the work of Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen in advancing the political process in Syria and
finding a peaceful solution to the conflict.

In conclusion, my delegation emphasizes the
importance of observing the international principles
of humanitarian assistance, which include humanity,
neutrality and impartiality, as well as full respect for
States' sovereignty and territorial integrity.

