Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): As I begin my
statement, allow me to express the joy and satisfaction
of Mali upon seeing Chad, a brotherly country, presiding
over the Security Council's work for the month of
December. Chad is today relentless in its search for
peace and security in the Sahel and in the region. We
in Mali are deeply grateful to Chad and bow before the
memory of the courageous Chadians who have fallen on
the battlefield in the north of the country. I would also
like to thank Australia for its outstanding leadership of
the Security Council's work over the past month.

My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
2195 (2014). We thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman for his briefing and endorse the statement
made by the Permanent Observer of the African Union,
Mr. Tete Antonio.

Everyone agrees that terrorism is today the
primary threat to peace, security and stability in the
world. Almost every day, images of a reality marked by
the raw trauma of terrorist attacks carried out around
the world - as was the case on Tuesday in a school in
Peshawar, Pakistan, where 132 innocent school children
died - remind us that the monster of terrorism is far
from being defeated. Mali, like all other countries
victims of terrorism, has paid and, unfortunately,
continues to pay a high price for terrorism following the
occupation of its northern regions by terrorist armed
groups. In this Chamber, among the most symbolic
forums of all, I condemn in the strongest terms those
heinous acts, which can never be justified, and express
my sincere condolences and the sympathy of the people
and the Government of Mali to all the victims of
terrorism around the world.

With regard to the specific topic of today's debate,
I would like to share with the Council the approach
taken by the Government of Mali to the fight against
terrorism and cross-border crime. Indeed, in Mali, the
authorities have always understood the importance of
preventing violent extremism and combatting terrorism.
Our holistic approach, which was inspired by other
international initiatives, addresses not only with the
response to the terrorist threat, but also all other related
issues, such as drug trafficking, arms trafficking and
hostage-taking, that constitute its lifeline.

The Government of Mali has adopted to this end a
strategy and clear measures that combine development
efforts and the fight against poverty and a repressive
arsenal. At the national level, we adopted a law on
23 July 2008 on the suppression of terrorism and cross-
border crime, and a law dated 30 December 2010 on
combatting the financing of terrorism. Mali has also
signed and ratified the majority of universal legal
instruments for counter-terrorism and transnational
organized crime.

At the regional level, the Nouakchott Process is
an incentive that has allowed important measures
to be taken in order to address the rising wave of
terrorism in the Sahel. The first summit of the Process
held in Nouakchott on 17 and 18 December made it
possible for important decisions to be taken aimed at
operationalizing the organization to tackle terrorism
and cross-border crime. I take this opportunity to recall
the words of the President of the Republic of Mali,
His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, at the
International Forum on Peace and Security in Africa,
which was held from 15 to 16 December in Dakar:
"As long as the problem in southern Libya remains
unresolved, there will be no peace in our region".

Furthermore, in February, Burkina Faso, Mali,
Mauritania and Chad established in Nouakchott
the Group of Five (G-5) Sahel. It is a body for the
coordination of development and security policies
in our shared space so as to fill the security gaps of
our individual States. The G5-Sahel summit is taking
place today, 19 December, in Nouakchott, and Heads
of State and Government of that organization will take
important decisions on the topic of our meeting today.

In the fight against terrorism, in particular with
regard to the fight against violent extremism, we
must stress the advantages of dialogue and mutual
understanding. We must fight against the allure of
intolerance. That is the why the other approach of
the Government of Mali is based on the fight against
the indoctrination of young people and even the
elderly. Indeed, today more than ever, it is crucial that
statements for peace replace hate speech. In that regard,
I should like to express the gratitude of the Government
ofMali to His Majesty King Mohammed VI ofMorocco
for the training of 500 Malian imams in Morocco. This
important initiative of His Majesty, which also applies
to other countries, allows the values of Islam - namely,
peace, tolerance and the acceptance of difference - to
be conveyed and spread. Promoting a moderate and
authentic Islam is a tangible response to extremism.
The values of true Islam have served as sources of
motivation for religious leaders and communities in the
northern regions of Mali in order to staunchly oppose
the armed terrorist groups.

Today, in the north of my country, it is hard to
distinguish between terrorist groups and armed groups,
and that is the heart of the problem. The Government
of Mali remains convinced that solving the crisis in
the north requires a political solution, which is also
the easiest way to combat terrorism and transnational
organized crime, so as to separate terrorists and armed
groups. It is in this spirit that the Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States and the Heads of State and Government
of the Nouakchott Process, who met on 15 December
in Accra and on 17 and 18 December in Nouakchott,
reiterated their commitment to the sovereignty of the
Republic of Mali, its territorial integrity, the unified
nature - and I stress the unified nature - and
Republican format of the Malian State. They also
reiterated their call on all armed groups in northern
Mali, signatories of the Ouagadougou Agreement of
18 June 2013, to distance themselves from terrorist
groups. They welcomed the results achieved in the
context of the inter-Malian peace talks, which began
in Algiers in July, with the support of international
mediation and conducted by Algeria, and called upon
Malian parties to conclude a peace agreement when the
talks resume in January 2015 on the basis of the drafts
submitted to the parties by the mediation.

It is now up to the Security Council, as stipulated
in resolutions 2100 (2013) and 2164 (2014), adopted
under Chapter VII, to require armed groups that have
signed the Ouagadougou Agreement of 18 June 2013
to distance themselves from terrorist groups. We invite
members of the Security Council that are able to bring
the necessary pressure to bear to bring the leaders of
the armed movements to personally commit to the
Algiers process as it resumes next January, so as to
conclude a comprehensive and final peace agreement
for the Republic of Mali as soon as possible.

In conclusion, we reiterate the appeal made
to the Security Council by the heads of State
and Government of the Nouakchott Process to
urgently undertake every measure necessary to
strengthen MINUSMA's capacities, so as to enable
it to effectively fulfil its mandate. The leaders of the
Nouakchott Process expressed their full readiness, in
consultation with the United Nations, to contribute
to the strengthening of MINUSMA, in particular
through the establishment - based on the model of
the Force Intervention Brigade of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - an intervention force of
contributing countries to be deployed in the northern
part of Mali, within MINUSMA and with robust means
and rules of engagement, so as to contribute to the fight
against terrorist armed groups and criminal groups.

