Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on a successful
presidency of the Security Council. It is my honour to
be the first speaker to share observations about this
month as a newly elected member. Japan welcomes
today's formal wrap-up session. We also welcome your
initiative, Sir, to hold an informal session this afternoon,
which will allow us to have an interactive dialogue with
the broader membership of the United Nations. As this
session is in open format, let me suggest to you, Elbio,
to start this afternoon's informal session with questions
and answers.

Let me first touch upon the working methods of the
Council. I would like to remind all Council members
that in presidential note S/2010/507, of which I have
a copy with me, all participants in Security Council
meetings are encouraged, in paragraph 29, to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less. Making a short
statement is not easy. Winston Churchill once said, "If
I had more time, I would have written a shorter letter".
Let me try to follow the five-minute rule.

The Security Council has dealt with many difficult
issues during the month of January. Among them, I
would like to concentrate on the nuclear test conducted
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on
6 January. The test was a clear violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the international
non-proliferation regime. It also constitutes a grave
security threat that undermines peace and security
in the region and beyond. On the day of the nuclear
test, the Security Council immediately held emergency
consultations upon a request by Japan, the United
States and the Republic of Korea. The Security
Council was united in issuing a press statement right
after the meeting, which strongly condemned the test
and decided to begin working immediately on further
significant measures in a new draft resolution of the
Security Council.

As one of the proponents of the emergency meeting,
let me express our appreciation for the cooperation of
all Council members. After the very swift reaction by
the Council, informal discussions have been conducted
towards a new draft resolution. We would like to
commend the efforts led by the United States, which
holds the pen. Japan believes that adopting a new draft
resolution with further significant measures needs to
be the top, urgent priority of the Council.

Sanctions under the Charter of the United Nations
are not a punishment or the final objective. Rather,
sanctions are one of the important tools that the Council
has at its disposal to bring about a comprehensive
solution to the issue in question. We agree that in
order to bring about a solution to the issue there has
to be dialogue. But we should also be reminded that
we have been engaged in dialogue with the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea for more than 20 years
on their nuclear development programme. Also, past
agreements and dialogues have not succeeded in
bringing about a solution. Those agreements include the
1994 Agreed Framework, the Pyongyang declaration
between Japan and the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea in 2002 and the Joint Statement of the Six-Party
Talks in 2005 - just to mention a few. But none of
those attempts worked, as promises by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea were not kept. In order for
dialogue to work, there has to be pressure at the same
time. That is the very reason that we are arguing for a
new, robust draft resolution.

In stark contrast to the grave challenge posed to the
non-proliferation regime by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, the international community
witnessed a positive development with regard to the
Iranian nuclear issue, namely, the advent, on 16 January,
of the implementation day of resolution 2231 (2015).
As a result, United Nations sanctions related to Iran's
nuclear programme were lifted. That is clear proof that
sanctions do work.

Before concluding my statement, Mr. President, I
would like to commend you and the entire Uruguayan
team for your incredible work. It must have been a big
challenge for Uruguay to assume the presidency in its
very first month on the Council. Having been on the
Council with you for one month, Sir, I have learned a
tremendous amount from your effective and professional
conduct of the presidency. I wish Ambassador Rafael
Dario Ramirez Carrefio and Venezuela every success in
the month of February.

