Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): My delegation
would first like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his briefing. It was, as always, an
excellent, useful and helpful briefing, and I would like
straight away to reiterate the United Kingdom's support
for the efforts of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and for
the Secretary-General's Special Representative towards
peace and stability in Kosovo.

During this short statement I really want to
concentrate only on the elections and what has been
said about spill-over into Macedonia, not least because
the representative of Belgium will be speaking later in
the debate on behalf of the European Union and I
associate myself with what he has to say.

First, the elections. We very much welcome the
support given by the Belgrade authorities for Kosovo
Serb registration in advance of the elections for the
Kosovo Assembly in November. These elections will
mark a correct and important step in returning
significant responsibility for self-government to the
people of Kosovo. We should also not forget that the
elections are a very important opportunity to shape the
future of Kosovo.

In order to make it clear that Kosovo must
develop as a multi-ethnic community, all ethnic groups
must take part in the elections. If they do not, those
who support a mono-ethnic independent State will be
able to claim, with some justification, that other ethnic
groups have no long-term interest in Kosovo. It is
therefore vital for the Belgrade authorities to give the
earliest possible signal of their support for Kosovo
Serbs and others to vote in the elections, not just to
register.

Ambassador Lavrov may have been right to say
that the clear signals from Belgrade, about both the
need to register and the need to vote, may not solve
everything. But they are certainly an extremely
important element in the equation, and, as far as we are
concerned, we strongly urge Belgrade to make its
views known and to help in this area.

We welcome also the meetings between Special
Representative Haekkerup and Serbian Deputy Prime
Minister Covic on 15 and 25 August following
Mr. Covic's appointment as chairman of the Yugoslav
Coordinating Committee for Kosovo. These meetings,
as Under-Secretary-General Guehenno has said, were
very helpful developments. It is also very good news
that UNMIK and the Belgrade authorities are now
working together positively and quickly to find
practical solutions to address declared Serb concerns
on security, returns and the missing.

I was particularly grateful to Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno for addressing the five points that
were raised with the Security Council mission by
President Kostunica. As Ambassador Hume has said, I
think it is important that we keep on reminding
ourselves of those points as key concerns declared by
the authorities in Belgrade.

Extremism and ethnically motivated violence
have to stop. Small groups of armed Albanians and
others should not be allowed to destabilize the region.
So we welcome the success of the Kosovo Force in the
last few days in arresting Albanian extremists crossing
into Kosovo from Macedonia armed with substantial
amounts of weaponry and ammunition. It is important
that that effort continue.

I also listened carefully to what the Under-
Secretary-General had to say about the exchanges of
correspondence, to which the Council has been privy,
between the Secretary-General and President
Trajkovski and other members of the Macedonian
Government. It is clearly important that a close and
harmonious relationship should be built up between the
Secretariat and UNMIK and the Macedonian
authorities in order that the concerns of both sides may
be fully understood and in order that, when necessary,
the appropriate action can be taken to meet those
concerns. I know that, as a first step, our Macedonian
colleague, who will be speaking later in the debate,
will be making every effort to strike up good, close and
cordial relations with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations so that we can make sure that things are
kept fully on the rails.

