Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On behalf
of F rance, I would like to warmly thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, for his excellent briefing, outstanding
work, exemplary commitment, tireless efforts and his
determination in spite of difficult challenges and risks
to his own life. I would like to convey my country's
profound respect and gratitude for his efforts. I also
thank Mr. John Ging for his briefing, which again
underscored the extreme gravity of the situation.

I will focus my statement today on four main
points - the political and security stalemate in Yemen,
the ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
the impact of the crisis on the region and the importance
of an urgent resumption of the political process.

The situation in Yemen has become increasingly
complex over recent years and weeks. Following the
assassination of former President Saleh, a coalition of
groups from the south of Yemen opposed to President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour has assumed control
of the vast majority of Aden, where Government
headquarters is located. That recent development has
diminished the prospects for a political settlement, but
should not serve to call into question the territorial
sovereignty of Yemen, to which we are all deeply
committed. There are several conflicts: between
the Government of President Hadi and the Houthis,
between the Houthis and the Arab coalition, between
the supporters of former President Saleh and the
Houthis, and between the groups from the south of
Yemen and the Government. Al-Qaida- and Da'esh-
affiliated groups are also present and active as the
primary beneficiaries of the prevailing chaos.

The main victims ofthe many conflicts are civilians.
The Yemeni people are plagued by a humanitarian
disaster. Three quarters of the Yemeni people are in
need of assistance. More than 2 million of them are
displaced. More than 18 million are affected by food
insecurity and at risk of starvation. There is dearth of
basic necessities and health risks, such as diphtheria
and cholera, remain high, as was eloquently mentioned
earlier, at a time when health and medical infrastructure
has been crippled. Our priority must be to address
one of the worst crises in the world by delivering
comprehensive, secure, unimpeded humanitarian access
to the people affected in all Yemeni governorates. That
access must guaranteed and sustained. The coalition's
humanitarian plan is an encouraging step forward and
should be commended. It is critical to ensure that it
be effective and delivered in full cooperation with the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations.

Financial assistance for the Yemeni Central Bank
is another step in the right direction in the light of
economic difficulties that have just been mentioned.
It is also essential that humanitarian and commercial
goods transit through all ports, including Hudeydah
and Saleef, and all airports, in particular Sana'a. The
blockade must be lifted again to enable the greatest
amount of predictability for humanitarian and
commercial actors. Inspection efforts conducted by the
United Nations verification and inspection mechanism
to ensure that cargo entering Yemen does not contain
goods that violate the embargo must continue. We
continue to emphatically condemn any attempt to divert
humanitarian assistance. Indiscriminate attacks against
civilians must cease. International humanitarian law
must be fully respected. The crisis also has an impact
on security in the region. We are concerned about
the continued deterioration of regional stability and
security. Yesterday we voted on a technical roll-over
of the sanctions regime, which will enable the Panel of
Experts to continue their important work. However, we
regret that the Council was not able to agree on the first
draft resolution vote on (S/2018/156).

We have voiced our concerns about the conclusions
of the report of the Panel of Experts on Yemen issued
on 15 February and have repeatedly condemned the
ballistic-missile launches staged by the Houthis,
specifically against Saudi Arabia. As we mentioned
yesterday, France will remain galvanized on the
question of the transfer of technology and ballistic
material throughout the region in the months to come.
This is an issue that the Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, will address in Tehran
during his visit on 5 March.

In this critical context, France's demands are clear,
namely, a ceasefire and secure, comprehensive and
unfettered humanitarian access. This is not optional
but an obligation under international humanitarian law
that is binding on all parties, which we would stress
to all parties to the conflict. The more entrenched
the conflict becomes, the more evident it appears
that there can be no military solution in Yemen. The
appointment of the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Martin Griffiths, affords an opportunity
for all parties to meaningfully re-engage, without
preconditions, in the negotiations. We must continue
to convey to regional actors a clear message about the
importance of playing a responsible and constructive
role in Yemen; this is critical.

Our common goal must remain to arrive at a
lasting cessation of hostilities and to encourage the
parties to rekindle dialogue, with a view to arriving at
a comprehensive and inclusive political agreement in a
manner that respects the country's territorial integrity.

In concluding, let me say that we hope that the
resumption of the political process will help to break
this disastrous deadlock. Let us be cautious, in this
context, to avoid creating divisions among us that could
have serious consequences. The unity and commitment
of the Security Council on this issue are prerequisites
to arrive at this necessary resumption of the political
process. France will continue to spare no effort to
achieve that end.

