Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for having brought us together
today to remain mobilized on this important subject.

My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of Finland
on behalf of the European Union.

I should, however, like to add one or two
comments. The first is a personal comment,
Mr. Minister, to tell you how pleased I am to see you
here today and to see a number of other friendly faces
around this table. Three years ago, you welcomed me
and the other members of the Security Council in your
capital. Three years ago, Charles Taylor was still in
power and we were anxiously asking ourselves how to
make him leave. Sierra Leone was still in a state of
shock; its society was really in chaos. Cote d'Ivoire
was at the brink of war. So it was a time of great
anxiety for the whole region. We were all aware that in
that region each country, each situation, each crisis was
a piece of a puzzle, and if one or two pieces of that
puzzle were sick then that sickness would spread to the
entire puzzle.

Three years later, things undoubtedly are better.
Taylor is where he should have been for a long time,
and in Liberia legitimate transitional authorities have
taken over. In Sierra Leone we see some renewal. It is
very promising that the Peacebuilding Commission has
chosen that country as one of the first on which it will
focus its efforts. Finally, in Cote d'Ivoire progress is
too slow. There are too many vicissitudes; things are
accepted today and then rejected tomorrow.

But that being said, overall in the past three years
we have managed to contain the risks of the crisis
growing worse, and the process is on the right track. As
a French delegate, I strongly hope that in the coming
weeks and months our Ivorian friends will all
demonstrate a sufficient sense of responsibility so that
the elections can take place properly. If that does
happen, I think that in a way the region will have come
to the end of a cycle of disturbance, disorder and
violence, a cycle that will have been overcome little by
little. So perhaps today's meeting is an opportunity for
us to engage in considering what might happen next,
what kind of cycle comes next. To get that discussion
going, I will set out a few points.

First, we need to preserve the achievements of
ECOWAS, because the successes we have been seeing
in these three years are to a large extent due to the
actions of some heads of State or of certain countries,
and also to ECOWAS, which has shown that it has a
considerable capacity to adapt to situations in a strong
partnership with the United Nations, in particular with
the Security Council. This has to be preserved and
developed, because with regard to certain transregional
and transborder problems, we have not completed all
the work to be done in this house. There is still a lot to
be done, especially if we wish to prevent the problem
of refugees, to take one example, from destabilizing
certain countries such as Guinea, whose representative
we heard a moment ago. Thus the first pillar is to
preserve what has been achieved by ECOWAS and by
its partnership with international institutions.
The second pillar is to develop governance. As
you said yourself, Mr. President, at the root of the
disturbances that the region has experienced was a
serious problem of governance.

06-4607]

The third pillar is to invest in young people and
in globalization. I believe Mr. Ould-Abdallah was quite
right to refer to the extraordinary potential, both in
terms of promise and of danger, of the enormous
number of young people in that region. That was the
theme of the Bamako meeting, the Africa-France
meeting that took place in December. As Mr. Ould-
Abdallah rightly said, these young people are very
attuned to globalization. Each situation in the region is
an element of a regional puzzle, as the region is part of
the global puzzle. To date the region has seen only the
negative aspects of globalization. Now, in the new
cycle, it must have access to the positive aspects, for
the benefit of the young people and through them.

Will the new cycle require another form of
partnership between the region and the international
institutions? I do not have any answer; perhaps it is a
bit too early for that. But it is a point that would be
interesting to consider in the coming months. Before
we get to that point, having opened up the prospects on
what our common work could be, I want to come back
to a note of realism. Before we can really start this new
cycle of hope and of promise, we need to properly
complete the cycle that we hope is coming to an end
today. For that, one of the transition points, one of the
necessary steps is, I think, the peace process in Cote
d'Ivoire. Again, I do hope that that can be completed in
conditions that the international community supports.
Just two days ago this was referred to in the statement
by the presidency of the Security Council.

