Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium aligns itself fully with the statements by the
observer of the European Union and the representative
of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict. I would like make the following observations
in my national capacity.

My country welcomes the annual report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/339) and his report on the
plight of children in armed conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2014/453).

Belgium regrets that armed conflicts continue to
affect children disproportionately. Indeed, the annual
report notes a significant spike in 2013 in the number
of cases of killing and maiming of children in several
countries. In addition, the recruitment and use of
children in conflict remain endemic. Impunity also
remained a worrying problem.

Belgium welcomes the appointment by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of a presidential
adviser on sexual violence and recruitment of children.
My country welcomes the progress made in the
national security forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, particularly following the adoption of the
national action plan in 2012. However, the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has continued, indicating that
efforts must also continue. The impunity enjoyed
by perpetrators of sexual violence also remains a
serious concern. For those reasons, my country calls
on the Congolese Government to fully and effectively
implement the action plan and encourages it again to
take all possible measures to bring perpetrators of
sexual violence to justice. The Government must also
ensure that those responsible for serious violations are
not recruited into or from its security services.

Belgium would like to reiterate its concern
regarding the use of explosive weapons, particularly
in densely populated areas, and calls on all parties
to armed conflict to renounce their use, in particular
given the harm they cause to children. My country also
calls upon States that have not ratified the relevant
international instruments to do so as soon as possible,
in particular the conventions banning anti-personnel
mines and cluster munitions.

Belgium is also of the opinion that the Government
armed forces listed in the annexes to the report of
the Secretary-General on the plight of children in
armed conflict should not be able to provide troops
to peacekeeping operations until they have fully
implemented action plans to end violations against
children.

Finally, Belgium welcomes, as the Secretary-
General does, regional and subregional organizations'
initiative and the important contribution they make in
termsofconflictprevention,mediationandpeacekeeping
operations. My country therefore echoes the invitation
extended to them by the Secretary-General to further
include elements for the protection of children when
developing their policies, planning missions, training
personnel and conducting peacekeeping operations.

