President Tadie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I will be
very brief in my concluding remarks. The conflict
between the Serbs and the Albanians has a long history.
It burdened practically the entire past century and did
not begin with the advent of Milosevic to power. It did
not begin in 1999, and the request for the independence
of Kosovo did not come about because of the war in
1999 or its victims. This request dates back many
years. It was expressed in the 1960s and the 1980s,
long before the war, by the demonstrations in Pristina.

Accordingly, there was a political plan for the
establishment of the independence of Kosovo, which
was realized following a terrible humanitarian
catastrophe. That catastrophe was experienced not only
by the Albanians, but also by the Croats, Bosnians and
Serbs in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. Every
nation had its victims, and I do not forget those
victims, not only among my people, but among all
peoples. That is why I am the only President in the
region to have extended my apologies to all the peoples
of the region, expecting the same apology to also be
extended to the Serbs.

We want peace and stability in the entire region,
but peace and stability will not be possible without
Serbia's participation in the process. As a democratic
country, Serbia is resolved to pursue peace and
stability within the framework of the United Nations.
In that process, we see a role for the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the deployment of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). Both UNMIK and
EULEX are welcome, and without them it would not
be possible to establish peace and stability.

For its part, Serbia will respect the values and
high standards defined by the United Nations, while
pursuing its approach to finding a solution to the future
status of Kosovo in accordance with international law.
This is the position of Serbia.

We spoke today of the cultural and historical sites
that were destroyed in the former Yugoslavia. I would
like to point out once again that each act of destruction
had its own perpetrator. There are no guilty peoples,
only guilty individuals, and that is why Serbia
continues to cooperate with The Hague Tribunal and
expects others to complete their cooperation with the
Tribunal.
