Mr. Mendonca e Moura (Portugal): I wish to thank
Japan for having convened this open debate, which is
extremely pertinent and timely.

A large number of African countries continue to
struggle with cycles of poverty and refugee issues as a
result of conflicts that have undermined socioeconomic
development efforts and afflict millions of men, women
and children. The international community must take
a stand and face this challenge. The continuous effort
to implement sustainable peace in Africa has to be a
common endeavour.

The peacebuilding concept introduced at the
United Nations in 1992 remains to be fully developed.
The recent review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture represented important progress. By
extending the scope of peacebuilding to encompass
every stage, from conflict prevention to post-conflict
reconstruction, it has shown that peace can be better
preserved if it is understood as an integrated and
systemic concept that goes beyond the mere cessation
of hostilities. In fact, only by jointly engaging the three
pillars of the United Nations and avoiding silos can the
peacebuilding approach succeed.

Africa has been at the heart of the United
Nations peacebuilding system since its inception.
African countries are currently the sole focus of
the Peacebuilding Commission's (PBC) agenda and
therefore the main beneficiaries of the Peacebuilding
Fund. They are also the primary recipients of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. At the same time, and
this is seldom underlined, Africa has reason to be a
central actor in terms of peace and stability both inside
its borders and at the global level. Africa is a contributor
of about half of the total number of peacekeepers
deployed worldwide. Africa has developed the African
Peace and Security Architecture, a unified structure at
the continental scale endowed with peace-consolidation
instruments.

Africa has a number of regional institutions that
go beyond economic integration to focus also on
peace and security, and Africa has proved to be a
pre-eminent security provider, developing a number
of important peacekeeping operations, increasingly
through partnerships between the African Union (AU)
and other international stakeholders, including the
European Union.

In this regard, the African continent and the
European Union have set up a strategic partnership
enshrined in the joint AfricafEuropean Union strategy
adopted in Lisbon in 2007. This partnership of equals
is unique among its kind in terms of its dimension, its
strategic scope and its ambitious goals. The partnership
has already produced tangible outcomes that are visible
in terms of not only conflict prevention and resolution,
but also in bridging post-conflict reconstruction
and incentives to deal with the underlying causes of
strife, particularly in the field of good governance,
accountability and sustainable development.

If we take stock of the evolution of Africa in
recent years as concerns peace, security and economic
development, we have to conclude that the progress made
is quite remarkable. Inter-State warfare has declined
and economic prospects have steadily increased,
despite sluggish world growth and commodity-price
volatility. Nevertheless, it is also true that the continent
still faces major unresolved challenges. Devastating
conflicts endure and the incidence of relapses into
conflict remain worryingly high.

One of the main principles that should underpin
our common endeavour is that sustaining peace and
preventing the recurrence of conflict should not be seen
as requiring exogenous solutions to African problems
but as a joint effort between African countries and
the international community, essential for the full
ownership and effective sustainability of the solutions
to be found.

As an active member of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Portugal knows full well the important role that the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture plays in
supporting peace and stability in African countries
and in keeping them on the international agenda.
The Senegalese Minister this morning referred to the
crucial role that the Economic Community of West
African States Mission in Guinea-Bissau is playing
in that country and the importance of EU support in
this regard. This is a good example of what we can do
jointly. But the Guinea-Bissau experience also tells
us that the responsibility of African States to provide
peacebuilding efforts in their own jurisdictions cannot
and should not be diluted.

The United Nations should increasingly engage
with the relevant African regional and subregional
organizations in a spirit of partnership and
complementarity of efforts and resources. We should
not only derive profit from the existing structures
implemented by the African Peace and Security
Architecture but also strive to enhance the capabilities
of the regional economic communities and other
relevant regional mechanisms, many of which have
developed security and early-warning instruments.

In this respect, initiatives such as the joint United
Nations-AU framework for enhanced partnership
in peace and security or the recent, inaugural direct
funding provided by the PBC to the AU Commission to
support human rights observation in Burundi may well
be the way forward. The principle of African ownership
should also direct our attention to the importance of
the local and community level in peacebuilding efforts.
Academic studies and political practice coincide in
identifying the root of lasting peace and social stability
in the political foundations and public culture of the
society. If local communities and civil society are not
centrally engaged in a peacebuilding intervention, it
will surely face the risk of bearing the taint of political
illegitimacy. No strategy to address the drivers of
violent conflict can be disconnected from the general
framework of sustainable development. It therefore
needs to be framed by the United Nations Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) Goals, in articulation with African
blueprints connecting peace, security and development,
such as the African Union's Agenda 2063. It also means
that greater attention should be paid to the processes
of transitional justice in the aftermath of clashes
with a strong ethnic or communitarian component.
The promotion of healing and reconciliation is key to
minimizing the risks of relapse into conflict.

