Mr. Roet (Israel): Before I begin, I should like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
for his efforts in the region, and to also thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this debate.

Two centuries ago, the great German writer and
statesman Goethe said: "The hardest thing to see is
what is in front of your eyes".

Look around the world today and you will see
that the primary threat to global peace and security is
staring the Council right in the face. From Buenos Aires
to Brussels and from Benghazi to Boston, no nation is
immune to the threat of radical Islamist terrorism.

Armed with dangerous ideologies and deadly
weapons, violent radicals are waging a war to destroy
lives and destroy our way of life. We have, unfortunately,
become all too familiar with their names - ISIS,
Al-Qaida, Boko Haram, Hizbullah and Hamas.

These violent factions share a disdain for
democracies, contempt for modernity and a willingness
to target innocent civilians. It is no accident that most
of these extremist groups operate in the Middle East, a
region plagued by instability and intolerance, dictators
and disorder, tyranny and terrorism.

Within the region, one nation stands apart. The
State of Israel is the only liberal democracy between
the Red Sea and the Caspian Sea. We are on the front
line, fighting radical Islamist terrorism. The struggle
that we face today is a preview of the struggle that the
rest of the civilized world will likely face tomorrow.

Even as we speak, the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) are fighting to rid Gaza of the Hamas military
infrastructure, which has terrorized the Israeli people
and devastated the Palestinian people for well over a
decade. Trust me when I say that Gaza is the very last
place we want our soldiers to be - the very last place.

This is not a war we chose. It was our last resort.

Hamas has sent suicide bombers into our cafes and
onto our buses. It has sent armed terrorists through
tunnels into our homes and schools, and it has launched
over 12,000 missiles and rockets towards our towns and
cities in the last 10 years.

Israel is a small country, and every single person
has been affected by terrorism. Israelis may have grown
up with this threat in our backyard, but we have never
and will never grow used to it. We will never grow used
to the sound of sirens or the roar of rockets overhead.
We will never grow used to seeing our children in
army uniforms, and we will never, ever - we refuse
to - become accustomed to burying our sons and
daughters, as too many Israelis have had to do since
Hamas dragged us into this conflict.

Israel did not want this war. Three times - three
different times - Israel agreed to accept a ceasefire,
and every single time Hamas refused and launched even
more rockets. Each of those rockets sends a message
loud and clear: Hamas is determined to wage war.

Even when the United Nations and the Red Cross
asked Hamas to hold its fire so they could assist its
own Palestinian civilians, Hamas refused. Once again,
Hamas proved that it has no regard for the well-being of
the Palestinian people. The Egyptian Foreign Minister,
Sameh Hassan Shokry Selim, stated: "Had Hamas
accepted the Egyptian proposal, it could have saved the
lives of Palestinians".

Let me make the picture very, very clear. Palestinian
civilian casualties are a direct result ofHamas's decision
to continue to send rockets and terrorists towards Israel
while putting their civilians up front to protect their

so-called leaders and their terrorists. The leaders of
the Palestinian Authority and their delegations today
refused to stand up and say to Hamas, "Stopl".

In the past month alone, Israel has been attacked
on four fronts. Rockets have been fired from Lebanon,
from Syria, from Sinai, and Hamas has launched an
all-out assault from Gaza. In addition to firing rockets,
Hamas has now developed a new strategy to wage war
against Israel. In Gaza, there are two cities: a city above
ground, and a city below ground. Eighteen metres
below the Strip are kilometres of dense terror tunnels
crisscrossing like a giant web. Hamas has built a vast
underground terror network, reinforced with thousands
of tons of concrete and supported by massive beams.

Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh recently declared
that the tunnels opened "a new strategy in confronting
the enemy from underground".

Since entering Gaza, the IDF has uncovered
23 tunnels with over 66 different entry points, many
of which are under homes and schools. No site is off-
limits for Hamas. One of the tunnels exposed over the
weekend began under a family home and was packed
with explosives. Hamas is using its extensive tunnel
system to carry out a series of deadly attacks. In the
past week, dozens of heavily armed terrorists have used
those very tunnels to infiltrate Israel.

What do you expect Israel to do when terrorists
in Shujaiya are as close to Kibbutz Nahal Oz as this
Chamber is to the Metropolitan Museum of Art?
Imagine what it is like for Israelis living near Gaza to
know that there are dozens of hidden tunnels leading to
the doorstep of their communities. Imagine What it is
like to fall asleep wondering if a terrorist is tunnelling
under your home or to wake up and wonder if your
children will be safe on their way to school. Just
yesterday, heavily armed Hamas terrorists emerged
from a tunnel only 200 metres from a kindergarten.

Over the weekend, eight Palestinian terrorists
emerged from a tunnel almost 300 metres inside Israel,
armed with automatic weapons and wearing Israeli
military uniforms. They fired a rocket-propelled
grenade at Israeli military jeeps, killing two soldiers
before retreating back underground. A few hours later,
two more terrorists entered Israel using a tunnel. They
were carrying tranquillizers and handcuffs and were on
a mission to kidnap Israelis.

For years, the international community has
criticized Israel for restricting the entry of construction
materials into Gaza. Now we know what those building
materials are actually being used for. All this time,
the international community thought that it was
sending money to develop social services or political
institutions or economic structures. In truth, the aid
dollars that were sent were only aiding Hamas to build
its terror stronghold. The fact that Hamas directs its
budget underground rather than above ground proves
that it is more interested in warfare than in the welfare
of the Palestinian people. Hamas violates international
law and brutally abuses the people of Gaza. It sends
innocent men, women and children to stand on the
roofs of their homes so as to shield the terrorists firing
rockets from their living rooms and bedrooms below. It
builds bunkers for its leaders, but refuses to build bomb
shelters for civilians. It fires rockets from mosques and
schools deep inside densely populated neighbourhoods.
And it has set up its headquarters inside a Gaza hospital,
where Hamas leaders can be seen walking through the
hallways.

Rather than taking steps to avoid civilian casualties,
Hamas has stepped up its attacks in the hopes ofcreating
even more casualties. Hamas's strategy is clear. It sees
every Palestinian victim of this conflict as fuel for a
propaganda machine. The purpose of that machine is
to push the international community into pressuring
Israel to grant Hamas's demands. Sadly, many people
have fallen for that cynical campaign.

All those who argue that both sides are equally
to blame are playing into Hamas's hand and inviting
a ruthless radical group to continue its campaign of
terror. I want to remind the Council that that terror
organization sits in the Palestinian unity Government.
President Abbas has a choice to make. He can continue
to remain silent and stand in support of Hamas. Or he
can assume the mantle of leadership by dissolving the
unity Government. The choice is his 4 to be a part of
the problem or to be part of the solution.

Israel is doing its utmost to avoid harming civilians
because we believe that every innocent life lost is a
tragedy. We deeply regret the losses, but the blame
lies with Hamas for hiding behind civilians and using
them as human shields. The IDF is fully committed to
upholding the rule of law and is operating only against
terrorist targets. It is taking steps that no other nation
at any time in history has taken. What other nation
supplies millions of tons of humanitarian aid or sets up
a field hospital to treat the wounded on the other side,
even as its enemy fires on it indiscriminately? What
other nation sends messages to warn exactly where it
will strike, giving the enemy time to set booby traps
and deploy snipers?

Israel spent four days warning Palestinians in
northern Gaza that the military would soon enter their
neighbourhoods to uproot Hamas. That gave Hamas
four days to prepare an assault on our troops. Every
time we drop a leaflet or make a phone call or send a
text message warning of an imminent attack, we are
endangering our own children so that we may keep
their children safe. As we have said before, Israel has
no interest in being in Gaza. We are fighting in Gaza,
but we are not fighting the people of Gaza.

The equation is simple - when it is quiet in Israel,
it will be quiet in Gaza. The goal of our operation is to
eliminate the rockets, shut down the terror tunnels and
demilitarize Gaza in order to restore sustained quiet
to the people of Israel. Members of the international
community have said that Israel has the right to defend
its citizens, but when we exercise that right we are
criticized. What do they expect us to do when terrorists
are tunnelling into our communities? What do they
expect us to do when our children are being kidnapped
and murdered? What do you expect us to do when
rockets are fired at our cities and our citizens cannot
spend a single day without running to a bomb shelter?

Iran is exerting its influence to attack Israel from
the land, the sea and the air on every front. It is supplying
Hamas with rockets in Gaza, it is standing by Al-Assad
in Syria, and it is supplying Hizbullah with missiles
in Lebanon. Some of those terrorist groups are now
teaming up to form a terror dream team that is intent
on making life a nightmare for millions of Israelis.
Hizbullah leader Hassan Nasrallah called Hamas leader
Khaled Meshal to say:

"Hizbullah and the Lebanese resistance
support Hamas's strategy and the just conditions it
has set for an end to the conflict".

For years, we have warned the international
community that Hizbullah was amassing tens of
thousands of rockets and missiles. We were met with
silence. Will you continue to remain silent? For years,
we have told the international community that Hamas
was building a terror stronghold in Gaza, and we have
called on the international community to condemn
the rocket fire. We were met with silence. For years,
we have warned of the impending escalation, and the
international community ignored us.

Goethe was right. The hardest thing to see is what
is before one's eyes. Israel is on the frontline of the
global war against radical Islamist terrorism. The entire
civilized world has a stake in the outcome and must
therefore support Israel's right to defend its citizens.
Israel's fight against terrorism today will determine
how we all live tomorrow. To do nothing and to say
nothing in support of our efforts is to invite tyranny
and terror into our own backyards. The international
community must stand together, speak together and
prevail together, so that all people everywhere can live
in freedom.

