Mr. Zambrana Torrelio (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
information provided by Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura, whom we thank and acknowledge for the work
he has done over the years and for his tireless efforts on
this sensitive issue, not only for the Security Council
but also for the international community. We would
also like to wish his successor the best of success in the
work entrusted to him.

During the two years that we have occupied this
seat, we have witnessed the urgent need of the Syrian
people for a cessation of violence and for humanitarian
aid. Accordingly, we attended numerous meetings
through which we sought to promote consensus and
unity in the Security Council for the benefit of the
Syrian people. Many times we had to make a call for
this space not to be politicized or for it not to be used as
a sounding board for the conflict on the ground or for
the achievement of geopolitical objectives.

That is why we highlight the progress made in
stabilizing and reducing violence in the country, which
in recent months has led to a tangible change in the
state of the conflict on the ground. We believe that the
improvement in the situation has been thanks to the
efforts of the Astana guarantors, whose agreements
made it possible to establish important areas of de'tente,
and to those commitments made between Russia and
Turkey or between Russia and the United States at the
time, all of which made it possible to reduce violence
on Syrian territory, which resulted in relative peace for
the civilian population.

In recent days, the agreement signed in Istanbul on
27 October among Turkey, Russia, Germany and France
had a major impact on the population by allowing
humanitarian assistance and emergency medical care
to reach those most in need. We are convinced that it
is the result of openness to dialogue among the parties
involved, which we believe must be a constant. On
the other hand, we believe that any measure involving
unilateral sanctions is not only contrary to international
law but also works to the detriment of the humanitarian
situation in Syria.

We emphasize the importance of the meetings
held in recent weeks, and particularly the recent
meeting in Geneva between the Special Envoy and
the Astana guarantors, which we believe served
once again to confirm the will to move forward
the political process in Syria. We hope that those
instances of rapprochement will bear fruit through
the establishment, in the near future, of a credible,
balanced, inclusive and representative, Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led constitutional committee, facilitated by
the United Nations, which will allow, in the medium
and long term, for a strengthening of the relative peace
that now exists on the ground.

That is why, throughout our presence in the Security
Council, we have stated that there is no military
solution to this conflict, and we rejected any attempt
at fragmentation or sectarianism in the country, as well
as the presence of foreign military forces without the
authorization of the Syrian Government. Within the
framework of international law, we request that they
be withdrawn as soon as possible, but mainly in the
context of respect for the principles of sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
country. We believe that all parties involved should
respect those principles.

We reiterate our call to resolve this conflict through
an inclusive dialogue and concerted political process,
led by and for the Syrian people, that satisfies its
legitimate aspirations and allows for a peaceful solution
to the situation, within the framework of the Geneva
process and resolution 2254 (2015), under the auspices
of the United Nations and as agreed in the outcome of
the Congress of the Syrian National Dialogue, held in
the city of Sochi in January.

I would like to conclude by stressing the challenge
facing the Security Council to continue the efforts,
commitments and dialogue among the parties that will
enable the formation of a constitutional committee in
the near future, and, to that end, by emphasizing that
support for the efforts of the Special Envoy must be
constant. We believe that the Security Council must
meet the challenge of remaining united in order to
advance a political process that leads to a sustainable
solution for the Syrian people.

