Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the delegation of France,
and to Mr. Le Drian personally, for organizing this
meeting on combating the financing of terrorism. The
Security Council has been actively working on this
matter since the beginning of the year. Following the
consideration of the current threats in the framework
of the presentation of the Secretary-General's eighth
report (S/2019/103) on the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), and the exchange on national practices at
the Arria Formula meeting led by France, the Council
made the right decision to take concrete action. We
affirm our support for resolution 2462 (2019), adopted
today, and call on all States to tackle its implementation
responsibly. That difficult task will be possible only
with the active support and coordination of the United
Nations, making use of the unique expert capacity and
effective mechanisms of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), as well as by involving non-State structures in
combating the financing of terrorism. In that regard,
we would like to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
Mr. Marshall Billingslea and Ms. Mercy Buku for their
insightful contributions to the discussion.

The examples of ISIL and Al-Qaida clearly
demonstrate that the intensity level of terrorist activity
depends directly on its funding levels. Adequate
material resources enable terrorists to prepare and
carry out attacks, attract new recruits and actively
counter law-enforcement agencies. In order to expose
terrorist financing channels quickly, it is essential to
conduct a thorough risk assessment. At our suggestion,
the issue of identifying ISIL's new sources of support
has become a priority for FATF. In June 2016, Russia
initiated regular updates in analysing financial flows
associated with ISIL. In accordance with today's
resolution, we urge States to actively participate in
FATF's efforts to disseminate the results of the analysis
and draw practical conclusions from them.

As the extensive network of terrorist syndicates
in the Middle East is being liquidated, the facts of the
various sources of support for terrorists in Syria and
Iraq, including support from States, are coming to light.
The scope of that improper conduct is extraordinarily
broad, ranging from supplying so-called non-lethal
assistance to concealing their companies' cooperation
with militants. Ultimately, States that apply double
standards and politicize the counter-terrorism agenda
themselves risk becoming targets of terrorists. They
should think about that sooner.

One might say that it has now become fashionable
at the United Nations to talk about the prevention
of terrorism and violent extremism. Some even
naively believe that promoting so-called soft power
instruments is enough to prevent terrorist attacks.
However, it is not every criminal, by a long shot, who
can be re-educated, rehabilitated and reintegrated. And
it is even less acceptable to replace criminal justice
with such efforts. Anyone who has been involved in
terrorist activity, including its financing, should be
held accountable. The Security Council has termed
any dealings with terrorists a serious crime regardless
of whether the money or other material resources are
spent on organizing specific terrorist attacks or on
extremists' personal needs. Attempts to disregard
obligations in that regard are in violation of resolutions
1373 (2001), 2178 (2014), 2199 (2015), 2253 (2015), 2368
(2017) and the one we have just adopted, as well as the
FATF standards.

We are grateful to the French delegation and to
Council members who take a constructive approach
for their support to Russia's proposal to include in
the resolution's scope issues related to combating the
supply of weapons to terrorists. Today the Security
Council has significantly strengthened its toolkit in
that area. We emphasize that the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons is a serious crime that must
be prosecuted to the full extent of the law. The need to
criminalize the full range ofrelevant acts is contained in
paragraph 27 of the resolution. We call on the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to pay close attention to that and
to immediately start assessing States' compliance. The
same applies to the various measures of countering the
illegal trade of small arms and light weapons Within the
framework ofthe Madrid Guiding Principles on foreign
terrorist fighters.

Of course, some countries will require assistance
in implementing new measures for combating the
financing of terrorists and preventing their access to
weapons. We are ready to extend support in various
areas to the efforts of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism in these priority areas and to give
technical assistance to partners through regional
platforms and bilaterally.

