Madame President, it is very good to be with you. We thank you for convening us to discuss this very important topic. Human rights is a core business for the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). It is one of the four pillars in our mandate, but it also occupies a cross-cutting role right across the entire Mission, as it is central both to peace and security and to the protection of civilians. At UNMISS, we are often looked to to provide a definitive account of human rights issues and to speak out on behalf of others about what has happened, because others will not or cannot do so. The Security Council is aware of South Sudan's poor record on human rights, particularly since the outbreak of conflict in 2013. The targeting and killing of innocent civilians has led to the displacement of over 2 million refugees and another 1.9 million displaced internally. People flee because they fear for their lives and/or the lives of their families. Sexual violence has also been extremely prevalent in South Sudan. This is an issue that has been discussed by the Security Council, documented and highly publicized. I will not go into the details today because Council members are already well informed on them. What I would really like to address today is how the UNMISS meets and works through those challenges. Our actions and work are tied to what we can do to make a difference, how we can change behaviour and what will bring about sustainable improvements to the observance of human rights. Of course, part of that role is to document abuse and call out violators and abusers. That is an important part of what we do, but documentation alone is not sufficient; too often it is a one-off action that makes an impact at the time of a report's release but the impact dissipates if there is no follow up. In UNMISS, we try to structure our approach into three broad streams, which I will now go through one by one. First, with regard to documentation and holding abusers to account, over the last couple years, we have restructured our Human Rights Division to include a rapid response team that can respond to events, provide definitive reporting on particularly relevant and topical areas, and investigate issues quickly. This is very important to the victims because their stories must be told, and their pain acknowledged and recognized, if we are to follow up promptly. Importantly, this approach also ensures that the perpetrators of abuse are identified. It also shows that we are witnesses to the abuses and are hopefully able to follow through to ensure that consequences for what happened are borne by the persons who perpetrated the abuses. Our reporting is conservative and careful because we want to make sure that absolutely everything we do is right, that our reports can be trusted and that we will not be targeted - or our findings dismissed - because we got something wrong. We also ensure that our reports are sent to the aggrieved parties so that they have a chance to respond, and we take their response into consideration. Depending on the response, we may change our report, or we may choose not to change it. But we do give the aggrieved parties an opportunity to respond. We have published a number of different reports on a broad range of issues, including on violations and abuses against civilians in Western Equatoria state, particularly documenting abuses by the opposition;on -_ indiscriminate attacks against civilians in Unity state, particularly documenting abuses largely by the Government; on threats to the freedom of expression in South Sudan; and on access to health care for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, which speaks to the right of women to gain access to services after abuse. The latter report was not just about victims but also about whether victims are able to gain access to follow-up services, including medical and psychological and social support, to help them get through their ordeals. We have also identified and singled out individuals who have committed particular atrocities. In this regard, I would mention an individual named Gordan Kong who, in 2018, orchestrated a horrific programme of abuse in Unity state in the centre of South Sudan. When later he spoke to our Chief of Human Rights, he defended his actions saying that he had to teach people a serious lesson or they would continue to attack or insult him. That serious lesson included hanging women from trees, burning old people in their homes, raping hundreds of women across the area, and killing and displacing thousands of other people. Gordan Kong is the kind of person who should be singled out, sanctioned and prevented from getting away with this sort of abuses when they are absolutely and categorically proven to have been carried out by him. The second issue is ending impunity and ensuring accountability. Ensuring accountability is the hallmark of all societies. Accountability means that if someone commits crimes and abuses, he or she will be tried, and if found guilty, punished. Ending impunity in South Sudan is particularly important and requires in large part that the justice system be working. This area is critical to our broad role as a Mission and involves not only our Human Rights Division, but also our police and rule of law components. We have been involved in supporting mobile courts as a first step towards establishing more permanent courts. When the first mobile court was deployed about 18 months ago in Bentiu, where a number of people who had perpetrated sexual violence against women were put on trial, a lawyer attended the proceedings and informed us about what she witnessed there. She told us of a 15-year old girl who stood in court as four men accused of gang-raping her were brought in. These men were very cocky, very sure of themselves, very arrogant - until they saw her and her witnesses standing there, and their faces fell. At the end of the trial, all four men were convicted and sentenced to prison terms ranging from 4 to 12 years. It and other cases had a sobering impact on the commission of sexual and human rights violations in the area. The mobile courts have done an enormous amount of good to ensure that impunity is beginning to end there. The lawyer also told me that a few days later she saw a line consisting of 47 women - she counted them - outside the court room waiting to enter. When she asked why they were there, she was told that these 47 women were witnesses queuing up to give evidence against the next cases of people who were being brought before the court for sexual abuses and other crimes. Our role in this context relates not just to the mobile courts; it is also about strengthening the national police, the justice system, the prosecution, the judges - right through to the Ministry of Justice. In South Sudan, I am pleased to note, we are pushing against an open door because we have received extraordinary cooperation from the justice system in supporting us to help them improve their systems. Finally, the third broad stream of our approach is engagement with the Government. Indeed, we can criticize the Government, but we also need to engage with it. We currently have three action plans with the Government: first, with the military - the South Sudan People's Defence Forces; secondly, with the police - the South Sudan National Police Service; and thirdly, with the forces of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement in Opposition. These action plans enable us to work to create the conditions within these forces for the respect of human rights. Consequently, we are regularly invited to help train their contingents. This is a step in the right direction because we get in on the ground floor, so to speak, with the officers who are in charge of their forces. Lastly, I want to speak about how we work in UNMISS. As I mentioned, human rights is not just a thematic area of work but is a cross-cutting approach throughout the Mission. For example, our Human Rights Division has a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the Force, our uniformed peacekeeping component, which enables both to understand the scope of their respective work and viewpoints. To understand why an MOU is needed, Council members should remember that uniformed peacekeepers rotate every 12 months. Documenting the Human Rights Division-Force approach in an MOU ensures continuity. Our uniformed peacekeepers therefore see and respect the work of the human rights component and assist it in its workings; conversely, the Human Rights Division has a better understanding of the workings of the military component. The MOU ensures that both components are working off the same page and that human rights standards are adhered to. I would also like to mention the important and specific role that women protection advisers and the Child Protection Unit play in advancing the work of the Mission. But most importantly, I would like to acknowledge the Chief of our Human Rights Division, Eugene Nindorera, who will be retiring in a month and a half after 10 years with the United Nations and a very long career as a human rights activist and a Government Minister in his home country of Burundi. I want to thank him for his hard work in helping to put human rights on the map in South Sudan.
