Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Permit
me to thank and commend you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting on so critical and difficult a
situation as that in Somalia and to express our gratitude
that it is being held in a public format. We should also
like to thank the representatives of the Secretariat for
their briefings. We have taken note of the Secretariat's
support for the establishment of a multinational force
and of the difficulties it is experiencing in that regard.
In addition, we welcome the representative of the
International Maritime Organization and listened
carefully to his concerns at the situation of piracy in
the region. Finally, we thank the representatives of
Somalia and the African Union for their statements. We
are heartened by their positive attitude towards the
political solutions in Somalia, but we also agree with
their support for the creation of a multinational force.

Panama is deeply concerned at the situation of
instability in Somalia, not only because of the risks it
poses to international peace and security, but also
because it affects the humanitarian situation of the
Somali people. There are few situations in the world so
grave as that being endured in Somalia today. In that
context, Panama has repeatedly requested that the
United Nations lend effective support to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the only
Mission that currently has any effectiveness in
Somalia, and we regret that it has not been provided in
the form requested by AMISOM. and the Secretary-
General. Unfortunately, the bureaucratic structures of
this Organization have prevented such support.

Furthermore, while we support the deployment of
a multinational force, we are not unaware of the
difficulties posed by the risks involved in establishing
such a force, and we have heard a number of ideas
about that here. Therefore, we reiterate once again that
the Organization is obliged to effectively support
AMISOM. with the troops and materiel that it needs
until something more substantive can be done.

With regard to the situation of piracy, which
obviously concerns all of us and is linked to the
situation in Somalia, we understand that that fact
cannot prevent us from seeking individual solutions to
it when required. The Security Council has proved that
naval forces of various countries can come to the
region with the approval of the Government of Somalia
to try to stop that piracy. As stated by the
representative of France, such Council authorization
should be renewed and strengthened.

However, it is worrisome that military forces of
various countries are operating independently in a
region as narrow as Somalia's territorial waters and the
Gulf of Aden. Panama believes that the Security
Council should review that situation and consider the
possibility of providing some form of coordination of
those forces under the leadership of the United Nations.

