Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Allow me to first thank
the President for convening such an important meeting.
It is an important follow-up to the implementation of
resolution 2185 (2014), which Malaysia fully supports.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his
overview and add my voice in welcoming the Police
Commissioners of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) to the Council,
and in thanking them for their respective briefings, to
which we have carefully listened.

It is clear that the majority of United Nations peace
operations today are complex and multidimensional,
with missions undertaking significantly more tasks that
range from assisting political processes, establishing
transitional authorities, distributing humanitarian
aid and relief and reintegrating former combatants to
preventing violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, and protecting
civilians, among others.

The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) proposed
a number of recommendations addressed both to
contributing countries and the Secretariat to ensure
that United Nations peacekeeping remains relevant
and able to meet the increasingly complex demands of
peacekeeping. We welcome the initial steps taken by
the Secretariat to implement those recommendations.
At the same time, we are of the view that there remains
room for improvement, including at the mandate design
and planning stages. Clear policy guidance and the
provision of adequate training would help to ensure the
credibility and proficiency of all United Nations police
personnel in carrying out the entrusted mandate.

The protection of civilians has become a core
component of numerous ongoing peacekeeping
missions, for example in South Sudan, the Sudan, Mali
and the Central African Republic. Civilian protection
is the cross-cutting issue that needs to be addressed by
military, civilian and policing components, acting in
concert with the political components of the missions.
In situations where the protection of civilians form
part of a mission's mandate, Malaysia stresses the need
for clear mandates on the protection of civilians and
for agreed benchmarks, processes and procedures for
their implementation. We are of the view that a shared
understanding of what it takes to keep the peace and
protect civilians in outbreaks of violence is key.

We agree with Commissioner Makotose of
UNAMID that the United Nations police has and should
continue to play an important role in combating sexual
and gender-based violence, and in protecting women
and girls from such violence. We therefore believe
that there is scope to ensure greater female leadership,
gender diversity and training within peacekeeping
missions, in line with the United Nations Global Effort
initiative. We also believe that police personnel need
to be fully equipped with the necessary training prior
to their deployment, as highlighted by the briefers. We
encourage police contributing countries and regional
organizations that have established peacekeeping
training centres to offer and assist in providing training
to United Nations police, including through specialized
training. Malaysia intends to do its part through our
Malaysian Peacekeeping Training Centre.

Finally, I wish to place on record our utmost
appreciation and respect for the commitment, bravery
and sacrifice of all United Nations police in the field in
discharging the mandates and responsibilities entrusted
to them by the United Nations. We have two questions
for the briefers.

The first is for Commissioner Munyambo
of UNMISS. Can the Commissioner provide an
elaboration on the role played by United Nations police
in supporting the UNMISS protection of civilians
mandate during the outbreak of violence in Juba and
other areas last July?

Our second question is for Commissioner Monchotte
of MINUSTAH. We have followed the development of
the Haitian National Police (HNP) since joining the
Council and we commend MINUSTAH police for its
supporting role in training and supporting capacity-
building for the National Police. Can the Commissioner
elaborate on the state of readiness of the HNP to assume
more substantial responsibility for safety and security
in the country, including in countering organized
criminal gangs?

