Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to welcome the presence here
today of His Excellency President Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed and to thank him for having shared with
Council members his assessment of the situation in his
country, his concerns and his expectations from the
international community. I would also like to thank
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his commitment and his
dedication to his mission of peace and reconciliation in
Somalia.

Morocco welcomes the ongoing interest that the
Security Council is attaching to Somalia in order to
assist a country that has been ravaged by a bloody war
for 20 years and to bring its people out of violence and
instability. That interest has been amply shown by the
London Conference held on 23 February, the results of
which, we hope, will be consolidated and built upon by
the Istanbul conference scheduled for the 31 May.

Morocco is pleased with the steps taken and the
progress made on the political and security fronts in
Somalia, which have been implemented through
establishing the Djibouti peace process and the road
map in order to turn the page on the transition. The
openness of the Transitional Federal Government in the
areas it has recovered and the agreement on modalities
for a Constituent Assembly represent real progress for
the Somali people.

However, in spite of that progress, the situation
remains fragile and reversible, as has been noted by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
because not only do some portions of the national
territory remain outside of the control of the central
Government, but the central Government is confronted
with terrorist acts by Al-Shabaab, particularly in the
north of the country, with all of the human and
humanitarian consequences flowing from it for
hundreds of thousands of refugees and displaced
persons.

My country emphatically condemns the terrorist
activities of Al-Shabaab and the acts of piracy that
have been staged off the shores of Somalia in spite of
the efforts of the international community to secure the
waters off the Horn of Africa. These efforts, both on
land and on sea, need to be strengthened and bolstered
by the establishment of the rule of law and capacity-
building for the Somali Government in this area.

Morocco stands in solidarity with the people of
Somalia and supports their legitimate aspirations to
peace and stability. My country remains committed to
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and national unity of Somalia.
However, meeting these objectives will require an
inclusive dialogue, the will to reconcile, and respect
for the commitments undertaken under the peace
agreement, the road map and the Kampala Accord to
end the transitional period. In this respect, we call on
all parties to intensify their efforts to finalize the draft
constitution and create the conditions for elections to
take place smoothly. These timetables are critical to
opening up reassuring and promising prospects for the
post-transition period.
Somalia finds itself at a crucial juncture, as noted
by all Council members. Somalis, as it stands, must
overcome their differences and put their country's
peace, stability, reconciliation and unity above their
personal ambitions and partisan differences. They will
need to exhibit the political will to unite to confront the
challenges of terrorism, insecurity and threats to the
unity of the country.

Somalia owes a great deal to the United Nations
and to the international community for the progress it
has made to date in the political and security fields and
for the assistance generously provided to displaced
persons. In particular, we welcome the efforts of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia, which has headquartered
in Mogadishu since 24 February, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009), chaired by the Permanent Representative
of India.

However, more solidarity and commitment are
required on the part of the international community to
make the critical period immediately following the end
of the transitional period one in which the gains made
thus far are maintained and consolidated. Morocco and
all of Africa are prepared to pursue their efforts to
support the people of Somalia in its quest for stability,
unity and reconciliation.

