Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): 1 would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's meeting, and the
delegation of Spain for initiating it. We also thank all
of today's briefers for their very useful presentations.

Climate change in the Sahel, along with
desertification and land degradation, is one of the
contributing factors stymying the development
prospects of the countries of the region. It also has
serious security implications, since the shrinking of
the natural resources vital to economic development
breeds competition and rivalry among communities and
countries, spoiling relations, severing ties, escalating
tensions and even provoking clashes. Global warming
was already affecting the region's stability well before
the adoption of the Paris climate change agreement.

My delegation therefore is convinced that a better
understanding of the ways in which climate change
multiplies security risks can help to manage and reduce
the negative effects of environmental degradation.
In that context, we believe that the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) should formulate
strategic guidance on combating desertification
and land degradation and ensuring the sustainable
management of pasture land. To that end, we also look
forward to closer cooperation and evolving synergies
among UNEP, the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification and other multilateral environmental
mechanisms. Ukraine believes that the United Nations
Environment Assembly (UNEA) should tackle the
issue of protecting the environment in areas affected by
armed conflict. We have already introduced a relevant
UNEA draft resolution - the first ofits kind - that we
hope will see light quite soon.

As recent lessons have taught us, voids that are
the result of underdevelopment - such as a lack of
education opportunities, stagnant or declining economic
activity, limited growth prospects for small businesses,
weak job markets and so forth - are quickly filled by
radical forces eager to exploit public discontent in their
pursuit of their own agendas. In that regard, Ukraine is
concerned about the threat posed by terrorist activities
in the Sahel region. Terrorist groups - specifically
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab and their affiliates - have a destabilizing
effect on the region's peace and security, with dire
humanitarian consequences for civilians, including the
most vulnerable of them - women and children.

In that context, Ukraine commends the efforts of
national Governments in the Sahel to address the issue
of the changing nature of the threat of terrorism and
to prioritize it at both the international and regional
levels. We also welcome the outcomes of the Second
Regional Security Summit, held on 14 May in Abuja on
the initiative of the President of the Federal Republic
of Nigeria and aimed at strengthening the regional
response to the threat posed by Boko Haram.

Along with combating terrorists through military
means, it is also vital to suppress their financing and
prevent them from acquiring weapons. Key elements
for achieving that goal are the effective management of
weapon stockpiles; the speedy disposal of small arms
and light weapons during disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration campaigns; the enhancement of
cooperation on border controls between the countries
of the region; and bringing down the transnational
organized criminal networks responsible for arms
trafficking in the region.

However, to ensure that the effects of counter-
terrorism efforts are lasting, we should consolidate
and implement a wide range of preventive measures
that promote social and economic development and
dialogue, respect for the rule of law and human rights,
the engagement of women and young people in strategic
communications, and investments in human capital, job
creation and education. Such steps will help to reduce
the appeal of extremist groups and support for them
and will strengthen resilience against them, thereby
preventing the Sahel from becoming fertile ground for
the recruitment of terrorists among its tens of millions
of disadvantaged people.

