President Hu Jintao (spoke in Chinese): The
current international security environment is complex
and fluid. Nuclear proliferation remains a pressing
issue and nuclear disarmament a long and arduous task.

To create a safer world for all, we must first and
foremost remove the threat of nuclear war. I would like
to propose in this connection that we make efforts in
the following five areas.

First, we should maintain global strategic balance
and stability and vigorously advance nuclear
disarmament. All nuclear-weapon States should, in
good faith, fulfil their obligations under article VI of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) and publicly undertake not to seek the
permanent possession of nuclear weapons. Countries
with the largest nuclear arsenals should continue to
take the lead in making drastic and substantive
reductions in their nuclear weapons.

The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
should enter into force at an early date, and
negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty should
start as soon as possible. When conditions are ripe,
other nuclear-weapon States should also join the
multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament. To
attain the ultimate goal of complete and thorough
nuclear disarmament, the international community
should develop, at an appropriate time, a viable long-
term plan composed of phased actions, including the
conclusion of a convention on the complete prohibition
of nuclear weapons.

Secondly, the international community should
abandon the nuclear deterrence policy based on first
use of nuclear weapons and take credible steps to
reduce the threat of nuclear weapons. All nuclear-
weapon States should make a firm and unconditional

commitment not to use or threaten to use nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-
weapon-free zones, and conclude a legally binding
international instrument in this regard. In the
meantime, nuclear-weapon States should negotiate and
conclude a treaty on the non-first use of nuclear
weapons.

Thirdly, we should consolidate the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and prevent the
proliferation of nuclear weapons. All countries should
join the NPT and make genuine efforts to uphold and
enhance its authority and effectiveness. The safeguards
functions of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) should be strengthened. All countries should
strictly comply with non-proliferation obligations,
refrain from resort to double standards, and tighten and
improve export controls to prevent proliferation.

Fourthly, the right of all countries to the peaceful
use of nuclear energy must be fully respected and
active international cooperation undertaken in that
regard. Developed countries should actively assist
developing countries in developing and using nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. The IAEA should
increase its efforts to promote technical cooperation
and assistance in nuclear power, nuclear safety and
security, and nuclear technology applications.

Fifthly, the international community should take
strong measures to enhance nuclear security and reduce
nuclear risks. Countries should act in strict observance
of all international legal instruments governing nuclear
security, take credible steps to ensure the security of
their nuclear facilities and materials, and effectively
prevent the diversion of nuclear materials. The
international community should intensify cooperation
and combat nuclear terrorism through concerted
efforts.

China has consistently stood for the complete
prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear
weapons. I wish to take this opportunity to solemnly
reiterate that China is firmly committed to a nuclear
strategy of self-defence. We have adhered to the policy
of no first use of nuclear weapons at any time or under
any circumstances, and have made an unequivocal
commitment that we will unconditionally not use or
threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-
weapon States or nuclear-weapon-free zones. China
does not participate in any form of nuclear arms race.
We will continue to keep our nuclear capabilities at the
minimum level required for national security and make
efforts to advance the international nuclear
disarmament process. China will continue to play a
constructive role in upholding the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime.

