Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
presidency of the Council and thanking you for
convening this open meeting on the important issue of
East Timor. I would also like to thank Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta, the East Timorese Transitional Administration
Cabinet member for foreign affairs, for his presence
once again in the Security Council chamber. I would
like to express special appreciation to Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his very useful briefing today and for his
remarkable success in tackling the daunting task of a
multifaceted peacekeeping operation in East Timor,
which was explained in detail in the Secretary-
General's report.

With the upcoming election of the East Timorese
Constituent Assembly in a month, my delegation is
pleased that the preparation process has by and large
been smooth. I would like to commend Mr. Vieira
de Mello and all other international staff for their hard
work on the election, including the preparation of a
master plan for the election, the registration of voters
and political parties with their candidates, and a
number of other complicated tasks.

Looking forward to the birth of an independent
and democratic East Timorese Government early next
year, as scheduled, the Korean Government has been
extending its support for election management through
contributing to the United Nations Development
Programme Trust Fund and the dispatch of
international observers and an international
commissioner.

In my delegation's view, the maintenance of
political stability, especially during the transitional
period after the election, will be crucial. In this regard,
we welcome the agreement of most East Timorese
political parties, in a pact of national unity, to conduct
the election in a peaceful fashion and to respect its
outcome. We strongly urge all political parties,
including those not participating in the election, to
make an effort to promote national unity.

We are of the view that a wide range of issues
related to human rights and justice must be resolved
not only for the fresh start of a nation but also for its
long-term stability and the reconciliation of its people.
We are deeply concerned about the more than 100,000
refugees who have gone without the help of
international humanitarian personnel for almost a year.
All human rights violators and other criminals in and
outside East Timor should be brought to credible
justice as soon as possible. We hope that constructive
collaboration between the new Indonesian Government
and the international community be indeed realized on
these issues.

The planning of a future United Nations presence
in East Timor after its independence will remain an
important issue in the Security Council in the latter part
of this year.

My delegation appreciates the continuing efforts
of the Post-UNTAET Working Group and the
Integrated Mission Task Force at Headquarters to
prepare plans for the future of East Timor. We fully
agree with the Secretary-General's temporary report on
the successor mission. While recognizing in principle
the need for a reduction of UNTAET, we believe that a
significant United Nations presence in East Timor
should continue in view of the general situation in
every field.

Regarding the reduction of the troop and police
components, we are particularly concerned about the
uncertainty of both the external and internal security
situations, which are difficult to predict at this time.
While we agree with the temporary overall assessment
contained in the Secretary-General's report, my
delegation would like to emphasize again that the
reduction should be implemented in a gradual manner
and with a carefully thought-out exit strategy.

After the election, we hope to be provided with
more detailed and comprehensive security and threat
assessments by the Secretariat. We also expect in
October more specific recommendations from the
Secretary-General regarding the successor mission to
UNTAET in the post-independence period, including
the reduced presence of United Nations peacekeepers.
We hope to continue to participate in these important
debates on East Timor and to be consulted, as
appropriate, throughout the decision-making process.

Let me conclude by expressing my delegation's
appreciation to everyone in the United Nations system
involved in the issues of East Timor for their hard work
and devotion during this critical juncture for East
Timor.

