Mr. Kubis (Slovakia): We welcome the fact that
the Security Council has reached a point at which it is
openly recognizing the significant security risks that
the wider implications of climate change will pose in
future. I would like to acknowledge the efforts of the
United Kingdom to introduce this theme into our
agenda.

Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement
that will be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of Germany on behalf of the European
Union. That is why I will limit my statement to some
specific comments.

The complexity of the climate system makes it
difficult to predict, but there is now an effective
consensus among the world's leading scientists that
there is a discernible human influence on climate and a
link between the concentration of carbon dioxide and
the increase in temperature. This is thus a good time to
consider the policy dimensions of climate change.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
has already finalized a new report that assesses the
current and future impact of global warming and
explores opportunities for proactively adapting to
them. The report concludes that the world's rivers,
lakes, wildlife, glaciers, permafrost, coastal zones,
disease carriers and many other elements of the natural
and physical environment are already responding to the
effects of mankind's greenhouse gas emissions.

The security implications of further climate
change entails, inter alia, the possible humanitarian
crises resulting from unusual weather changes,
including drought; energy shortages; possible
migration pressures; and overall societal stress in those
States that are heavily affected by climate change.

It is important to underline the scale of the
implications for the developing world. It is not difficult
to imagine the security, stability and health problems
07-30908

that will arise in a world in which there is increasing
pressure on water availability; where there is a major
loss of arable land and consequent food shortages; and
in which there are large-scale displacements of
populations as a result of flooding and other climate
change effects. And those factors will compound each
other. The poorest countries in the world will suffer
most from severe weather events, longer and hotter
droughts and rising oceans. Over the coming decades,
the Arctic, sub-Saharan Africa, small island States,
low-lying coasts, natural ecosystems and water
resources and agricultural production in certain regions
will be at particular risk.

Such threats and growing social stress can be
properly addressed only through international
agreements and their consistent implementation. Only
concerted action by Governments around the world can
successfully address the long-term challenge of
fighting climate change and stabilizing greenhouse gas
concentrations in the atmosphere, while preventing
severe global economic and political strains and
sustaining economic growth.

The 1987 Montreal Protocol, addressing the
challenge posed by the hole in the ozone layer, has
shown how quickly a global environmental problem
can be reversed once targets are agreed. Slovakia is, in
that respect, strongly committed to working with the
world's industrial countries and emerging economies to
reach emissions reduction targets after the first phase
of the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change ends in
2012.

We believe that emissions trading is one of the
most cost-effective ways of reducing carbon emissions.
The emissions trading scheme in Europe is of great
importance to overall targets in that respect, and the
establishment of the carbon-trading market is a
substantial achievement and will change the way
thousands of businesses think about their energy use. A
world-wide network of such schemes could push its
positive effects even further.

Other options exist for providing a stimulus for
the development and more extensive use of renewable
energy. We have to continue to support investments in
the innovation of new low-carbon technologies, and
there are also ways to consider nuclear energy as a
cleaner choice if we are to meet our carbon targets.
3

Those are some of the reasons why Slovakia has

approved the respective decisions taken at last March's

European Council meeting on energy, which

established binding European Union commitments

coping with carbon dioxide emissions and on greater
use of renewable sources of energy.

Security is only one of the factors to be
considered under the overall agenda for climate
change, but in this case it is well in line with Security
Council resolution 1625 (2005) on comprehensively
addressing the root causes of armed conflict and
political and social crises, as highly stressed societies
tend to be more violent societies. There is, in our
opinion, an indisputable role for the Security Council
in conflict prevention and in contributing to other
United Nations organs and agencies, where
appropriate. Notwithstanding what the other forums,
including the General Assembly, already deal with, the
Security Council is well positioned to incorporate that
new dimension of threat perception into its
considerations and ad hoc discussions, while remaining
within its mandate.

My delegation would like to suggest that the
Security Council request the Secretariat to include in
its future regular reports, under mandates provided by
the Council and where reasonable and substantiated, an
additional note on possible threats in the framework of
the subject of such a report that would be considered to
be a security implication of climate change.

Time will show how we can deal with the climate
change issue within the Security Council and where a
consensus of the international community will be
reached to address climate-related factors of instability
and security risks.

