Mr. Jeenbaev (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
becoming President of the Security Council, and I wish
you all possible success in this responsible post.

In speaking today, representing the country
chairing the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), I would like to note the importance of the
Indonesian delegation's timely convening of this
meeting on the role of regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security. We are convinced that under your skilful
leadership, Sir, the Council will achieve successful
results. Please allow me, Minister Wirajuda, on behalf
of the Secretary-General of the CSTO, Mr. Bordyuzha,
who because of certain obligations was unable to come
to New York, to convey words of appreciation for your
invitation to him to participate in today's meeting.

The Collective Security Treaty Organization
welcomes the opportunity offered by these debates to
speak on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, as well as on
ways to broaden the impact of such cooperation for the
successful attainment of our purposes and goals. We
note the importance of improving coordination
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
and we share the interest in finding ways to improve
this coordination as part of the continuing search for
joint efforts to identify useful and effective methods to
ensure international peace and security. We are
convinced that the work of regional and subregional
organizations in peacekeeping, with skilful
implementation, could help to strengthen possibilities
and encourage success in achieving the various
critically important purposes of the United Nations.

Today, regional organizations are assigned an
important role in conflict prevention and settlement, as
well as in post-conflict peacebuilding. Geographical
proximity and close historical and cultural ties between
their members give regional organizations comparative
advantages in better understanding the root causes of
regional conflict and in more successfully seeking
peaceful solutions to those problems. Recent
operations of the United Nations in support of peace
have been implemented in close cooperation between
the Organization and regional and subregional
organizations.

In this regard, I would like to briefly report on
recent decisions by the CSTO in the area of
peacekeeping.

The Collective Security Council of the CSTO
confirms its efforts to ensure collective security and
stability within the purview of CSTO and states its
commitment to the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, to the decisions of
the United Nations Security Council and to the
generally recognized norms of international law. Given
the importance of ensuring effective participation of
the CSTO and its member States in efforts to maintain
international peace and security, and considering that
the participation of the CSTO in peacekeeping
activities is an effective instrument for strengthening
its international positions, authority and political
influence in global and regional affairs, and also on the
basis of our founding documents, on 6 October 2007 in
Dushanbe, the CTSO approved the agreement on
CSTO peacekeeping activity.

Additionally, the Collective Security Council of
the CSTO adopted a decision on documents for a
normative and organizational structure, within the
CSTO, of a peacekeeping mechanism, including a
provision for collective peacekeeping forces of the
CSTO, a provision on an operations working group to
prepare CSTO peacekeeping operations and a provision
on the chief of the CSTO peacekeeping mission.

