Mr. Abdalhaleem (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, at the outset, to extend to you, Sir, my
congratulations for presiding over the Council this
month. We value the active role of your country, Peru,
on the international scene. The recent Latin American-
Arab Summit bears witness to that important and vital
role. We look forward to its continuation during the
coming summit meeting of Africa and Latin America.

I would also like to extend my thanks to the
previous President, the representative of Japan, for his
wise management of the work of the Council during
the last month.
06-61024

My delegation aligns itself with the statements by

the representative of Qatar on behalf of the Arab

Group, the representative of Cuba on behalf of the

Non-Aligned Movement, and Azerbaijan on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.

My country is following with serious concern the
development of the situation in the Palestinian
territories and the military practices of the occupying
authority, in which it uses internationally prohibited
weapons against populated areas and continues to
destroy and demolish houses and Arab land. It is also
imposing a policy of starvation and siege on the Gaza
Strip for lengthy periods, which will lead to further
deterioration and instability in the region and will
make it very difficult to reach a permanent peace.

Since the Palestinian people have freely elected a
national Government in a clear, democratic
environment, it has been subjected to collective
punishment because of its democratic choice. Israeli
policies and practices in the Gaza Strip have led to a
horrific deterioration in economic, social and
humanitarian conditions. More than 900,000
Palestinian civil servants have been affected by the halt
of external assistance to the Government. Israel has not
paid what it owes in taxes, customs and tariffs to the
Palestinian Authority, which is now more than
$500,000,000. Checkpoints and closures have led to
the destruction of Palestinian exports, the bankruptcy
of companies and displacement of their employees.
Other practices have besieged the Palestinian people
and destroyed their will to stand up to the occupier, a
steadfastness that they have shown for five decades.

Last week, Israeli tanks killed tens of
Palestinians, including a large number of women and
children, and injured hundreds in Beit Hanoun, in
Gaza, in a brutal attack on unarmed civilians, who
were mowed down mercilessly by Israeli tanks. This
incident is a continuation of the aerial bombardment
that Israel is carrying out against residential areas, in
addition to the extrajudicial killings and arbitrary
targeting of civilians, demolition of homes, destruction
of infrastructure and arrest and detention of
democratically elected officials. Even children were
not spared prisons. The report of the Committee points
to tens - in fact, hundreds - of Palestinian children
who have been detained and imprisoned in Israel.

In the West Bank, despite the clear and explicit
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice

that stipulates halting the construction of the separation
wall, the Israeli occupying authority continues to
construct the wall and build more than 550 barricades.
Israel practises all forms of intransigence, which is
reported by all forms of media and is having the worst
effect on Palestinian citizens, particularly the sick, the
disabled and the students and those who are facing the
worst kind of collective punishment and abuse by
Israeli soldiers. They suffer beating, have their clothes
removed and are forced to sit in mud or stand for long
hours under the sun or experience exposure to cold
weather and all forms of torture.

The political positions that give the Zionist entity
the unjust right to continue its barbaric aggression
against the defenceless Palestinian people under the
pretext of self-defence unjustly support this explicit
aggression. They give free rein to the Zionist entity to
continue its atrocities against the Palestinians.

My country condemns this aggressive Zionist
attitude and calls upon the Security Council, the
international community, all human rights institutions
and all peace-loving people to move urgently to
condemn this aggression and to put an end, by all
means possible, to the inhumane practices that are
perpetrated daily by Israel against the steadfast
Palestinian people.

The time has come for the international
community, the Security Council in particular, to
shoulder its responsibility vis-a-vis the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories and the indescribable
suffering of civilians. Decisive steps should be taken
immediately to force Israel to implement resolutions of
international legitimacy and to put an end to Israeli
practices against the unarmed Palestinian people and
their property by stopping its aggression in occupied
Palestinian territories and Jerusalem. Israel should
withdraw immediately from the Gaza Strip. An
international investigative committee should be
established to look into the massacre that was
perpetrated by the Israeli forces on 8 November 2006
in Beit Hanoun, Relevant United Nations agencies and
other organizations should send emergency
humanitarian assistance to the needy in the occupied
territory and force Israel to provide full compensation
for the harm that has befallen the Palestinians.

The international community, represented here in
this Council, should take immediate and urgent
measures to protect the Palestinian people and to force
Israel to implement without delay the General
Assembly's and the Council's resolutions that are
based on its withdrawal from the territories it occupied
in 1967.

We would like to remind Security Council
members that Israel is the only country in the world
that has no borders. That is because it is an entity based
on expansion.

