The Secretary-General: I should like to thank
Foreign Minister McCully for organizing this meeting
at a cruciall important time. Allow me to begin by
wishing all Muslims who celebrated this week Eid
Adha Mubarak.

I also want to reiterate my hope for the swift and
full recovery of former Israeli President Shimon Peres,
who has been tireless in seeking peace between Israelis
and Palestinians.

Twenty-three years ago, almost to the day, the
first Oslo Accord was signed between Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization. Unfortunately, we
are further than ever from its goals. The two-State
solution is at risk of being replaced by a one-State
reality of perpetual violence and occupation. Despite
warnings by the international community and the
region, leaders on both sides have failed to take the
difficult steps needed for peace.

Just yesterday, militants in Gaza fired yet another
rocket into Israel, which I condemn. Israel fired four
missiles at targets in Gaza in response. Once again, I
reiterate that such attacks and the response they elicit
do not serve the cause of peace. In the past two weeks
alone, plans have been advanced for yet another 463
housing units in four settlements in Area C of the
occupied West Bank. Official Israeli data shows that
the second quarter of 2016 had the highest number of
construction starts in three years. The decades-long
policy that has settled more than 500,000 Israelis in
Palestinian territory is diametrically opposed to the
creation of a Palestinian State.

Regrettably, the reporting period also saw the
continuation of statements by both sides that only
perpetuate an environment of mistrust. I am disturbed
by a recent statement by Israel's Prime Minister
portraying those who oppose settlement expansion as
supporters of ethnic cleansing. This is unacceptable and
outrageous. Let me be absolutely clear - settlements
are illegal under international law. The occupation,
stifling and oppressive, must end. The international
community, including the Security Council and the
Middle East Quartet, universally views the expansion
of settlements as an obstacle to peace.

I continue to be appalled that Palestinian parties
choose to praise despicable acts, such as the 1972
terrorist attack against Israeli athletes at the Munich
Olympics. The glorification of terror is disgraceful and
the Palestinian leadership must put an end to it.

As Palestinians prepare for the first local
elections in over 10 years, we see increasing threats
to the electoral process and the credibility of elected
institutions, including politically motivated attacks
and a growing number of questionable rulings. I am
particularly concerned by last week's decision of the
Palestinian High Court to suspend all preparations
while deliberations continue on a petition to cancel
elections. Local elections in the West Bank and Gaza, if
held in line with international standards, could provide
an important renewal of Palestinian democracy and a
first step towards advancing national unity. Regional
efforts to encourage reconciliation and strengthen
moderate political forces can also play a positive role.

Turning to Gaza, there has been progress in the
two years since the 2014 ceasefire. Houses, hospitals,
schools and critical infrastructure have been repaired
thanks to generous donors and good cooperation
among Israel, the Palestinian Authority and the United
Nations. At the same time, 65,000 people remain
displaced. More assistance is needed to rebuild nearly
5,000 destroyed houses. More coordination is required
to accelerate ongoing reconstruction. Since 2014, the
Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism has facilitated the
entry of more than 1.5 million tons of construction
material and helped significantly to boost imports into
Gaza, positively impacting the private sector.

Israel has legitimate security concerns with regard
to the smuggling or seizure of materials. Nevertheless,
the mechanism is closely monitored and all sides
continue to ensure that appropriate controls are in place
for aid to reach its intended recipients. I encourage
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to continue their
cooperation with the United Nations and facilitate the

import of reconstruction materials that are so Vital to
rebuilding people's lives, while ensuring that materials
are not diverted for military use.
Apart from reconstruction, Gaza's humanitarian
needs run deep. More than 1.3 million of its 1.9 million
people need of assistance. Continued humanitarian
access and funding services to the Palestinian
population in Gaza remain critical. In this dire
context, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
continues to face serious financial challenges. I appeal
to Member States for their generosity to ensure that
UNRWA can carry out its activities effectively and in a
predictable manner.

Looking at the broader situation, Gaza remains
under closures and is a ticking time bomb. Instability
and the risk of violent escalation are ever-present.
The continued arms build-up and militant activities
of Hamas and other radical groups keep both sides of
the border in a state of constant alert. The continued
humanitarian deprivations of Gaza's nearly 2 million
residents smother dreams and ambitions, and feed
instability and extremism.

The corrosive Palestinian political divide worsens
the humanitarian situation and stifles development,
and the absence of a Government of national unity,
espousing the principles upon which to build peace,
inhibits the realization of an end to the occupation and
the establishment ofa sovereign Palestinian State. In its
July report (S/2016/595, annex), the Quartet highlighted
these complex political, security and socioeconomic
dynamics in Gaza as one of the negative trends severely
undermining hopes for peace. Lasting progress in Gaza
can be realized only on the basis ofPalestinian unity, an
end to the illicit arms build-up and militant activities,
and a full lifting of movement and access restrictions in
line with resolution 1860 (2009).

Turning to the Golan, I remain concerned by
the continued breaches of the ceasefire line and by
fighting in the areas of separation and limitation. These
developments undermine the 1974 Disengagement
of Forces Agreement and jeopardize the ceasefire
between Israel and Syria. In particular, recent fire from
the Syrian Arab Armed Forces impacted the Israeli-
occupied Golan. On both occasions, the Israel Defense
Forces responded with an airstrike. I call on Israel
and Syria to abide by the terms of the Disengagement
Agreement and exercise maximum restraint.

In a matter of days, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians will meet here in New York. I encourage
both sides to focus on positive policy shifts, consistent
with the transition to greater Palestinian civil authority
in Area C, contemplated by prior agreements. To
this end, I welcome the parties' recent agreement on
outstanding electricity debts and the creation of a new
energy market, which will transfer authority to the
Palestinian Government for the management of energy
infrastructure. Such steps, echoing the intentions of
Oslo, are critical to the viability of a future Palestinian
State.

At the same time, international stakeholders
must continue to work towards a negotiated end to
the occupation, now entering its 50th year, and the
establishment of a viable, democratic Palestine living
in peace with Israel, each respecting the other's historic
and religious connections to this holy land. Building on
its report, the Quartet will continue its role to promote
consensus to that end.

I wish to thank my Special Coordinator, Nickolay
Mladenov, for his unwavering commitment and
continued engagement with the parties in what remains
a challenging context. For the sake of regional and
indeed global peace, we must intensify our efforts to
encourage the Israeli and Palestinian leadership to take
the difficult steps to change the destructive trajectory
currently leading us towards a one-State reality.

