Mr. Osman (Somalia): On behalf of President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo and the Federal Government of Somalia, I would like to begin by expressing my gratitude and appreciation for the strong leadership shown by the Permanent Representative of Belgium as President of the Security Council for this month. I would also like to welcome the new members of the Council - Tunisia, the Niger, Viet Nam, Estonia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines - and wish them every success in fulfilling their mandates. I would also like to take this opportunity to shine a light on and honour the 82 young lives that were cut short on 28 December at the Ex-control Junction in Mogadishu. Desperate attacks by terrorist groups do not diminish the resolve of the Government and people of Somalia as we continue in our quest for peace and stability. We thank the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for its sacrifices in that regard as it continues to fight alongside us.The Federal Republic of Somalia reiterates its unwavering commitment to continuing to work closely with the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia alongside AMISOM to ensure the transfer of primary security responsibility from AMISOM to Somalia. I therefore extend my gratitude to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ambassador Swan for his briefing as well as the increased understanding and close cooperation between my Government and the Mission. On the same note, I would also like to thank Ambassador Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of AMISOM, for his briefing and Mr. Dan Smith, Director of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, for his presentation on climate and the impact of climate change on security. The current Government, which took office three years ago, embarked on comprehensive and ambitious cross-sectoral reforms. Given the challenges that we inherited as a Government, we overcame considerable obstacles and achieved progress within an extremely short period thanks to the strong partnership between the Federal Government of Somalia, the federal member states and our international partners. Together, we have worked to tackle some of the threats to Somalia's peace and security. Our flagship reform agenda has been economic recovery through wide-ranging reforms with the ultimate goal of re-engaging with international financial institutions. Today that goal is very much within reach. We have achieved great success and undertaken unimaginable reforms, as we have made serious efforts to reconstruct and validate our external debt. To further set the conditions for achieving debt relief, the Federal Government of Somalia recently adopted the ninth national development plan, which will act as our interim poverty reduction strategy - a blueprint for our economic development over the medium term. The plan aims to address the root causes of poverty and provide sustainable measures to improve the impacts of poverty experienced by Somalis across the country. In that regard, Somalia welcomes the announcement by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank at their respective 12 and 13 February Board meetings of our eligibility for debt relief under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative. That is a historic step forward and we thank the members of the international community for their support towards that achievement. The decision point on debt relief is not an end to our quest for comprehensive economic reforms but, in fact, the beginning of a long-term process to steer our country out of poverty and to ensure that our people attain socioeconomic emancipation. It is not lost on us that further comprehensive reforms are still required to move from that decision point to the completion point. Today I assure the Council that the Somali leadership is committed to remaining steadfast and to concluding all necessary reforms to reach that goal. As members may know, under the new IMF programme, we have committed ourselves toa more stringent reform package. We believe that such a path will allow for foreign direct investment that will not only benefit all Somalis but also diversify our economy, create jobs and ensure the ability of the Government to directly fund the provision of basic services. We have recently focused on a number of private-sector development reforms, such as the development of Somalia's company law and the establishment of the Somali Bureau of Standards. This week we hope that Somalia will become the 182nd member of the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, which protects and insulates potential international investors against any political and security risks. The proceeds of the debt relief will enhance socioeconomic inclusion, decentralize service provision and act as the single most unifying factor across the political strata. Under extremely difficult circumstances, with the leadership of Prime Minister Hassan Ali Khayre, the Somali Government has made irreversible gains in security sector reforms. We have begun the task of reforming the Somali security forces, placing a special focus on their leadership, personnel, funding and logistics as we aim for able, affordable and accountable forces. The greatest success is perhaps the management of the resources of the Somali national security forces through a system that is cashless, auditable, trackable and verifiable. Indeed, that enhanced accountability framework has seen the partial resumption of direct support to some of our forces by the United States and increased technical and physical support to our military from Turkey. The Somali national security forces are currently in the midst of concluding the second phase of its reform plan, comprising a combination of human resources reform and investment in leadership. That will enable us to implement the newly approved pensions and gratuitybill, which is awaiting the signature of the President, as well the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration solutions that we have begun to pursue. Providing direct investment to the Somali security forces is the surest way for us to effectively and decisively deal with the threats that Al-Shabab poses to our citizens and allies throughout region, We have courageous, committed men and women in uniform who are willing to protect their people against a brutal enemy. However, we face shortages that, if overcome, would give our forces the requisite military advantage over an enemy that is desperately determined to survive. We have nevertheless continued to make use of the capabilities at our disposal, together with the support of our international partners, to step up the fight against the insurgents. Operation Badbado in Lower Shabelle, borne out of that collaboration, has had a great impact on the infiltration of vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices into the capital as well as on the necessary extension of governance and stabilization to that region. Similarly, in Lower Juba, the Somali National Army, supported by forces of the federal member states and our allies, has continued to push the terrorists out of their hideouts in preparation for wider clear-and- hold operations. The Somali National Army has also begun to play a role in supporting the peacebuilding efforts, the latest example being with regard to the intercommunal conflict in Towfiiq and Af Barwaaqo. Thanks to the dedication and rapid deployment of the Somali national armed forces, a ceasefire initiated an immediate peacemaking process that was spearheaded by the community elders of both communities, supported by the Federal Government of Somalia. To mitigate such threats, the Federal Government has been working together with the federal member states to closely monitor such disputes and clashes through early warning prevention mechanisms. As Somalia enters a_ critical phase of democratization, we require concerted efforts, both domestic and international, to unreservedly support the ongoing economic, political and security progress in order to ensure that vested interests do not find ways to undermine the tangible gains that we have made over the past few years. Regarding our social reform agenda, the Federal Government of Somalia has increased the budgetary allocation to social sector reform and development by 200 per cent. This Government has demonstrated a track record in responding to the needs of our citizens. As we transition from decades of instability and insecurity, our health service providers are now providing basic medical care at the point of use. Cultural identity relies on the memory of communities and individuals. Reviving our culture and heritage is a powerful tool for determining what the Somali people remember. After decades of conflict, the restoration of our symbolic cultural sites has instilled hope in the Somali people. We have renovated and restored many renowned landmarks, including a number of monuments, sports and cultural sites. The Federal Government continues to build an inclusive political process across the country. Our efforts in Galmudug have borne fruit. Through a lengthy State-building process that entailed months of reconciliation, negotiation and setbacks, the people of Galmudug have finally managed to form an inclusive regional legislative assembly, which led to the election of the Speaker and, later, the President of the state Government. The regional leadership now faces the task of amicably addressing outstanding issues, bringing any disgruntled stakeholders on board and uniting the citizens of Galmudug. The Government is committed to accommodating the democratization process and to continue building consensus around contentious issues requiring political debate going forward - a major shift from the norm that was built over the past two and a half decades. Politics is now becoming ever more issues-based, and future elections will be guided by programmatic linkages. In the regional context, Somalia stands ready to play its part as a member of the global community in our fast-evolving world. Somalia remains determined to achieve the region's common objectives to empower ourselves for the betterment of our people. We will do so while recognizing the inherent rights for mutual respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and unity, including Somalia's. Somalia believes the region can best succeed with more cooperation and less interference. That is why our President decided to play a leading role in the Horn of Africa initiative. As many members may be aware, the Horn of Africa's swift and crucial diplomatic turnaround was one of most significant and successful diplomatic developments in the African continent formany years. That development will indeed pave the way for long-term stability in the region and has the potential to attract investors to the region while at the same time preventing the destabilizing effects of regional disputes from spilling over into Somalia. The Government of Somalia therefore calls on all external actors, especially those in our neighbourhood who are Security Council-mandated, to cease interfering in our domestic affairs and, rather, support the hard- won gains on the political, security and economic fronts, which would be beneficial to the entire region. According to the Charter of the United Nations, Article 2, paragraph 4, "All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations." The current electoral discussions are now at fever pitch. My President signed into law the electoral model approved by both houses of Parliament, firmly signalling the type of year we should expect. Debate has begun in earnest, and we are aware that the path will require candid engagement with all the different Somali stakeholders. I would like to assure the Council today that we are bound by and will respect the principle that the elections be held on time and the transfer of power be peaceful and orderly. For the past three years, the rallying call of this Administration has been for a narrative change for Somalia, and for our partners to take greater risk in our country by believing in the hope and the spirit of the Somali people, who have endured so much. Since then, our collaborative relations have shown that real change happens when we work together to change mindsets, negate old narratives and make genuine tangible progress. I therefore urge our partners today to see us for what we can be. We must not be defined by our past challenges. The narrative of progression, positivity and reform that defined my Government over the past three years must be supported by all.
