Mr. Al Hussein: I thank those present for this
opportunity to discuss my continuing and grave
concerns regarding the human rights situation
in Burundi.

Despite some positive signals by the Government
in recent weeks following visits by a delegation from
the Council, by the Secretary-General and by five
African Heads of State and Government, as well as two
visits by the Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, Mr. Ivan Simonovie, and the most recent visit
of independent experts at the request of the Human
Rights Council, those signals have yet to be followed up
with strong and consequential action aimed at engaging
real reconciliation.
After a court hearing of their case, 47 detainees
who had been arrested almost a year ago were been
provisionally freed this week. Those 47 were on the list
of 125 detainees suggested by my Office for immediate
release. We see that as an indication that some effort is
being made to re-establish the rule of law. I strongly
urge the release of all ofthe others on the list, especially
political prisoners. As just mentioned by the Secretary-
General, the Government has further pledged to release
approximately 2,000 prisoners.

The Government has also taken steps to ensure
that one fully independent radio station can operate.
A second radio station, which has also reopened, is
not independent from the Government. That gesture
is encouraging, but falls well short of full freedom
of expression and information. The Government
cooperated with the team of independent experts
mandated by the Human Rights Council during its first
visit to Burundi earlier this month. The experts met with
military, police and intelligence officials, in addition
to victims and several representatives of civil society.
The secretariat of the independent expert team is due
to arrive in April for a four-month deployment, but the
Government's approval is still pending. It is crucial that
the investigative team be permitted to operate.

Despite indications of limited progress in some
areas, serious human rights violations continue. My
Office, which has presences in Bujumbura, Gitega,
Makamba and Ngozi, has detected no indication of any
decline in reports of arbitrary arrests and detention.
Indeed, 140 such cases have been recorded this month
so far, most of which were arbitrary. Moreover,
although the numbers are clearly imprecise, we have
seen increased reports of torture and ill-treatment
since the beginning of January. During a recent visit
by my staff to some detention centres in Bujumbura,
it appeared that almost half of the detainees had been
tortured or ill-treated - some of them seriously.

Despite the recent initial steps towards allowing the
operation ofa few independent media outlets, critical or
independent voices remain severely restricted. Political
opponents continue to be subjected to intimidation
and arrest. Six days ago, 16 leading members of the
opposition party, the Forces nationales de liberation,
were arrested in Kirundo province by police assisted
by Imbonerakure militia members associated with the
ruling party. On 9 March, Hugo Haramategeko, one
of the few national opposition figures remaining in
the country, also was arrested. Civil society continues
to operate within an extremely limited space, with
activists suffering judicial harassment, arrests and
torture, as well as violence and intimidation by agents
of the State or militia associated with the Government.
Since the violent events of December - involving
an armed attack against three military camps around
Bujumba, followed by reports of particularly brutal
crackdowns by security forces in a number of
neighbourhoods - two separate armed groups opposed
to the Government have emerged. Two members of the
ruling party, the Conseil national pour la defense de
la democratie-Forces pour la defense de la democratie,
were killed by gunmen on Monday.

Grenade attacks are an almost daily occurrence,
with grenades being thrown at police or military targets
or indiscriminately tossed into crowds of people. Last
month, Medecins sans Frontieres treated more than 115
people who had been wounded by grenades over the
course ofjust four days. I am very deeply concerned by
the lack ofprogress in investigating the multiple serious
human rights violations that have been reported over
the past year. I take note of the recently released report
of the commission of inquiry set up by the Ministry of
Justice and led by the Prosecutor-General to investigate
allegations of extrajudicial killings during the events of
11 December 2015. However, I urge further and much
more credible investigations into the alleged multiple
mass graves in the country, the torture, sexual violence
and killings that were reported in December and many
other serious allegations.

Continued human rights violations and impunity
for perpetrators mean that many of Burundi's people
live in terror. The country remains on the brink of a
sudden escalation of violence of even more massive
proportions. We have already seen hundreds of people
killed, thousands detained and over a quarter ofa million
Burundians fleeing to neighbouring countries. The
crisis has devastated Burundi's economy, compounding
the human rights violations suffered by the people, and
UNICEF reports that the number of children admitted
for severe acute malnutrition in Bujumbura has doubled
between October and December 2015. The crisis has
also created a major humanitarian emergency and
contributes to destabilizing the Great Lakes region,
with major implications for regional peace and security.
I note that the European Union (EU), which is
Burundi's largest aid donor, announced earlier this
week that it would no longer issue funds through or
to the Government. That action was taken in line with
article 96 of the EU-African, Caribbean and Pacific
trade agreement, which calls for the suspension of
development cooperation when essential elements,
such as respect for human rights and the rule of law,
are violated.

The Council has clearly recognized the urgency of
the situation in Burundi. I encourage it to continue to
work to persuade the Government to take significant
steps towards real reconciliation and inclusive national
dialogue. Half-measures will not heal the wounds that
Burundi's people have suffered. There must be an end to
disappearances, arbitrary arrests, extrajudicial killings
and torture, and there must be clear and public moves
to hold perpetrators to account, including agents of the
State and members of armed groups associated with
the ruling party. Such steps are vital to restoring public
confidence and to placing Burundi on the path towards
development, security, and respect for human rights.

