Mr. Kittichaisaree (Thailand): My delegation
commends the delegation of China for convening this
timely and important open debate on a comprehensive
strategy for the realization of peace and security in
Somalia. I would like to focus my statement on the
issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia.

Thailand has serious concerns about the problem
of Somali piracy, which has increased in scope, scale
and frequency. Thai fishing and commercial vessels are
at times hijacked by Somali pirates. Thailand believes
that Somali piracy is a symptom of various underlying
factors. In order to effectively address the problem,
such factors and root causes must be concurrently and
holistically addressed through short-, medium- and
long-term solutions.

Thailand believes that a long-term and long-
lasting solution to the Somali piracy problem can only
be achieved through the restoration of peace and
security in Somalia. The rule of law must be in place
and upheld. Economic development must be promoted
to offer employment opportunities as viable
alternatives to piracy. Sustained international and
regional aid and assistance for Somalia to help develop
its economy and eradicate poverty are crucial; as is
capacity building for Somalia, for it to achieve political
and economic stability and security.

A medium-term solution may be achieved in the
form of the Somalization of responses to piracy,
proposed by Mr. Jack Lang, Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General on Legal Issues Related to Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia, in his report (S/2011/30, annex). The international community should seriously
consider his 25 proposals, including the possibility of
setting up special courts, with two special prisons for
suspected pirates in Puntland and Somaliland. The
approximate cost of $25 million for establishing them,
as he proposes, should be shared by the United
Nations, the African Union, the European Union and
other organizations and stakeholders.

The cost of piracy to its perpetrators must be
raised to a point where piracy is no longer a relatively
low-risk, high-profit enterprise. To achieve that, the
problem of impunity must be addressed, and there is a
short-term solution: deterrence of the perpetration of
acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea through the
repression and prosecution of pirates and those
involved in piracy, including national and transnational
organized groups. Universal jurisdiction over piracy
and criminalization of acts proscribed by various
conventions and protocols should be useful tools for
achieving this objective. Another deterrent measure
that is already in place and that Thailand supports
appears in several Security Council resolutions:
imposing certain arms sanctions, travel bans and assets
freezes of those individuals and entities engaged in
perpetuating the instability in Somalia, including those
who may be supporting or engaged in acts of piracy.

For Thailand's part, between 8 September 2010
and 14 January 2011, the Royal Thai Navy (RTN)
dispatched its Counter-Piracy Task Group, comprising
371 Royal Thai Navy personnel with two naval vessels
together with two airlift helicopters and two RTN
Special Operation Units, to participate in the
Combined Maritime Forces patrolling in the
Internationally Recommended Transit Corridor in the
Gulf of Aden and off the coast of Somalia. On
28 February this year our experts participated in the
meeting of the Working Group 3 of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, chaired by the
United States, to discuss strengthening shipping self-
awareness and protection and other capabilities in
order to coordinate international efforts to combat
piracy in the Gulf of Aden and off the coast of
Somalia. I myself will be one of the panelists at the
meeting organized by the Permanent Observer Mission
of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization
on 16 March to address the topic of "Piracy: Legal and
Policy Issues" here at United Nations Headquarters.

Thailand hopes that our concrete contributions
have helped alleviate the problem of piracy off the
coast of Somalia. We look forward to further dialogue
and cooperation to develop a coordinated international
strategy for combating piracy in all its dimensions,
including the attainment of the long-lasting peace,
stability and prosperity of the nation and people of
Somalia.

