Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert
for the work she has done and for her briefing.

Recently, thanks to the joint efforts of all parties,
Iraq has maintained overall security and stability.
Progress has been made on the formation of the
federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government. The processes of national reconciliation
and reconstruction have been advancing steadily.
The Council conducted its first visit to Iraq in June,
thereby providing firm support to Iraq for its efforts
to ensure economic recovery, peace and stability,
national reconciliation and reconstruction. In the spirit
of mutual respect, equality, mutual benefit and win-win
cooperation, Iraq is developing friendly relations with
all neighbouring countries and strives to ease regional
tension. In that regard, China would like to express
its appreciation.

China welcomes Iraq's handover of the human
remains of Kuwaitis exhumed from the Samawah
burial site and expects the two sides to continue close
cooperation on the matter. In the meantime, Iraq
remains at a critical stage of consolidating counter-
terrorism results, achieving peace and stability and
taking forward national reconstruction. All parties
should fully respect Iraq's sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity and firmly support the efforts
of Iraq.

First, support for Iraqi efforts to consolidate its
counter-terrorism results and safeguard its national
security must continue. Although Iraq has made
tremendous sacrifices in the international fight against
terrorism, it continues to face the threat posed by
terrorist remnants. Efforts should continue with a view
to settling the issue of internally displaced persons in
Iraq, in the light of the conditions and reconstruction
process in the country. Iraq's handling of foreign
terrorist fighters and their dependants deserves strong
support. The international community should fully
respect the jurisdiction of Iraq and support the country
in bringing terrorists to justice in accordance with its
relevant domestic law. The United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant should
conduct its work according to its mandate and in close
consultation with the host Government.

Secondly, support for inclusive political dialogue
and the national reconciliation process in Iraq should
continue. China welcomes enhanced relations between
the federal Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
Regional Government, looks forward to the conclusion
of an agreement on oil revenues, income distribution
and security arrangements as soon as possible, and
welcomes the constructive role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in that regard.
The international community should support and
facilitate the inclusive reconciliation and harmonious
coexistence of all Iraqi parties, in line with the
fundamental interests and development needs of all
Iraqi people. That will also have a positive effect on
regional peace and stability.

Thirdly, vigorous efforts should be made to
facilitate Iraq's economic recovery and expedite its
reconstruction. China commends the Iraqi Government
for its commitment to improving its business
environment to actively attract foreign investment
and for issuing its first report on the implementation
of the Government's national development plan for
the period 2018 2022, which helps promote economic
reconstruction and development. China welcomes the
memorandum of understanding signed by UNAMI
and the Iraqi Government to establish the Iraq
Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Trust Fund, in
support of the Government's recovery and development
framework. The international community should fulfil
its commitments in earnest and continue to provide
support for Iraq's efforts to explore a development path
compatible with its national conditions.

China supports any and all efforts that help maintain
peace and stability in Iraq combat terrorism and
supports UNAMI in continuing its work according to
its mandate. China will continue to actively participate
in Iraq's reconstruction in sectors, such as energy and
infrastructure, under the framework of the Belt and
Road Initiative. To the best of its abilities, China will
provide assistance to Iraq for its economic and social
development and help Iraq achieve peace, stability
and development.

