Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We would like to thank the
Indonesian presidency for organizing this debate, and the
Secretary-General, Lieutenant General Martins Filho
and Mr. Holmberg for their comprehensive briefings.
We also appreciate the presence of Her Excellency
Mrs. Marsudi, Foreign Minister of Indonesia, who was
with us here this morning.

Peacekeeping has always been one of the
essential tools available to the Security Council for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
That has been the case since the early 1950s, and
peacekeeping missions have been remarkably
successful in many ways. At the same time, in recent
years much has changed. The objectives and functions
of United Nations peacekeeping have changed
considerably over the years, and that has of course
had a significant impact on the training and support
required for peacekeepers. United Nations missions can
now be tasked with a much wider range of protection
activities, which can include military activities such as
ceasefires, withdrawals of foreign forces, cantonment
and force disarmament and demobilization. They may
also have to deal with national reconciliation, refugees,
humanitarian relief and local administration as well
as numerous other tasks. All of that means that the
mandates for peacekeeping missions must be carefully
and effectively defined, with clearly designated aims
and proposed achievements.

Investing in training and capacity-building
activities is critical to improving both the safety and the
performance of peacekeepers. Training and equipment
determine performance. Ethiopia, for example, has
well-established military and civilian training systems
for peacekeeping deployment. We strongly believe that
risks to the safety and security of peacekeepers can
be controlled and managed though effective training
and appropriate manoeuvres. That can also be applied
to enhancing the capacity of peacekeepers to deal
with threats to civilians, whether in or outside their
operational areas.

In addition to training and capacity-building for
peacekeepers, providing peacekeeping missions with
realistic mandates and sufficient resources remains
critical to their success. All missions need a combination
of uniformed and civilian peacekeeping personnel and
the capacity to use equipment effectively to facilitate the
implementation of the mandate. Another requirement
is strong and competent leadership at all levels, along
with proper coordination, and that must also include
United Nations Headquarters. All of that is very
necessary for adequate peacekeeping performance. In
that connection, I want to emphasize that the Security
Council, the troop- and police-contributing countries,
Member States and the Secretariat must work together
to provide the necessary conditions for the deployment
of well-trained and properly equipped uniformed
personnel. The commitment to supporting the effective
development and provision of peacekeeping training
must include meeting the requirements for preparing
personnel prior to their deployment.

On the one hand, United Nations peacekeeping
missions are facing growing demands for greater
professionalism and delivering ever-increasing results.
That is simultaneously coupled with demands that
they ensure cost-effectiveness and operate with fewer
resources. That is simply not realistic. Mandates and
resource requirements for missions must be balanced
if they are to achieve their aims. It is only then that
the Security Council, the Secretariat and contributing
countries can assess and identify problems, address
gaps and determine the actual impact of delivery
and performance. The fact is that the capacity to
finance peacekeeping and the associated political
processes, and support it with the adequate provision
of technological capabilities, can make the difference
between success and failure for a mission. I want to
emphasize that Ethiopia understands from extensive
first-hand experience that peacekeeping operations
must be provided with adequate financial and human
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of
their mandated tasks. That must include the provision
of equipment and other assets. Gaps in capacity
and capability are major impediments to creating
peacekeeping operations that are fit for purpose.

Innovative approaches such as triangular
partnerships and co-deployments may help to change
some of the mistaken views of the performance of
troop- and police-contributing countries. For example,
Ethiopia is working closely with various partners,
including Indonesia, to prepare itself more effectively
for current and future global and regional peace and
security challenges. I want to underscore a comment
about the challenges we are facing made in the report
by former United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant
General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz entitled
Improving security of United Nations peacekeepers:

"The blue helmet and the United Nations flag no
longer offer 'natural' protection. Peacekeeping
environments now feature armed groups, terrorists,
organized crime, street gangs, criminal and
political exploitation and other threats."

Ethiopia has seen that first-hand in the African Union
Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei, the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
we believe that the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative will provide a new impetus for
addressing the evolving challenges of peacekeeping
more effectively. I can also assure the Council that
Ethiopia is determined to remain at the forefront in
providing support for peacekeeping, including in
partnership with other troop- and police-contributing
countries. It will continue to supply well-trained
and -equipped uniformed personnel, with a greater
participation of women. Ethiopia currently has 800
women peacekeepers deployed in various missions.

