Mr. Toure (spoke in French): I have the honour to
speak before the Security Council to present the report
(S/20l6/675) of the Secretary-General on developments
in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNOGBIS). Today's meeting marks the second
since the Security Council visited Bissau. As if there
were a need to, that shows the particular and sustained
attention that the Council accords to Guinea-Bissau.

As I address the Council, ongoing consultations are
being pursued in order to break the deadlock prevailing
in the People's National Assembly. The Assembly has
yet to consider the Government's programme, although
it has been in place for nearly three months. The normal
legislative process, which should lead to the convening
ofa plenary session to discuss the programme, appears
to be paralysed. Since its first unsuccessful meeting,
on 28 July, the Standing Committee of the National
Assembly, an organ that is designed to prepare, inter
alia, the agenda of the plenary session, has been unable
to meet owing to the decision of the majority party,
the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cabo Verde (PAIGC), to suspend its participation in
those efforts. Among the reasons that the PAIGC has
given for that is the arrest of a member of Parliament
with parliamentary immunity and the need to clarify
the status of members of Parliament who were expelled
by the party in January.

Faced by this impasse, the President of the National
Assembly launched a mediation initiative between the
parliamentary groups of the two main political parties,
namely the PAIGC and the Party for Social Renewal
(PRS). On 16 August, the President of the Assembly
invited the African Union, the Economic Community
ofWest African States (ECOWAS), the European Union
and the United Nations to a meeting during which he
shared the results of this initiative, his analysis of the
situation and his proposal to end the crisis. He asked
the organizations to convey his proposal.

The next day, representatives of those organizations
and I met with President Jose Mario Vaz to discuss the
opportunity ofa dialogue that would be carried out with
our support. The President of the welcomed the initiative
and assured us of his willingness to explore solutions
that could help resolve the crisis. Subsequently, we
conducted a series of consultations with all the political
parties represented in Parliament, the Prime Minister,
the Supreme Court, the group of 15 expelled PAIGC
members of the Assembly, as well as civil society and
religious and traditional leaders. The consultations
sought to gather the views of national stakeholders on
the current situation and explore solutions for a way out
of the crisis.

Other steps have also been taken, which include
compiling of a list of 57 signatures of members of
Parliament, including those of the PRS, that was sent
to the Speaker of the National Assembly on 22 August,
to convoke a plenary session. Since 26 August, the
PAIGC and PRS have started negotiations to reach
consensus in order to end the political deadlock. We
strongly welcome that initiative and count on the sense
of responsibility of the leaders of both parties as well
as that of the entire political class of Guinea-Bissau
for a definitive way out of the crisis in the very near
future. It is important to underscore that, in the absence
of a programme bearing the imprimatur of those
elected by the people, accompanied by a corresponding
budget, it will be difficult for the Government to
undertake essential reforms for the sustainable return
to institutional stability and implement policies and
strategies to boost inclusive economic growth and
address the real problems of Guinea-Bissau, namely,
combating poverty and improving the living conditions
of the people.

(spoke in English)

As part of the efforts of UNIOGBIS to assist
in resolving the political crisis, I have continued to
engage with multiple stakeholders in furtherance of the
Secretary-General's good offices, including through
meetings with regional Heads of State to advocate
for support to Guinea-Bissau. I also convened several
meetings with ECOWAS, the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the
European Union, as well as with key bilateral partners
and national stakeholders, to promote the coordination
of mediation efforts to break the political gridlock. I
have been greatly encouraged by the commitment of all
international partners to remain engaged in the country.

I am pleased to note the collective commitment
by national stakeholders to engage in dialogue. The
ongoing political impasse can, and must be, resolved.
The parties to the crisis should be urged to honour
their commitment to make the necessary sacrifices
and concessions needed to end the parliamentary
stand-off and put the Government machinery back on
track. In that regard, I call upon the political leaders
to put aside partisan considerations and focus on
the national interests, as well as the welfare of the
suffering population.

I am also pleased that the military continues to
demonstrate restraint and neutrality in the face of
the political stalemate. Many of them look forward
to receiving pledged support for their demobilization
and socioeconomic reintegration. For the sake of the
stability of Guinea-Bissau, we must not fail them.

While addressing the current impasse remains
the immediate priority, breaking the stalemate should
also provide an opportunity for the political actors of
Guinea-Bissau to reflect on ways of ending the recurrent
cycle of institutional paralysis and ensuring sustainable
stability. That can be achieved only through genuine
and inclusive dialogue among the citizenry. Such an
exercise has the potential to stabilize institutions and
pave the way for tackling related priorities, including
justice and reconciliation, the reform of the defence and
security sectors and the fight against drug trafficking
and other forms of transnational organized crime.

In that connection, it is heartening to note that
preparations for the National Conference are on course.
Earlier this month, a delegation of the Organizing
Commission for the National Conference, with funding
from the Peacebuilding Fund, visited Timor-Leste to
learn fromthat country's experiences innational dialogue
and transitional justice processes. That experience will
no doubt feed into the impending dialogue.

As we all know, there is no development without
stability. The path to stability in Guinea-Bissau will
require a pragmatic and integrated approach. That
means that, in addition to the current focus on achieving
stability from the top down, we should also invest
energy and resources to foster stability from the bottom
up. To that end, I call upon the donor community to
consider allocating more resources to the social sectors,
including health and education, and to programmes that
empower women and create opportunities for our youth.

The people of Guinea-Bissau are resilient, peaceful,
decent and hard-working. All they aspire to is to improve
their daily lot and overcome the harshness of poverty.
Those aspirations should not be held back or constrained

by political contingencies. While we continue to work
with the Bissau-Guineans for the return to full stability,
we should design resilient policies and programmes for
their benefit that would be impervious to fragility and
instability. The people of Guinea-Bissau are counting
on the support of the Security Council and that of the
international community at large.

