Mr. Ben Mustapha (Algeria) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to welcome Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Mr.
Haekerrup's very first visit to the Council is taking
place at a particularly sensitive time in the context of
developments in Kosovo, and in a crucial phase for the
region. We would like to thank him for his very clear-
sighted and detailed presentation of the Secretary-
General's report on the activities of UNMIK, which
shows how far we have come and also how much
remains to be done.

Today's meeting is all the more important
because it is taking place in the wake of talks that
began earlier this month on this question. Indeed, the
information provided to members of the Council in the
course of visits by the Secretary General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Prime Minister of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, along with today's report of the Secretary-
General, has provided us with a comprehensive
overview of the situation and specifies UNMIK's short-
term priorities.

In this connection, we welcome the fact that Mr.
Haekerrup has decided to set up, as priority objectives
for the coming months, a legal framework with a view
to achieving provisional self-government before the
holding of general Kosovo-wide elections, and to
continue with the implementation of an effective law-
enforcement system and the promotion of an
independent and impartial judicial system.

The achievement of these objectives will require
the commitment of all ofthe communities in Kosovo as
well as close cooperation with all of the parties
concerned, including the establishment of a
constructive dialogue with the Belgrade Government.
In this respect, we welcome the fact that UNMIK will
soon open an office in Belgrade, and we believe that an
important step has just been taken towards establishing
regular channels of communication, with a view to
successful cooperation between the international
community and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

My delegation welcomes the efforts to develop a
legal framework for substantial autonomy, namely
through the setting up of an internal Working Group.
We are convinced that the active participation of all of
the parties concerned would provide balance as well as
a guarantee of success for this operation. We call upon
all of the parties to assume their responsibilities and to
cooperate within this group, with a View to
implementing Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
It is also important to ensure the success of the voter
registration operation. The drawing up of accurate and
complete electoral lists for the upcoming elections is
one of the keys to the success of the entire operation
and will provide it with the necessary support and
legitimacy for its implementation.

We believe also that the effective implementation
of the results of the municipal elections and the gradual
transfer of responsibilities to municipalities would
prepare the population of Kosovo to take full charge of
its affairs, with a view to assuming total autonomy in
future. Thus we approve of the efforts of UNMIK to set
up an efficient, responsible and politically impartial
civil service.

We are also pleased with the economic progress
that has been achieved in recent months in Kosovo.
The transition from an emergency reconstruction phase
to a new phase of maintaining economic stability is
remarkable, especially if we look at the achievements
that have been registered in the area of the management
of the consolidated budget, the establishment of basic
public services and the institution of a liberal trade and
monetary regime.

In order to maintain the gains achieved by the
international community in Kosovo, we believe that it
is urgent to put an end to the violence. The continued
ethnic and political tension is seriously jeopardizing
efforts aimed at reconciling the ethnic communities and
is undermining the efforts of the international
community. It is crucial that all the leaders in Kosovo
work with resolve in order to eradicate the violence.
Their commitment to a tolerant, non-exclusive and
democratic society will be a example for young people
and will pave the way for inter-ethnic reconciliation in
Kosovo.

Furthermore, my delegation is deeply concerned
at the continuing acts of violence in southern Serbia as
well as at the border with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. In this respect, we believe that
the deployment of the Yugoslav army in the safety zone
should take into consideration the concerns of the
Albanian civilian population living in that zone.
Indeed, we feel that this measure of trust given to the
Yugoslav Government should be followed up with
better cooperation with UNMIK, namely as concerns
releasing Albanian prisoners who are still detained in
Serb prisons and lowering tensions in Kosovo.

The question of refugees and displaced persons is
crucial in the search for a lasting solution in Kosovo.
We must therefore ensure the return of refugees in
satisfactory conditions, namely by improving security
in minority communities. This question is all the more
critical given that returns are often spontaneous in
nature. In this context, we welcome the efforts of the
United Nations agencies that are contributing
effectively to meeting the needs of those vulnerable
groups.

In conclusion, I should like to pay tribute to Mr.
Haekkerup for his efforts at this very delicate stage of
the settlement of the question of Kosovo, to assure him
of the full support of my delegation, and to wish him
every success in his new duties.

