Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the President and Uruguay for its leadership on the
issue of the protection of civilians, both here in the
Security Council by convening this debate and also in
peacekeeping, where Uruguay has played such a strong
regional and international role. I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Beerli and Ms. Rooijmans for
their briefings. Let me offer my profound respect and
admiration for the heroic, lifesaving work that Oxfam
and the International Committee of the Red Cross, as
well as their volunteers, perform every day in Syria and
in other conflict-areas around the world.

Last Thursday, the UNICEF representative in
Syria, Ms. Hanna Singer, managed to penetrate into
the besieged area of Madaya and was brought to the
basement of a makeshift hospital. Two teenage boys
were sharing a bed. Singer recalled that their bodies
were skeleton-like. A UNICEF doctor approached one
of the teenagers, a 16 year-old named Ali. He looked
particularly weak. When the doctor checked his pulse, it
turned out there was none. The doctors started trying to
resuscitate him, but saw that it was hopeless. According
to Singer's account, given to Agence France Presse, the
other young man lying next to him became frantic: "Did
he die? Did he die?" he asked. Ali's family, themselves
malnourished and sitting nearby, wept silently. They did
not even have the energy to wail aloud upon realizing
that their boy had died.

Ali was one of at least 35 people who have starved
to death in the town of Madaya since 1 December,
eight of them in the past nine days alone. Um Sultan, a
resident of Madaya, told Amnesty International,

"Every day, I hear that someone is sick and unable
to leave their bed. My husband is now one of them.
He can't leave his bed, and when he does, he faints.
I don't recognize him any more; he is skin and
bones. I have asked for help with food, but no one
can help. We are all in the same mess."

Convoys of food and medical assistance were just
recently permitted to reach the 40,000 people suffering
in Madaya and the 20,000 people besieged by armed
opposition groups in Fu'ah and Kafraya, Evacuations of
some of the hundreds of people reportedly near death
have finally begun. It goes without saying that this is
absurdly overdue. These aid convoys must continue
these evacuations; they must be urgently allowed to
proceed, but, above all, the sieges, the daily sieges of
these communities, must be lifted. I speak of Madaya
as others have done today because the crisis there is far
from over for the people living there. As we enter the
United Nations today, all of us, we experience the first
truly bitter cold day of the winter. Now imagine burning
the wooden fixtures and fittings in one's home for some
respite from that bitter winter. Imagine burning plastic,
as those who have run out of wood to burn have started
to do. Imagine surviving for weeks on leaves and grass
and then imagine winter coming and taking with it the
leaves and grass on which you relied. Imagine being
the mother or the father of a teenage boy like Ali, and
watching your child die without the means of helping
him or her.

We have to try to put ourselves here in the shoes of
others. We have to. These families love like our families
love. They are human beings, and they need us to do
more than we have done up to this point. They need
the medical evacuations that the United Nations has
asked for, which are being agreed to at a trickle. That is
unacceptable. There are 15 besieged areas: two of them
besieged by armed opposition groups; one besieged
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL); and
the rest, 12 of the 15 besieged areas, besieged by a
Member State of the United Nations. Think ofthat. The
United Nations was created to prevent crimes against
humanity, to prevent atrocities, to prevent images of
emaciated children and civilians from being projected
out of areas in need. Twelve of 15 by a Member State of
the United Nations.

Now I speak of Madaya also because it exemplifies
what this debate is about. It reminds us of the human
stakes when we talk about the protection of civilians.
And it shows why we have to talk about the protection of
civilians regardless of whether or not peacekeepers are
deployed in a particular area. And it reminds us, above
all, of the growing disregard for granting humanitarian
access, which used to be a principle that was observed
as a general rule, even though there were always
exceptions, the disregard for international humanitarian
law and, most fundamentally and most disturbingly, the
apparent disregard for human life. That is what we are
dealing with - a numbing that would allow people to
inflict that kind of harm willfully on civilians and on
children.

More than 4 million Syrians now live in areas where
the United Nations struggles to deliver assistance.
Time and again the Syrian regime has promised to
uphold its most basic responsibilities to its citizens.
Time and again it has agreed to allow lifesaving aid to
reach starving people, and time and again the Syrian
regime has failed to follow through. Throughout last
year, Damascus did not even bother to respond to
more than half of United Nations requests to deliver
assistance across conflict lines. And those coutries in
the United Nations that have influence over the Syrian
regime, who are partnering with it now in the conflict,
who are coming in some places to its rescue, please
use that influence to get it, in the first instance, to
respond to United Nations requests and, above all, to
grant those requests. The United Nations estimates that
if the regime approved the outstanding requests - the
requests outstanding just today - 1.4 million people
would receive assistance.
It bears stressing that, while we have all rightly
talked about the use of starvation as a weapon of
war here today, that use of food as a weapon of
war is happening right alongside other horrific
tactics - barrel bombs, chemical weapons use and
systematic torture against civilians by the regime, and,
of course, when it comes to ISIL, some of the most
barbaric and gruesome tactics that we have ever seen
employed, including the use of children to execute their
parents, including the summoning of civilians, as we
saw over the weekend in Deir ez-Zor, with somewhere
between 100 and 300 people executed in cold blood,
and the sexual enslavement of women like Nadia,
whom we heard from in December at our meeting on
human trafficking, Where is the sanctity of life? Where
is the respect for the human dignity of the person in
conflict today? Yemen, South Sudan, Central African
Republic, Burundi - the list goes on and on. Civilians
are not just going unprotected, but often are coming
under deliberate attack.

Let me briefly suggest three areas in which
we - and by we I mean the Security Council, the
United Nations and we each as Member States - can
and must seek immediate improvements.

The first should be straightforward. It is on the
transmission of information. When United Nations
staff leaders and experts, or when any of us as Member
States through our partners on the ground, recognize
looming threats or anticipate potential crises, they
or we must immediately inform the Council. When
something shocks the conscience of someone who
works for a non-governmental organization or for the
United Nations or for a Member State, come forward
again,jump up and down, sound the alarm. The Council
must also hear immediately from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) when peacekeeping
contingents that are tasked with protecting civilians do
not fulfil that component of their mandate. As has been
documented, that happens too often. In that instance,
we in the Council can try to use our leverage, our
leverage in capital in terms of our bilateral ties and our
leverage as a Council, to ensure that appropriate action
is taken.

Building upon the Secretary- General's implementation
report on the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (S/2015/682), DPKO should also work to
more systematically bring to the Council's attention
the most pressing protection challenges and strategies
needed to address them. Shine the spotlight back on us,
rather than internalizing the constraints that may well
exist; put it back on the Council, where it belongs.
The second area is peacekeeping performance
and accountability. With nearly all peacekeepers now
mandated to protect civilians, they represent one of our
most powerful tools in this effort, even if they cannot
be, and are not, everywhere. It is incumbent upon the
Council to ensure that all contingents are appropriately
prepared and sufficiently trained and equipped, and
that they are held accountable if they fail to uphold their
mandate.

From the outset, we must ensure that the mission
planning process takes full account of the protection
of civilians. This priority should inform strategy
development and resource allocation. We must also
ensure that the troops being deployed are adequately
prepared. Others have touched upon the importance of
the Kigali Principles, and we share the appreciation for
the initiative taken by Rwanda. The United States is
prioritizing support for troop-contributing countries
that have committed to the Kigali Principles, or who
have otherwise demonstrated a commitment to fully
implementing mission mandates. Once deployed, the
United Nations leadership must be prepared to replace
any contingents that are not effectively protecting
civilians, and certainly also any that would harm
civilians, including through sexual exploitation and
abuse. The additional 50,000 soldiers and police pledged
at the September peacekeeping summit gives the United
Nations new choices and the ability to replace failing
units. This option must be exercised, and, in that regard,
we welcome the United Nations decision to remove the
Democratic Republic of the Congo peacekeepers from
the Central African Republic, as an important signal of
zero tolerance on abuse. Full accountability is needed
across that and other missions for all the allegations
that have surfaced.

Thirdly, and finally, this Council and this
Organization must also recognize that its responsibility
for the protection of civilians is not limited to those
countries hosting peacekeeping missions. From
Madaya to Burundi, when civilians come under threat,
the Council must consider every appropriate action at
its disposal. We may disagree on what the perfect tool
is, but we must agree that we need to open the toolbox
and try to put as many tools in place as have a chance
at achieving influence. That could include sustained
bilateral pressure, the development of mediation
and peacekeeping options, and the consideration
of sanctions against those who are perpetrators or
organizers of attacks against civilians - or attacks
against peacekeepers.

We need to think of how many peacekeepers were
attacked in 2015 and ask how many of those who
attacked United Nations peacekeepers - the very
people sent by the Security Council - were ever held
accountable, ever. And we need to look at that record
over a decade. The answer is a show of the impunity
that the perpetrators of attacks against peacekeepers
feel, and we can imagine, if that is the case for those
coming from Member States of the United Nations sent
by the Council, what it is like for the average civilian
who has been attacked.

We can also increase, as I think we have been doing
lately, Security Council engagement with regional
organizations, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Individual Member
States, each with its particular bilateral relationships
and capabilities, must also consider all the relevant
tools in our respect toolboxes.

Member States and all parts of the United Nations
must also embrace the Secretary-General's Human
Rights up Front initiative, which means recognizing
once and for all that mainstreaming human rights across
the Organization is not a luxury, it is a necessity. It is
not something that is nice to do, as some Member States
and some within the Organization have suggested, it is
an absolute need - if we are serious about protecting
civilians.

In conclusion, today's open debate is an opportunity
to discuss how to better protect civilians, which is an
urgently needed conversation. But through it I hope we
also send an equally urgent message: no matter how
frequent, heinous or blatant the assaults on civilians,
whether in Syria or elsewhere, the Security Council
will never accept them as the new normal, as somehow
inevitable. Starving civilians, burning villages,
sexually enslaving women: these are not the costs of
war or the inevitable consequences of war; these are
heinous, wilful, barbaric acts. They are the acts that
the Organization was created to prevent. The Council
must remain committed to combating them. It must do
more to combat them. We must do better at ensuring
accountability for those who inflict harm upon civilians
or those tasked with aiding civilians.

