Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): We are
pleased to see you, Madam President, presiding over this
meeting. Your presence with us today is an illustration
both of the importance of the peacebuilding theme and
of that which Colombia and all of us attach to building
solid and lasting foundations for peace and security
through socio-economic development.

(spoke in English)

I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
for the work he has done in fostering peacebuilding as
an essential component of the United Nations work.
I also thank Ambassadors Gasana and Momem for
their statements on the past and current work of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I also welcome the
presence with us today of the Vice-President from the
World Bank.

Allow me to touch upon three issues that should
continue to merit our attention in the near future,
namely, the relationship between the PBC and other
United Nations bodies; the partnership with external
actors; and resource mobilization.

As many previous speakers have said, enhancing
the PBC's institutional linkages with the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council has been one of the most important
undertakings of the Commission. That is a natural
consequence of the diversity of challenges that it has to
address and of the need to muster political support from
the wider membership. We are convinced, in particular,
that the PBC is in a unique position to perform its
advisory role to the Security Council, especially with
regard to countries that are on the agenda of both
bodies. As the Council has already recognized, security
and development are closely interlinked. The PBC is
naturally suited to offer a comprehensive perspective
on the root causes of conflict and on the multiple
challenges in post-conflict scenarios. An integrated
approach that takes into account the close interrelation
between security and development as pillars of
sustainable peace should be seen as an important added
value of the PBC.

A coherent mix of peacebuilding and peacekeeping
activities is also a powerful tool to ensure that short-term
stabilization will be matched by a greater capacity
to deal with medium- and long-term challenges to
security. The better a State is equipped to address social
and economic strife, the more it will be able to avoid a
relapse into conflict. In that regard, the perspectives of
the PBC can be valuable in a variety of areas, such as
in security sector reform; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes; the economic inclusion
of women; youth employment; the management of
natural resources; and the restoration of basic services
and economic revitalization. We therefore hope that the
synergy between the Security Council and the PBC will
be continually strengthened, including through more
frequent interactive dialogues and the participation of
PBC Chairs in discussions that are of interest to both
bodies.

Furthering a stronger relationship with regional
organizations and United Nations missions is of
the utmost importance to ensuring a more in-depth
perspective on the reality on the ground and closer
involvement with local stakeholders. The annual
report (S/2012/70) demonstrates that the pool of PBC
partners has been expanded lately. It is up to us to
maintain the momentum. The case of international
financial institutions should be singled out. The
World Bank, the African Development Bank and the
International Monetary Fund have been pivotal in
helping post-conflict countries to improve economic
management, jump-start economic recovery and access
much-needed financial support.

That brings me to my last point, namely, the
mobilization of resources. As we are all aware, the
countries on the PBC's agenda usually have to overcome
situations that generate a perception of high risk on the
part of donors, investors and international institutions.
It is our role is to help them find ways of increasing
the level of attention from the international community
and garner the necessary resources to develop national
capacities and to maintain stability.

We hope that today's discussions will be a further
step in enhancing the relationship between the PBC and
the Security Council. We also expect that it will help
the Commission to play an even more meaningful role
in the United Nations system.

As Chair of the Guinea-Bissau country-specific
configuration, as well as a member of the Organizational
Committee, Brazil reiterates its commitment to our
common efforts to assisting countries emerging from
conflict to achieve peace, stability and socioeconomic
development.

