Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by
extending my delegation's appreciation to Australia for
convening this open debate. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, the Chair ofthe 1267 Committee
and the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee for
their briefings.

Indonesia associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of the Islamic Republic
of Iran and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

The convening of this open debate is timely, given
the steady momentum and assortment of threats posed
by terrorist organizations in the past few months,
particularly by the murderous group that calls itself the
"Islamic State." Indeed, the rise of the so-called Islamic
State, along with other forbidding developments in the
realm of terrorist groups in various parts of the world,
calls for more robust and integrated counter-terrorism
cooperation. It is extremely critical for us to stay a
long way ahead of terrorist groups. We must be able
to identify new challenges and anticipate developments
that might need a fresh look or approach.

In 2006, we all agreed on the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, which remains the comprehensive
strategic policy framework for counter-terrorism
cooperation. While I reiterate Indonesia's advocacy
of a balanced implementation of the Strategy, I would
like to stress that pillar I of the Plan of Action in the
annex to the Strategy needs to be accorded continuing
special priority. Pillar I deals with measures to address
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.
Against that backdrop, Indonesia is very much in line
with the idea in the concept note for today's meeting
(S/2014/787, annex), which emphasizes the importance
of de-radicalization and counter-radicalization.
Terrorism and other forms of extremism arise out
of pure hatred and bigotry. The resulting sense of
superiority over others offers terrorists and other
extremists the justification to do whatever they please
in order to achieve their intended goals.

In the face of that menace, Indonesia reaffirms that
preventive measures are among the best approaches for
addressing terrorism and extremism. In that context,
we have been an ardent advocate of promoting the
values of tolerance and respect, as critical components
of our efforts to counter the ideology of violence. And
as a multicultural and multi-faith country, we have
learned to believe strongly in the efficacy of dialogue.
Tolerance and respect must be nurtured, as they can
only be cultivated in open minds and fertilized by
education and interaction.

Opening the minds of convicted terrorists
forms the backbone of Indonesia's deradicalization
programme. It is a nationally-integrated programme
aimed at coordinating all relevant stakeholders in
de-radicalization efforts, and includes not only law-
enforcement agencies, but also religious authorities
at the Government and community levels. Our
deradicalization efforts begin in the prisons and
detention centres. Through dialogue and discussion,
we seek to instil the principle of moderation in the
convicted terrorists. We even facilitate discussion
between them and moderate clerics in order to ensure
that deradicalization achieves its objectives. Our broad-
range deradicalization programme also includes efforts
to rehabilitate convicted terrorists and prepare them for
reintegration into society.

Let me make it clear that deradicalization is a
complex programme with enormous challenges. Hard-
core terrorists, for example, are extremely difficult to
re-educate and reintegrate. In some cases, the effort to
reintegrate them carries the high risk of putting them
in a position where they can attempt to spread their
extreme views to other prisoners. That is one reason
behind the inauguration of a deradicalization centre
earlier this year in Indonesia. The centre will serve not
only as a venue for the de-radicalization programme,
but also for research and training in de-radicalization
issues.

Internationalcooperationisincreasinglyinstrumental
in our fight against terrorism. In that regard, I wish to
reiterate Indonesia's support for the primary role of
the United Nations in orchestrating global counter-
terrorism cooperation. We remain convinced that
the United Nations can and should play a stronger
role in building States' capacities to implement the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, including through
deradicalization and counter-radicalization.

Along that line, allow me to highlight the cooperation
between Indonesia and your country, Australia, as
Co-Chairs of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum's
Detention and Reintegration Working Group. I wish to
recall the message of the Working Group's inaugural
meeting, held in Indonesia in August earlier this year,
which underlined the importance of sharing countries'
experiences, expertise and best practices in capacity-
building for deradicalization, counter-radicalization
and detention-management for convicted terrorists.

Indonesia also believes that dialogue is an
effective antidote to the complex challenge of foreign
terrorist fighters. As part of our preventive measures,
the Government has aligned itself with religious
organizations and community leaders to detect and
counter appeals to become a foreign terrorist fighter.
Meanwhile, as part of our law enforcement efforts,
we have also increased surveillance over Indonesians
who travel into conflict areas. We are also stepping
up cooperation with relevant overseas authorities for
early detection, should an Indonesian citizen become a
foreign terrorist fighter.

To conclude, Indonesia would like to highlight
the fact that foreign terrorist fighters continue to take
advantage of situations of conflict, instability, and
political turbulence. The obvious challenge before the
United Nations is to work, without delay, to resolve
conflicts throughout the world and help establish peace
and prosperity.

