The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on the
next phase in the deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), as contained
in his report of 16 October 2001 (S/2001/970).

"The Security Council supports the
initiation of phase III of the deployment of
MONUC within the currently mandated ceiling
and, in particular, its deployment towards the east
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council reminds the parties
to the conflict that they are responsible for the
continuation of the peace process. It is up to them
to create and to maintain conditions conducive to
the start of phase III of MONUC by fully
implementing the commitments they have
undertaken. The Council will take its decisions on
the future of phase III of MONUC after
ascertaining that the parties to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement (S/l999/815) are committed
to continuing, in a spirit of partnership, to make
the efforts necessary to advance the peace
process. The next meeting between the Security
Council and members of the Political Committee
established by the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
will provide an opportunity to discuss these
issues.

"The Security Council recalls the
importance it places on the implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and the relevant
resolutions of the Council. In particular, the
Council calls on those States which have not yet
done so to withdraw from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in accordance
with the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and the
relevant Security Council resolutions; calls on all
parties to cease any support for armed groups and
to implement the process of disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration of the groups referred to in annex A,
Chapter 9.1, of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement;
emphasizes the importance of the inter-Congolese
dialogue and calls on the Congolese parties to
work together for the success of this process; and
demands the demilitarization of Kisangani, in
conformity with its resolution 1304 (2000).

"The Security Council expresses serious
concern at the worsening humanitarian and
human rights situation, particularly in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and reiterates its call for all the parties to urgently
address the human rights abuses, including those
raised in the ninth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2001/970), in the Government-controlled
territory, the territory controlled by the Front de
Liberation du Congo and the territory controlled
by the Rassemblement Congolais pour la
Democratic."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2001/29.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

I should like in closing to express the
appreciation of the Council for the continued excellent
support that we have received from our colleagues in
the Secretariat, including today, United Nations Day.

The meeting rose at 1.40pm.
