Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to welcome Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, to the Security Council
and to thank her warmly for her briefing.

As we do every year on 9 May, today the States
members of the European Union celebrate Europe Day
in honour of the shared project that they have brought
to life together since the signing of the Treaty of Rome
more than 60 years ago now. The decision to hold this
annual meeting of the Council on the cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union
on this symbolic day is anything but trivial. It reflects
the closeness of two organizations that share the
same values and whose areas of joint intervention
are constantly increasing. It is also testament to the
huge importance that the United Nations has for the
European Union in its conduct of its external policies,
as shown by Ms. Mogherini's presence in New York
today, on this special day for all Europeans, and I thank
her for it once again.

Today the European Union is a major player
in peacekeeping and a strategic partner of the
United Nations in that area. As with other regional
organizations, its role is becoming ever more central
to the implementation of peacekeeping operations,
whether through financing, military contributions or
political support. The European Union's numerous
missions, military and civilian, within the framework
of its common security and defence policy, help to
implement Security Council decisions in many regions
of the world. That is particularly the case in Europe
itself, where, for example, it contributes to the stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to strengthening
the rule of law in Kosovo; in Africa, including in
Mali, the Niger, the Central African Republic and
Somalia, where it helps to strengthen African crisis-
response capabilities structurally and provides crucial
funding for African peace-support operations; and in
responding to cross-cutting threats through its efforts
to combat migrant smuggling in the Mediterranean and
maritime piracy off the coast of Somalia. I could give
many more examples.

We should keep in mind the financial contribution
that European countries make to peacekeeping
operations, covering 40 per cent of the total budget
for peacekeeping - but also on the human front, as
in Mali, for instance, where more than 1,000 European
Blue Helmets are working with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali with unprecedented means at their disposal. More
broadly, the European Union intervenes in support of
peace and security by using the full range of its tools
within a global approach designed to promote political
solutions and address the underlying causes of conflicts
and terrorism in depth. That makes it entirely consistent
with the Secretary-General's vision for action by the
international community throughout cycles of conflict,
from prevention to peacebuilding.

The European Union is also a core partner of the
Security Council in its efforts to reach lasting solutions
to the major crises on its agenda. Some examples of that
include the Syrian issue, where the European Union
has added its voice to those emphasizing the urgency
of resuming inter-Syrian negotiations with a view to
setting up a political transition that accords with the
provisions of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). That
can be achieved only in an environment where there is a
sustained cessation of hostilities and free, unhindered,
consistent access to humanitarian aid.

Another such example is in Libya, where the
European Union is deployed alongside the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya in a major effort
to enable the Presidential Council of Prime Minister
Serraj to combat the threat posed by the growing
presence there of terrorist groups. In addition, through
the European Union Sophia military operation in
the Southern Central Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR),
deployed in international waters off the Libyan coast,
and based on the relevant Council resolutions, the
Union is also helping to fight migrant smuggling and
strengthen the implementation of the arms embargo
on Libya.

A third example is the crisis in Ukraine, in which
the European Union has pursued a policy of dialogue
and firm support for the work of the Normandy group,
whose efforts will continue in the months to come. The
European sanctions are intended not as punishment
but rather as encouragement to the parties involved
to implement the provisions that the Security Council
has endorsed to bring about an end to the crisis, that
is, the package of measures for implementing the
Minsk agreements.

Lastly, the European Union is a leading actor in the
response to the global migrant crisis. In the face ofwhat
appears to be the greatest crisis of displaced persons
and refugees since the end of the Second World War, in
which we must show both solidarity and responsibility,

the European Union's proactive efforts are too often
downplayed or misunderstood. It continues to be by
far the biggest provider of humanitarian aid to refugees
around the world. Its operations, with EUNAVFOR
Sophia in the forefront, have saved the lives of tens
of thousands of people in distress in the waters of the
Mediterranean and have been combating the migrant-
trafficking networks in the Mediterranean.

The EU is not ignoring the importance of tackling
the underlying causes ofthe issue, as it has demonstrated
through the priority it has given to financing for
development in implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and its major financial
support to countries of origin and transit. To cite just
one example, the European Union contributes well over
50 per cent of governmental assistance to development
globally. So while it cannot solve the migrant crisis
on its own, it contributes its full share of political,
security, financial, moral and human responsibility in
attempting to respond as effectively as possible.

Finally, I would like to echo a remark of
Ms. Mogherini's and note the deep attachment that
France, and our community of nations as a whole, has
to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and its full
implementation, which represents one of the greatest
challenges of our time and which needs all of our
engagement. I would like to conclude by emphasizing
once again a fundamental point of convergence between
the United Nations and the European Union, which is
their shared commitment to multilateralism and a world
where the law is stronger than mere might. That is one
of the elements that go to make the European Union one
of the pillars of today's international order, far beyond
its role as a regional organization.

