The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, document 5/2007/331.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2007/361, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.
2

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1759 (2007).

In connection with the resolution just adopted, on
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized
to make the following complementary statement on
behalf of the Security Council.

"As is known, the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (S/2007/331) states in paragraph 11:

'... the situation in the Middle East is tense
and is likely to remain so, unless and until a
comprehensive settlement covering all aspects
of the Middle East problem can be reached.'

"That statement of the Secretary-General
reflects the view of the Security Council."

That statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2007/20.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.15 a.m.
07-38877

