Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to thank the Chairmen of the three Committees, the
Permanent Representatives of India, Germany and
South Africa, for their comprehensive briefings and
ongoing efforts with all members of the Security
Council to promote international counter-terrorism
cooperation. I would like to make the following
comments.

First, with respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities, we commend the measures adopted by
consensus by the Security Council in resolution 1989
(2011) to enhance the transparency and fairness of the
working methods of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee
and to guarantee the fundamental rights of the
individuals and entities on the sanctions list. Those
objectives will be achieved, in particular, by promoting
and enhancing the mandate of the Ombudsperson,
whose recommendations for the listing and de-listing
of names have now essentially become decisive. That
will put an end to cases of arbitrary listing.

The number of requests submitted to the
Ombudsperson to date attests to her important role. We
therefore believe it necessary to provide the
Ombudsperson with all the logistical resources
required to carry out her duties and fulfil her mandate.

We also commend the efforts of the Committee
and its Monitoring Team, which have led to the
publication, on the Committee's website and in the six
official languages of the Organization, of the reasons
for the listing of all names. We further emphasize the
importance of continuously updating the consolidated
list and removing the names of individuals with
insufficient identifying information, as well as the
names of entities that have ceased to exist. That will
help to promote the reliability and accuracy of the list
and enhance the implementation of sanctions by
various States. In the same context, we believe it
necessary for the Committee to justify all of its
decisions. Lebanon insists that sanctions always be in
compliance with the Charter of the United Nations and
its human rights provisions.

Secondly, with regard to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), we commend the efforts of Committee and its
Executive Directorate to promote the legislative and
institutional capacities of States to combat terrorism,
which continues to develop in various forms and
means. We also encourage continued dialogue,
cooperation and coordination with States and regional
organizations to implement resolution 1373 (2001) and
other relevant resolutions, because combating terrorism
can be complemented by national, regional and
international measures.

We welcome the 2011 global survey on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by Member
States (S/20ll/463, annex), which evaluated the
progress achieved in implementing that resolution in
various geographic areas. It addressed the developing
challenges and risks and discussed existing gaps in
implementation and how to tackle them. We look
forward to the issuance of a similar study on the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005) by the end of
this year.

We also emphasize the importance of the meeting
of this Committee on the tenth anniversary of its
establishment, which provided an opportunity for all
States and international and regional organizations to
express their position on counter-terrorism. We call for
taking into consideration the various points of view
offered during that meeting in the next stage of the
Committee's work.

Thirdly, I turn to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We welcome the
most recent report of that Committee (S/2011/579) and
its tenth programme of work. We emphasize the
importance of supporting and cooperating with it in
order to achieve the objectives set out in resolution
1977 (2011). We especially support current efforts to
implement operational paragraph 5 (b) of that
resolution.

With Lebanon's membership in the Security
Council coming to a close, it is important for us to
stress the importance of paragraph 17 of the final
document on the Committee's 2009 comprehensive
review (S/2010/52, annex), which discusses the
importance of efforts that can be carried out by States
in implementing resolution 1540 (2004) after their
membership on the Committee has ended.

We also commend the efforts of the four Working
Groups, on Monitoring and National Implementation,
Assistance, Cooperation with International
Organizations, and Transparency and Outreach. We
further find that the assistance provided by the
Committee and expert groups to countries that request
it is more than a principal factor in the implementation
of the resolution. That assistance also enhances the
exchange of expertise and capacity-building for taking
effective measures at the national level to prevent
terrorists and non-State actors from reaching sensitive
materials and technologies related to the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, whether nuclear,
chemical or biological.

We would like to remind members of the efforts
of the League of Arab States in this context and to
emphasize the importance of making the Middle East a
zone free of such weapons. We welcome the
appointment of a facilitator to prepare for the 2012
conference on establishing a zone free of nuclear
weapons and weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East, in implementation of the action plan set
out in the Final Document of the 2010 Review
Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.

Lebanon knows very well the dangers of
terrorism because of the attacks it has suffered over so
many years. We emphasize our continued constructive
cooperation with the three Committees and our full
support for international efforts to combat terrorism.

Furthermore, in the face of continued horrible
terrorist attacks today, which have also targeted United
Nations offices and its various bodies, we are more
convinced than ever that the success of counter-
terrorism efforts will above all require addressing the
root causes of terrorism and the removal of the factors
that nurture it by eliminating areas of tension and
double standards in the implementation of international
legitimacy, as well as by putting an end to foreign
occupation, ignorance and poverty. We also encourage
promoting the culture of acceptance of others, along
with dialogue between various cultures and religions,
as an indispensable tool for the success of
anti-terrorism efforts.

