The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Brazil, Canada, Indonesia,
Japan, New Zealand, Portugal, the Republic of Korea
and Sweden in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Wensley
(Australia), Mr. Fonseca (Brazil), Mr. Heinbecker
(Canada), Mr. Widodo (Indonesia), Mr. Akasaka
(Japan), Mr. MacKay (New Zealand), Mr. Brito
(Portugal), Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea) and Mr. Schori (Sweden) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Xanana Gusmao,
President of the National Council of Timorese
Resistance, and to Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Member of
the Transitional Cabinet of East Timor responsible for
Foreign Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Gusmao to take a seat at the Council
table.

I invite Mr. Ramos-Horta to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/436, which contains the interim
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).

On behalf of all Council members, I would like to
welcome Xanana Gusmao and Jose' Ramos-Horta's
participation in this meeting. The Council has talked
about the concept of Timorization and hearing directly
from the two of them is a tangible reflection of that
process, going a step further than we did in January,
when Mr. Ramos-Horta participated with Sergio Vieira
de Mello in the Council discussion leading to the
decision to extend the mandate of UNTAET.

There are other significant East Timorese voices,
including those of the leaders of the newly registered
political parties. It will be important for UNTAET to
ensure that the full range of East Timorese views is
communicated to the Council, especially in the post-
election period. We look forward to welcoming soon
East Timor's participation in the Council, not under
rule 39, but as a full-fledged Member of the United
Nations.

In that regard, I would note that Council members
have agreed that Mr. Gusmao and Mr. Ramos-Horta
will speak before Council members and other Member
States take the floor. We have a full programme to get
through in a limited period and we will try to move
along quickly.

I give the floor to Mr. He'di Annabi, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.


