Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, Mr. President, my delegation congratulates
you on having convened this debate on the role of civil
society in conflict prevention and the pacific settlement
of disputes. Also, I am grateful for the constructive and
interesting statements by the representatives by civil
society who are with us today: Mr. Paul van Tongeren,
Mr. Andrea Bartoli and Mr. Vasu Gounden. I thank
them for their statements, which will help us adapt to
what is a new framework for the United Nations and
for the Security Council.

Since the inception of the United Nations, the
way in which societies evolve has been changing. This
has been especially true in recent decades as new
actors have been incorporated into the national
decision-making processes, which had previously been
conducted exclusively by Government representatives.
As a consequence of this evolution, consultation with
civil society is today an element that cannot be avoided
in a nation's decision-taking process.

This evolution is positive because by giving
decisions a better substantive base it contributes to
better identifying priorities and allocating resources
with a broader social consensus. This unquestionably
leads to greater legitimacy for a Government's
decisions.

At the international level something similar is
happening; the participation of civil society at the
United Nations, especially in recent years, has been
constantly growing. Here, Argentina supports many of
the recommendations set out in the report of the Panel
chaired by former President Fernando Henrique
Cardoso of Brazil (A/58/817). This participation is
translated into greater influence by public opinion,
which has in turn brought greater democratization to
the international system, at the same time helping to
strengthen multilateralism.

The world today is much more interlinked than in
the past. So, unfortunately, are conflicts. It has become
evident that, by itself, a direct response to violence can
eliminate neither the underlying conflict nor its causes.

The Security Council has therefore begun to
develop new means of responding to conflict. Thus, it
has modified classic concepts regarding sanctions and
peacekeeping operations, which are now much more
complex and more multidisciplinary, and has begun to
venture into areas such as human rights, development,
election monitoring and post-conflict reconstruction.
We recall that our recent reform created the
Peacebuilding Commission to provide a solution for
armed conflicts that goes beyond the military and
extends to all areas in order to achieve lasting peace.

In the future, it is very possible that the
international community will have to move towards
acting before conflicts, not after them; that is to say,
acting preventively and proactively before conflicts
develop. It is not enough to limit peacekeeping to
rebuilding a damaged community; it is obviously better
to try to avoid a conflict before it erupts.
In that context, it is appropriate to ask ourselves:
what is the role of civil society in conflict prevention?
As we know, a conflict expresses tensions existing
within a society. The task of preventing those tensions
from being channelled into violence requires that all
sectors of a community be involved. States have the
primary responsibility to protect their populations.
However, conflict prevention goes beyond the State
level and involves all of society's actors, not only
Governments. It does not diminish, but rather
increases, the responsibility of Governments towards
their own citizens, since it includes the obligation to
gather and take into consideration public opinion,
which naturally includes the views of civil society
organizations.

Various civil society actors have prominent roles
in that process. Public opinion is among the most
important elements, but let us recall that there are
others. In the framework of the Global Compact, for
example, private sector activity is important. It can
often contribute to post-conflict reconstruction and
should be utilized in such areas as small-arms
monitoring, ensuring compliance with Security
Council-imposed sanctions and the sustainable
exploitation and legitimate trade of natural resources.

A successful peacebuilding phase is the best
guarantee for preventing the recurrence of conflict, as
we said. Hence, the Peacebuilding Commission will be
a valuable tool for interaction with civil society,
particularly with women and communities, given their
role in creating sustainable conditions for peace and
reconciliation.

Another question that we should ask ourselves is:
what role does civil society play in the work of the
Security Council? Its influence is indisputable. How
can we fail to recognize that warnings from many non-
governmental organizations have helped the Council
more than once to prevent potential massacres? How
can we deny that inaction following such warnings has
led to tremendous catastrophes?

We believe that the Security Council should
systematically incorporate the contributions of civil
society into its analytical processes. Today, there are
various useful mechanisms for doing that. The easiest
is simple consultation. Council member States can and
should consult the opinion of members of civil society,
not only in order to hear their points of View, but also
to better evaluate their positions. A customary
mechanism is, as we know, the Arria formula, which
has already become a classic tool of the Security
Council. My country believes that more frequent use of
the formula will undoubtedly strengthen the Council's
preventive role. Establishing more regular and more
formal cooperative frameworks for work with civil
society organizations, not only in the Security Council
but also in groups of States, will serve to strengthen
preventive work.

In conclusion, Argentina shares the Secretary-
General's view that, in a world of interconnected
threats and opportunities, we must respond effectively
to current challenges and defend the cause of larger
freedom. We will be able to do that only through
extensive, profound and sustained global cooperation
among all States, which will undoubtedly include
relations of effective cooperation with civil society.

