Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for his briefing and assure him of my country's full
support in his new role and wish him every success.
I also thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia
and the Ambassador of Kosovo for their statements.
I take this opportunity to express to them France's
gratitude for the messages of solidarity of the Kosovar
and Serbian authorities following the heinous attacks
on our country on 13 November.

France welcomes and supports the political
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo under the auspices
of the European Union. As the Special Representative
noted, the signing, on 25 August in Brussels, of four
bilateral agreements is a significant step forward. We
are pleased that the first concrete steps have already
been taken, such as the launching of the construction
work on the Mitrovica bridge.

However, it is crucial that the parties continue to
mobilize without reserve their efforts to fully implement
the agreement. We will, in that regard, be attentive to
the developments following the decision of the Kosovo
Constitutional Court to postpone until next January the
possibility of adopting the agreement on the association
of Serb-majority municipalities. In our view, that
agreement is a key mechanism that enables the Serb
population to fully embrace their Kosovar citizenship
and to stop viewing themselves, wrongly, as foreigners.
Its creation will not call into question the unitary status
of the country. Kosovo's authorities must pursue their
efforts to reconcile with Serbia on this score, all the
while stepping up outreach to the population.

The efforts to consolidate the rule of law in Kosovo
must remain more than ever a priority. That entails, first
and foremost, unconditional respect for the functioning
of its institutions. Recent months have been marked by
a series of particularly serious incidents in the form of
attacks against members of the Government or even
physical attempts to impede the work of the Parliament,
as we saw yesterday. Such acts of violence are quite
simply unacceptable. They endanger the advances so
patiently built up by Kosovo for more than 10 years
on its path to constructing an independent, modern
and democratic State. We therefore call on all Kosovar
political actors to abstain from all forms of violence.
The consolidation of the rule of law also entails the
fight against impunity. After the Kosovo Assembly's
adoption in August of a series of constitutional
amendments that authorized the establishment of the
specialist court to follow up allegations of war crimes
contained in the Marty report, it is important that the
specialist court be put in place as soon as possible.

The consolidation of the rule of law also ultimately
requires the fight against radicalization in all its forms.
France commends the actions taken by the Kosovar
authorities in support of the fight against violent
extremism. Their mobilization on that front is critically
important in our collective fight to combat terrorism.
We intend to pursue our bilateral coordination efforts
in that realm. I would also like to take this opportunity
to reiterate our support for the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo, which is working day by day to
support the rule of law and security in Kosovo.

I should also like to recall the European position,
which recognizes all the Balkan States as a whole.
The signing on 27 October, in Strasbourg, of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement between the
European Union and Kosovo signals an important step
that confirms the European Union's full commitment
to supporting Kosovo in its implementation of the
reforms that are an indispensable part of its pursuit of
rapprochement with Europe. The Agreement will be
an essential tool for strengthening our cooperation in a
great number of domains, particularly in the economic,
commercial and political spheres. The measures for
their implementation should be put in place at once.
Matters relating to the rule of law, justice and internal
affairs will be under particular scrutiny within that
framework.

In recent years, Serbia, for its part, has undertaken
important efforts to draw closer to Europe, whether
through internal reforms or by improving relations with
its neighbours. We encourage it to continue the full
implementation of agreements already concluded with
Pristina, and reiterate our willingness to see it accede
to the European Union as soon as possible, when the
conditions have been met.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing the
importance of both the Serbian and Kosovar authorities
taking the high road in sorting out their differences and
concentrating on efforts to normalize their relations,
which represents a fundamental requirement for the
stability of the region as well as the strong demand of
their respective peoples.

