Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),
Ambassador Nestor Osorio, for his briefing on the work
of the Committee. We note the high professionalism
and effectiveness of the leadership of the Chair and the
Colombian delegation as a whole. Under the Colombian
chairmanship, the Committee has acted in a balanced
and objective manner and has not overstepped its
mandate. That must continue in the future.

We thank the Committee's Panel of Experts for
its concrete assistance. The Russian delegation has
always believed that the Panel must work impartially
and independently and be guided in its conclusions and
evaluations only by reliable and objective information.

Russia fully upholds all Security Council
resolutions concerning Iran. We remain convinced
that the effectiveness of the sanctions regime, and of
the collective and united activities of the international
community as a whole to settle the situation of Iran's
nuclear programme, are undermined by unilateral
restrictions applied in parallel. In a number of cases,
they are extraterritorial in nature, which is categorically
unacceptable under international law.

With respect to ensuring the implementation of
sanctions, we stress that the 1737 Committee has
received no reports recently of any implication of Iran
in the illegal trafficking of conventional weapons, as
noted in the midterm report of the Panel of Experts.

Russia has consistently called for a political and
diplomatic settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue, and
believes that there is no alternative to a negotiated
solution. Efforts to that end must be undertaken on the
basis ofthe principles ofconsistency and reciprocity and
in accordance with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. We call for intensified dialogue
between Iran and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and the continuation of the Six-Party
talks. We hope that the next round of talks between Iran
and the IAEA on the so-called proposed investigation
will allow the two sides to conclude work on a document
on modalities and to begin practical activities on that
basis as soon as possible.

In cooperation with its partners, Russia shall
continue to strive to achieve progress towards a
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue.

