Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor and deliver this
statement on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

At the outset, we wish to convey, on behalf of
the States members of the Movement, our respect to
His Excellency Mr. Mark Rutte, Prime Minister of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands, and to express our
gratitude to his delegation for convening this high-level
open debate on such an important issue. We are also
grateful for the concept note (S/2018/184, annex) that
has been circulated to guide our discussions today.

We also take this opportunity to recognize the
diligence with which the delegation of the State of
Kuwait, a member State of the Movement, presided
over this organ during the brief but intense month
of February.
In addition, we thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
Ms. Fatimata Toure for their valuable briefings.

Anything that concerns improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is a matter of vital importance to the
Non-Aligned Movement, in view of the fact that
88 per cent of peacekeeping personnel deployed on the
ground come from non-aligned countries. Throughout
our statement in this open debate, we will therefore
emphasizetheneedforeffectivetriangularconsultations,
or rather a renewed and revitalized alliance of shared
responsibility among the Security Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat, in
order to perform objective assessments and harness the
potential of peacekeeping mandates and operations.
Such an alliance could result, among other things,
in the formulation of clear and viable mandates that
reflect the scale of existing challenges on the ground,
but only if such cooperation is continuous, substantive,
representative and meaningful, including before the
renewal of mandates.

In that regard, the action plan resulting from
the Santos Cruz report on improving the security of
United Nations peacekeepers, of which we take note,
provides a good basis for jointly responding to issues
of concern and the common challenges we face, as
well as for defining a long-term strategy, ensuring that
peacekeeping operations can address the realities on
the ground.

The States members of the Movement reiterate their
commitment to promoting the peaceful settlement of
disputes, in accordance with the provisions of Article
2 and Chapter IV of the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as with all relevant United Nations resolutions
and international law as a whole, in order to contribute
to strengthening international peace and security and
to save future generations from the scourge of war
and armed conflict, including by strengthening the
role of the United Nations in the peaceful resolution
of disputes, the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
the promotion of trust, national reconciliation and post-
conflict peacebuilding, rehabilitation, reconstruction
and development.

While there is agreement on the fundamental role
that United Nations peacekeeping operations have
played in achieving security and sustaining peace,
as indicated in the concept note (S/2018/184, annex),
we emphasize that, in the context of an integrated
approach and with the objective of lasting peace and
security, the implementation of all mandated tasks
must be supported and accompanied by an inclusive,
parallel and comprehensive political peacekeeping
process that is well planned and carefully designed,
based on national ownership and the support of the
international community, as well as the consent and
adherence of the parties concerned. In other words,
peacekeeping operations should not be used as an
alternative to addressing the root causes of conflicts or
to manage conflicts.

It is worth noting that during the seventeenth
Summit of the Movement, held in 2016 in Venezuela,
our Heads of State and Government reaffirmed their
principled position on peacekeeping operations,
which must be carried out in strict compliance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. They also stressed that respect for
the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of States, as well as non-interference
in internal affairs, are fundamental elements of joint
efforts to promote international peace and security.
In doing so, they reiterated that respect for the basic
principles of peacekeeping - primarily the consent of
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
cases of self-defence and defence of the mandate - is
essential to the success of peacekeeping operations.

As reflected in the Santos Cruz report, performance
affects the security of peacekeeping personnel.
However, when dealing with the issue of performance,
it is the performance of missions as a whole, and not
only that of their contingents, that should be evaluated.
Guaranteeing the effective implementation of mission
mandates is the responsibility of the interested
parties and is subject to a variety of critical factors,
including but not limited to viable, realistic and well-
defined mandates; political willingness, leadership,
performance and accountability at all levels; sufficient
financial and human resources; and policies, planning,
guidelines and operational training. In addition, we
reiterate our support for the Secretary-General's zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.

In addition, the States members of the Movement
reiterate the importance that they attach to discussion
and the reports of the annual substantive session of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which
is the only forum of the United Nations with a mandate
to thoroughly consider every aspect of the issue of
peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, we wish to state that the safety of
United Nations mission personnel remains a matter of
concern. We categorically condemn all attacks and acts
of violence against peacekeepers, which saw a notable
increase last year. Likewise, we call for all necessary
measures to be taken to ensure that those responsible
for such attacks are held accountable and brought to
justice. In that regard, we, the 120 members of the
Non-Aligned Movement, take this opportunity to pay
tribute to and recognize the important work carried out
by all peacekeeping personnel, men and women alike,
who work in armed conflicts and, in many cases, in
adverse conditions on the ground, risking their lives
on a daily basis. We extend our sincere appreciation to
all of them, including those who have lost their lives
in operations on the ground, defending the flag of the
United Nations and the cause of peace.

