Mr. Mminele (South Africa): We thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and for his tireless
efforts to bring about a resolution to the situation in the
Middle East, including on the question of Palestine.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

South Africa has been actively involved in the
Middle East in order to contribute to a lasting peace in
the region and attaches great importance to this open
debate. South Africa is nevertheless concerned that
nothing substantive has been achieved, to our collective
shame, which is witnessing the ongoing suffering of
the Palestinian people. Yet, we would all agree that the
current status quo is undesirable.

As we have done in the past, today we will again
declare our commitment to the two-State solution and
reiterate that an essential part of achieving peace in the
entire Middle East is through the establishment of a
free and sovereign Palestinian State, coexisting side by
side in peace and security with the State ofIsrael, based
on the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. We will also agree that this can be achieved
only through genuine substantive negotiations among
all the affected parties.

However, our action, or rather lack of action, will
expose our words and commitments as hollow because
nothing has been done to encourage and move the
parties towards restarting the long-stalled negotiations
or to prepare the ground for the difficult way forward
on negotiating final status issues. It should concern us
all that while we are vacillating, the situation on the
ground grows worse by the day because of continued
acts of violence against Palestinians and Israelis alike,
including ongoing settlement activity and the high rate
of demolitions of Palestinian structures.

In that context, South Africa deplores the recent
announcement by the Government of Israel, declaring
370 acres in the West Bank, South of Jericho, to be so-
called State land. Like the Secretary-General, we are
concerned that should that decision be implemented, it
would constitute the largest land appropriation by Israel
in the West Bank since August 2014. Such actions not
only undermine the viability of a two-State solution,
but also hinder the Palestinian Authority's ability to
expand its economic activity, which in turn undermines
political stability and security in Palestine, which will
eventually impact the security of Israel.

The events in the occupied Palestinian territory
over the past months have heightened the urgent need
to find a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. As
the Council may recall, numerous concerns have been
raised regarding illegal Israeli actions aimed at altering
the demographic composition and geographical reality
of establishing a contiguous State. The Palestinian
people continue to experience injustices, and cases
where settlers have burned an entire Palestinian family
alive are completely unacceptable and demand our
condemnation. Acts of violence are also not condonable
in whatever form and by whomever they are committed.
In that context, we appeal to all the parties involved
to cease the violence and to take a peaceful path that

ensures that innocent lives are not lost. My delegation
considers the international protection of the Palestinian
people essential, as they are a people at the mercy of an
occupying Power.

In conclusion, South Africa welcomes the
announcement by the International Atomic Energy
Agency that Iran has complied with its side of the 2015
accord. We also express our support for the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, to convene intra-Syrian negotiations on the
29 January. It is our hope that the process will lead to
a new horizon for the country and bring an end to the
terrible conflict.

