The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

I thank Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, Chair of the
Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in the

Sudan, and Mr. Haile Menkerios, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
for their briefings. We are encouraged by the smooth
completion of the voting process and the assurances of
the parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA) that they will respect the result of the Southern
Sudan referendum. Furthermore, in the sensitive time
following the end of the voting, it is vital that the
parties ensure a peaceful and credible conclusion to the
referendum process. It is also important to remind all
stakeholders that only the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission is authorized to declare the final results of
the referendum.

We commend the Secretary-General's Panel on
the Referenda in the Sudan for its efforts to monitor
and assess the referendum process. Its presence and
that of international observers have been indispensable
in ensuring the credibility of the referendum process.

We take positive note of the parties' decision to
continue negotiations on outstanding issues after the
conclusion of the referendum process. We urge them to
redouble their efforts to reach agreement on these
issues, including wealth-sharing, the management of
assets and debts, citizenship and voter security
arrangements, before the end of the interim period in
July 2011.

We welcome the efforts of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel in facilitating
negotiations between the parties. As an important part
of the CPA, a solution has to be found with regard to
Abyei in the coming period.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the view that now
is the right time for the international community and
the United Nations to anticipate their future
engagement in the Sudan. Special attention should be
given to economic development and extensive
cooperation between the North and the South as a
crucial part of long-term stability in the region.

As for the situation in Abyei, we are concerned
about the recent violence there. It is important that the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)
continue to closely monitor the situation in Abyei and
that it remain careful to prevent the deterioration of the
security situation there. We welcome the activities of
UNMIS designed to increase its presence in Abyei. We
also welcome the increased presence of UNMIS at hot
spots in order to prevent a possible worsening of the
security situation.

With regard to restrictions on UNMIS freedom of
movement, we call upon the Sudanese authorities to
ensure such freedom of movement. We commend the
efforts of UNMIS to boost activities related to its
protection mandate. It is of the utmost importance that
all parties cooperate fully with UNMIS with respect to
the protection of civilians.

We are concerned by the recent upsurge of
violence in Darfur. We call upon all parties to cease
hostilities and to ensure freedom of movement and
access for UNMIS and humanitarian workers to the
affected areas and populations in need.

We reiterate our full support for the United
Nations- and African Union-led peace process in Doha
and the mediation efforts of Joint Chief Mediator
Bassole, It is imperative that all parties seize the
opportunity offered by the Doha peace talks, and we
urge them to join the process without preconditions or
further delay.

Finally, we underline that it is of the utmost
importance that the United Nations and the
international community continue to deliver
humanitarian assistance, monitor the humanitarian
situation on the ground, and respond duly to any
humanitarian crises that may arise.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

