Mr. Doig (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru has the
honour to speak on behalf of the countries members of
the Rio Group: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua,
Panama, Paraguay, the Dominican Republic, Uruguay,
Venezuela and my own country, Peru.

The Rio Group welcomes this open meeting of
the Security Council on the report of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), and once again reiterates
its complete repudiation of terrorism and its support for
the work of the Committee.

Since the previous open meeting on this subject,
which was held on 4 April, there have been two
regional developments that the Group would like to
emphasize, as they confirm the progress of our nations'
commitment to combating terrorism.

The first was the declaration of the heads of State
or Government of the Rio Group, made during its
seventeenth annual Summit, held on 23 and 24 May in
Cusco, Peru, in which they reaffirmed their strongest
condemnation of terrorism, which is a threat to peace
and security, to the effective enforcement of the rights
of all individuals and to democratic stability. Similarly,
they emphasized the need to continue to work to
combat terrorism, particularly in relation to the global
problem of drugs and related crimes, and underlined
the fact that the fight against terrorism should be
carried out with full respect for international law and
human rights.

In that context, the heads of State or Government
defined, in what has become known as the Cusco
Consensus, the following action: the strengthening,
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) of cooperation
among our authorities in the fight against terrorism and
its relationship to illicit drugs, money laundering and
illegal arms trafficking, while increasing information
exchanges with a view to preventing terrorist acts and
suppressing their financing.

The other development was the entry into force,
on 10 July, of the Inter-American Convention Against
Terrorism. That multilateral instrument was adopted by
the States members of the Organization of American
States in June 2002. Its entry into force commits the
nations that have already ratified it to preventing,
combating and eradicating the financing of terrorism
and to effectively cooperating among themselves to
combat that scourge.

Those developments highlight the fact that the
policies that the countries of the region have been
developing for a number of years are ongoing and are
being intensified, as the Security Council is aware. The
steadfast support of our countries for the work of the
CTC is the result of such policies. All of the States
members of the Rio Group have sent their first two
reports to the CTC. To date, some members have
already delivered their third explanatory report at the
request of the Committee, while others are preparing
theirs.

These national reports contribute to the work of
the Committee in its important endeavours to
harmonize and implement anti-terrorism measures and
to put in place practical mechanisms for international
cooperation to combat such criminal activity. This
work is sustained through the commitment of all the
States Members of the United Nations, which is
indispensable if the international community is to
confront terrorist threats and related crimes with the
required courage and strict respect for the rule of law.
In this context, we support the effective application of
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All its Aspects.

The Rio Group also highlights the fact that, in the
programme of work for its eighth work programme, the
Committee should continue to work to identify the
assistance and cooperation requirements of countries;
develop a global information network against terrorism
and modernize the electronic web site of the
Committee; and promote universal participation in the
12 international conventions and protocols to combat
terrorism. In that connection, the Rio Group expresses
once again its interest in completing the strengthening
of the international legal anti-terrorism framework, and
we hope that a general convention against terrorism
will soon become a reality. We hope for similar success
with regard to the draft convention on the suppression
of acts of nuclear terrorism and the review of the
International Atomic Energy Agency Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material.

Finally, the Rio Group expresses its satisfaction
with the fact that, as you pointed out, Mr. President, the
next meeting of the Committee with international,
regional and subregional organizations will be held in
October at the headquarters of the Organization of
American States, in accordance with the suggestion of
the Inter-American Committee Against Terrorism. We
are confident that that meeting will facilitate the
follow-up, deepening and expansion of the areas of
cooperation between international and regional
organizations in the fight against terrorism.

