Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. J ean-Pierre Lacroix for the quality
of his briefing on the special report of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission on the strategic review
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2018/530). The report informs
us of the developments and challenges in Darfur to
bring peace and stability to the region.

My delegation welcomes the weapons-collection
campaign and the gradual redeployment of State power
that have led to an improvement in the security situation
throughout Darfur. However, it must be noted that the
situation remains worrying in Jebel Marra, where
armed groups associated with the Sudan Liberation
Army-Abdul Wahid faction continue to carry out
criminal and destabilizing activities. Cete d'Ivoire
therefore calls on the international community to do
its utmost to halt the actions of those armed groups,
which could undermine the gains made in the area of
security. Cote d'Ivoire also welcomes the extension of
the unilateral ceasefire of hostilities by the Government
of the Sudan and certain armed groups, and urges them
to commit themselves further by signing a permanent
ceasefire - a precondition for a definitive end to
the crisis.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
delegation notes that two major challenges remain,
in particular the issue of internally displaced persons
and the effects of climate change on the population's
resilience capacity. With regard to the issue of
internally displaced persons, besides the lack of
infrastructure and limited access to basic social
services, problems related to land management and the
use of natural resources continue to prevent internally
displaced persons from returning home freely, safely
and with dignity. In that regard, my delegation is of the
view that the comprehensive implementation of land
management provisions, such as those stipulated in the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, will help to bring
about a permanent settlement to the land tenure issue.

Cote d'Ivoire encourages the Sudanese Government
to redouble its efforts to settle the land management
issue. We also call on the international community to
provide financial support to the Sudanese Government
so as to enable the various committees established
in accordance with the Doha Document to continue
activities that ensure the well-being of the people
of Darfur.

My delegation is concerned about the negative
impact of climate change on agriculture and livestock
farming, both of which help to improve food security.
We call on the international community to meet the
funding needs of the 2018 Humanitarian Response Plan
for the Sudan.

At the political level, cote d'Ivoire deplores the
fact that some armed groups have not signed the Doha
Document, which is having an adverse impact on the
peace process in Darfur and on the implementation of
the Document's provisions. My country shares the view
of the Secretary-General with regard to the importance
of making a greater effort to encourage such groups to
take part in the peace process, based on the provisions
of the Doha Document, which is the only viable path to
peace in Darfur.

cote d'Ivoire congratulates the Sudanese
Government on the progress that has led to a considerable
improvement in the security situation and improved
stability in Darfur, despite the current challenges.
My delegation welcomes the progress made on the
operational concept of UNAMID, which is focused on
peacekeeping in Jebel Marra and on achieving stability
and peacebuilding elsewhere in Darfur. It also notes
the findings of the strategic review of the Mission
conducted with the African Union Commission and
calls for the diligent implementation of the Secretary-
General's recommendations.

My delegation supports in particular the
recommendations on defining common priorities
and implementing relevant joint activities, in close
cooperation with the United Nations country team
within the framework of the transition. In the light of
its experience in the area of peacebuilding and the vital
support of the United Nations country team in Cote
d'lvoire, my country maintains that such collaboration
could provide the right solutions and conditions required
to bring about a viable end to the crisis and UNAMID's
exit. Its withdrawal should be gradual in order to ensure
that the protection of civilians is notjeopardized.

In addition, my delegation underscores the
importance of providing the necessary funding to the
country team to ensure the long-term implementation
of rapid recovery, development and peacebuilding
activities. Moreover, Cote d'Ivoire shares the
recommendations of the Secretary-General with
regard to the importance of reforming the security
sector, in accordance with the Doha Document and the
principles outlined in the African Union Framework
on Security Sector Reform. As the Secretary-General
has stated, the implementation of the recommendations
will help to stabilize Darfur and bolster post-conflict
reconstruction efforts.

Once again, my country calls on the international
community to assist the Sudanese Government in its
efforts to provide an effective response to development
challenges in Darfur, in particular in the areas of
health, education and access to basic social services.
In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire supports the request of the
Sudanese Government for financing from the United
Nations Peacebuilding Fund in order to implement the
priorities outlined for the transition period.

In conclusion, my country calls on the Sudanese
Government, UNAMID, the United Nations country
team, the African Union, as well as all development
partners to work together for a lasting return to stability
and to prevent renewed conflict in Darfur.

