Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for having given us
this opportunity to speak during this meeting. I know
that the Council has a great deal on its agenda, so I do
not wish to take up more than a few minutes of its time.

I wanted to address the Council today to express
the thanks of the people and Government of Libya for
having responded quickly to our request for it to take
a position with regard to the attempts to circumvent
Libyan control over our oil and concerning attacks on
Libyan sovereignty over its resources. The position
of the Security Council today in adopting resolution
2146 (2014) reaffirms the commitment of the Council
to respect the rules of international law. Moreover, it
sends a clear signal to the Libyan Government that the
Security Council is prepared to come to Libya's aid
when so required. Furthermore, it sends a strong signal
to the people of Libya that they will not be left alone
during this critical transition period.

More important than that is the fact that this
resolution sends a clear message to those operating
outside the law, the criminals and all those who are
exploiting the weakness of the State to undermine its
stability and sovereignty and embezzle its resources.
This is a clear message that the international community
will not tolerate such acts.

Resolution 2146 (2014) also sends a message to the
world at large that the international community will be
vigilant against anything leading to the loss of innocent
lives and against anyone seeking to impose their will on
Libya through the use of arms or to control the Libyan
people by means outside of the legitimate democratic
framework. This is a message to the Libyan people.
The Security Council will assist the Libyan people
whenever we are in need. We thank the Council for that
assistance.

Finally, I would like to thank in particular the
United States for having escorted the vessel in question
back to Libya and for its efforts in preparing resolution
2146 (2014) for adoption today.

