Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Mr. Yamamoto, Mr. Fedotov and Ambassador Djani
for their briefings. We also thank and welcome the
Ambassador of Afghanistan.

The electoral events and those related to the peace
process continue to weigh on the political environment
in Afghanistan. In that regard, we take note of the
preparations for the presidential elections, to which we
hope that the lessons learned from the parliamentary
elections will be applied, but above all that they will be
credible and legitimate. We applaud the collaboration of
international and regional actors with the intra-Afghan
dialogue, and we urge the continuation of the talks
that have been taking place in Doha in support of an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process.

At the same time, we welcome the various initiatives
in support of that dialogue, including the third trilateral
consultation held in Beijing, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization summit held in Bishkek and the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process senior officials meeting held
in Ankara. Meetings such as those are simple steps
to create and build trust between the parties. In that
regard, we would like to commend the cooperation of
the Governments of the United States, Pakistan, Qatar,
Germany and Russia, as well as the improvement of
bilateral relations between Pakistan and Afghanistan.

Regarding the security situation, we are concerned
about the high number ofvictims and the consistent level
of clashes and attacks perpetrated by anti-Government
elements. We urge both the Government and the
Taliban to comply with the initiatives emanating from
the outcomes of the peace dialogue aimed at bringing
about a ceasefire and reducing the number of clashes.
The Dominican Republic strongly condemns the recent
attacks perpetrated by the Taliban, and we offer our
condolences to the families of the victims.

We would like to acknowledge the progress made
in protecting women's rights, the allocation of funds
to the national budget for women victims of violence
and the establishment by presidential decree of the
special secretariat to investigate cases of harassment of
women in Government institutions. Similarly, we wish
to reiterate our call for the meaningful participation
of women in the peace process and all areas of
decision-making on the future of Afghanistan.

An area of concern for us is the economic situation
caused by conflict and natural disasters. Impoverished
farmers are seeing their crops decimated by drought
and their living standards diminished, so that illegal
cultivation becomes an attractive option. Moreover,
we are concerned that the high levels of opium
production and trafficking are channelling funds to
non-State groups, fuelling instability and hampering
development efforts.

On the other hand, vulnerable groups continue to
be in urgent need of assistance to survive and mitigate
the shortage of food, including 132,000 displaced
families in the first five months of the year. That is
compounded by restrictions on humanitarian access to
vulnerable areas controlled by anti-Government armed
groups. The threats posed to humanitarian personnel in
those areas are unacceptable. We urge all parties to the
conflict to ensure access to those areas and to respect
the rights of their inhabitants.

Despite promising advances, many challenges must
be addressed before lasting peace can be achieved.
Ending the war in Afghanistan will require all parties
to make difficult compromises, but ultimately it is up to
the Afghans themselves.

