Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): First of all, let me begin by thanking Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe for
his briefing.

Our debate is taking place at a time when the
peace process in the Middle East remains at an
impasse. It should be remembered that this follows
Israel's lifting of the moratorium on Jewish settlement
activity in the Palestinian territories. My delegation
therefore urges both parties to resume direct dialogue,
which is an essential condition for arriving at an
acceptable and definitive settlement of the conflict. As
we have always emphasized, the goal is the
establishment of a viable Palestinian State living side
by side with Israel within secure and internationally
recognized borders.

We wish to reaffirm our appreciation for the
diplomatic efforts being made by the United States of
America, the Quartet and countries of the region aimed
at restarting direct peace negotiations. We urge them to
continue their efforts. In that regard, we welcome the
announcement of an upcoming Quartet meeting to be
held in Munich in the next few days.

There will be no lasting solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian crisis unless it is part ofa process towards a
comprehensive negotiated settlement of the various
crises in the region. We are convinced that the effective
involvement of countries of the region in peace talks is
absolutely essential to achieving these goals.

With regard to Lebanon, we urge the country's
political leaders to pursue dialogue and national
reconciliation in order to ensure unified participation in
a comprehensive peace process in the region. We hope
that the current political crisis associated with the work
of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon will be resolved
through negotiations.

Lastly, we reaffirm our support for the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and its
mandate. We urge Israelis and Lebanese to cooperate
with UNIFIL to ensure the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).

