The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

We thank Special Representative Ghassan Salame
and Ambassador Juergen Schulz, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, for their
informative briefings. We reiterate our recognition of
the unstinting work done by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.

We would like to start by recalling the tragedy at the
Tajoura detention centre at the beginning of July, which
caused the deaths of many migrants and refugees, who
were victims of an indiscriminate aerial bombardment,
which was condemned by the Council at the time. We
regret that, following that, another tragedy occurred
with boats carrying migrants and refugees off the coast
of Libya. We express our alarm at the humanitarian
situation in the country, which is exacerbated by attacks
on civilians and health centres and numerous violations
of international humanitarian law.

What is unacceptable is that we are becoming
accustomed to simply reporting the death of innocent
civilians, without further action to prevent or mitigate
its cause. We believe that it is an unfortunate vicious
circle of suffering, destruction and humanitarian
disaster, fuelled by flagrant violations of the arms
embargo imposed by the Council, which serve to
perpetuate the situation of conflict, violence and deaths
and to create space for terrorist groups to act.

At the same time, it is crucial to promote
accountability for those responsible for the atrocity
crimes that have been increasing throughout the
conflict, which is approaching its fifth month. The
fight against impunity must also be extended to those
who continue to supply weapons to the parties to
the conflict.

Peru reiterates the need for an immediate and
unconditional ceasefire and a return to the negotiating
table through renewed mediation efforts that will allow
for a peaceful solution to be found in a context in which
the military solution is meaningless. We therefore
highlight the importance of the three-part proposal of
the Special Representative, which we hope to discuss in
greater detail in the consultations.

We again urge countries with the ability to influence
the parties to act immediately and effectively in order
to bring the parties closer and to finally overcome any
strategic or economic considerations, while ensuring
full respect for international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.

