Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate,
and through you I wish to express our appreciation of
Minister Jean Asselborn's personal leadership in this
matter. I should like to thank the Secretary-General,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Leila Zerrougui and Mr. Anthony Lake for their
presentations. Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh's testimony
about his experience as a child soldier in Sierra Leone
reminded us of the horrors to which some children are
still subject to this day.

Stopping the plight endured by children in armed
conflict is a moral imperative. Children in conflict
situations are particularly vulnerable. Their suffering
extends in time, in the form of traumas that burden
entire generations for many years after the resolution of
a crisis. The Security Council is right to help increase
awareness about violations and to be more involved
in preventing and halting violence against children in
cases determined by the Council to constitute threats to
international peace and security.

As the concept note prepared by the Mission
of Luxembourg points out (S/2014/144, annex), the
consideration of the agenda related to children in
armed conflict has significantly progressed in the past
years. The international community has been able to
take decisive steps to confront the gravest challenges
regarding children in conflict. The initiative launched
by Special Representative Zerrougui and UNICEF to
end the recruitment of children by Government forces
by 2016 deserves our full support. We are convinced
that, with political will by all parties involved, that
target can be achieved. Nevertheless, the reality on the
ground in many conflicts remains a source of serious
concern.

The appalling situation of children in Syria
was rightly described by the Secretary-General as
unspeakable and unacceptable. The High Commissioner
for Human Rights reminded us in her presentation to
the General Assembly on the humanitarian situation
in Syria that grave violations against children have
been committed by both sides, with documented cases
of detentions, torture, sexual violence and executions.
The number of schools and hospitals that have been
seriously affected by the conflict is alarming. Those
acts violate the most fundamental rules of international
humanitarian law. To deprive children of education and
access to health is to deprive them of paramount tools
to build a peaceful society and jeopardize the future of
the entire nation.

The plight of Syrian children turned refugees as
the result of the conflict is also very telling about the
serious consequences of the military option that some
have been promoting and seem to continue to believe in.
Brazil is acutely aware of the increasing pressure faced
by neighbouring countries hosting Syrian refugees.

Those facts must not be regarded merely as troubling
statistics. The emotional impact of the conflict on
young Syrians has disturbing after-effects. We cannot
simply hope that Syrian children will prove to be as
bold, courageous and resilient as Mr. Sawaneh from
Sierra Leone. The very touching and troubling reports
regarding the suffering of children in Syria must awaken
our moral conscience and collective responsibility in
order to promote an urgent and peaceful solution to
the conflict on the basis of the Geneva communique
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) and the efforts of
Joint Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi.

Brazil has been contributing to humanitarian
initiatives to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people,
including children and Syrian refugees. In response
to the call made by High Commissioner for Refugees
Antonio Guterres, Brazil is facilitating entry visas for
Syrian nationals seeking asylum in our country.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
Afghanistan, in the Central African Republic and in
other conflict situations, children continue to bear a
heavy burden. Abuses against children are perpetrated,
moreover, even in situations on the Council's agenda
that are not currently of open conflict. A report issued
by Amnesty International last week underscores the
dire scenario faced by Palestinian children under
occupation in the West Bank. We call on Israeli forces
to abide by their obligations under international human
rights law and humanitarian law, with special attention
to the situation of Palestinian children. Reports of
harassment and intimidation are particularly distressing
and impact negatively on the perspectives for peaceful
and harmonious coexistence between Israelis and
Palestinians in future. Such abuses must cease forthwith
if the two sides are to build an environment conducive
to peace and stability, as supported by the international
community.

In order for crimes against children in situations
of conflict to be eradicated, perpetrators must be
brought to justice. International efforts to ensure that
accountability is upheld have been greatly enhanced
by the role of the International Criminal Court in
prosecuting individuals accused of violations against
children and by its deterrent effect. Peacekeeping
missions may also have a role to play - as long as
they have the adequate capabilities to perform their
protection tasks - both through the protection of
civilians in immediate danger and through the work of
child protection advisers.
As in many other situations, in the case of children
and armed conflict the Security Council should also
pay greater attention to the benefits of prevention. The
promotion of sustainable development, with social
inclusion and food and nutritional security, can certainly
contribute to conflict prevention, and therefore to
avoid bringing conflict to the doorsteps of millions of
children. An improvement in living conditions and, as
a consequence, the establishment of a safe environment
for children and youth to pursue their educational and
cultural development, are vital factors to avoid the
recruitment of children by armed groups.

In conclusion, let me once more underscore
Brazil's firm commitment to the protection of children
in situations of conflict. When serving as a member of
the Security Council, Brazil worked actively for the
adoption of resolutions addressing this critical issue,
resolutions such as 1612 (2005) and 1998 (2011). We
will continue to enhance our cooperation with the
United Nations system and to make use of our bilateral
channels to ensure due attention is given to halting
violence against the most vulnerable. Brazil joins the
Security Council's efforts to break the cycle of violence
and to spare children the direst consequences of adults'
wars.

