Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French): I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to express my best wishes for 2004.

The topic of today's debate, "Post-conflict
national reconciliation: role of the United Nations", is
of primary importance for countries that are emerging
or in the process of emerging from civil war, such as
Burundi. My delegation finds this discussion to be very
timely, because a number of conflicts in Africa, for
example, are civil wars pitting sons and daughters of
the same nation against each other. Reconciliation is a
national imperative, regardless of the painful efforts it
imposes on enemy brothers and sisters.

But reconciliation must adapt to another
imperative that is just as important: justice and the rule
of law. In September 2003, during a public debate of
the Security Council on the topic "Justice and the rule
of law: the United Nations role", the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, addressed this issue. The Secretary-General
said:

"At times, the goals of justice and
reconciliation compete with each other. Each
society needs to form a view about how to strike
the right balance between them. Nevertheless, in
striking that balance, certain international
standards must be adhered to." (S/PV.4833, p. 3)

Indeed, that right balance is difficult but not impossible
to find.

My country, Burundi, has been engaged in a
peace negotiation process for six years. The progress
made since the signing of the peace agreement and the
ceasefire agreements with the rebel groups gives us
hope that the war will end in the near future. But
Burundians are still decrying the situation of impunity
for crimes imposed by the politicization and excessive
polarization of society caused by the ethnic violence
Burundi has experienced since independence. Many
criminals are circulating freely in the country. Judicial
services are demonized by some and idolized by others,
which has seriously hindered the action of those
services.

National and international human rights
organizations believe that the weakest point in the
Burundian peace process is the way in which the issue
of fighting impunity is being pursued under the signed
agreements. Today, the agreements grant provisional
immunity to political leaders returning from exile and
to belligerent forces. It is a political instrument of great
importance, but the civilian population, the main
victim of violence of all kinds, wonders whether this
temporary amnesty will not be made permanent,
because certain suspected individuals have great
political ambitions. In the lead-up to the general
elections scheduled to take place before 1 November
2004, Burundi is not safe from possible new tensions.
It is caught between the duty of keeping to the
timetable foreseen by the peace agreement and the need
to have the minimum conditions required for
organizing post-conflict elections. So how can we
make sure that the candidates are honest people?

Another question is whether a country can
successfully emerge from a crisis as serious as
Burundi's without a minimum state of rule of law and
the moral rehabilitation of the victims. The assistance
of the United Nations can be decisive here.

As the level of trust among Burundians does not
always allow them to organize an acceptable inquiry by
themselves, the country still awaits the arrival of
another international commission of judicial inquiry,
which the Government requested of the United Nations
on 23 July 2002. My delegation welcomes the fact that
the Security Council has approved the terms of
reference for a Secretariat assessment mission, which
should soon be sent to Burundi to prepare for the
establishment of the commission of inquiry. The
commission is cherished by the Burundians, as the
members of the Council noted during their visits to
Burundi. As well, the inquiry is one of the pillars of the
peace agreement. The negotiators at Arusha also agreed
to establish a Commission on Truth and Reconciliation
with a mandate complementing that of the commission
of inquiry. The process of adopting its regulating texts
will conclude next February.

Despite the efforts of Burundians and the
progress already made in seeking peace, the role of the
United Nations remains indispensable, especially in the
fight against impunity and in national reconciliation
efforts. Burundians require support in seeking the truth
about deeds and individuals. In a country where living
conditions in the hills are identical for all ethnic
communities and where the sharing of a common
culture has forged a social cohesion as old as the single
common language, the truth about the bloody crimes
that mark the country's recent history constitutes the
final road towards the survival of the nation.

Bringing to justice those responsible for major
crimes such as acts of genocide, rape, violence against
children and other war crimes, including those against
humanitarian rights, helps to heal the wounds and
prepare minds for forgiveness and reconciliation - so
long as this is handled skilfully through traditional,
national and mixed tribunals and other experiences
from elsewhere that are applicable in Burundi.
Reconciliation is not incompatible with legal action.
That will lead to peace. To ignore that is to build on
quicksand, to walk with a thorn in one's foot, to create
a breeding ground for new grudges - at least in the
case of Burundi. Burundi needs impartial and
reconciliatory justice accompanied by a vast campaign
of detoxification to eradicate ideas that kill. That is the
surest way to establish reconciliation, rule of law and
democracy in Burundi and the entire Great Lakes
region, which still lives under the shock of genocide,
whose roots have not yet been extirpated.

The United Nations can contribute to peace and
reconciliation in Burundi by mobilizing the
international community to improve the living
conditions of the population, especially among those
most affected by the war. The Security Council should
be thanked for its mobilizing appeals addressed to
financial backers. Those appeals have been heard, to
judge by the success of the Forum of Partners for
Development of Burundi, just held in Brussels on 13
and 14 January. The repatriated, the internally
displaced, the demobilized combatants, child soldiers,
the poor living on the hillsides - all need to be
psychologically and materially rehabilitated in an
equitable and sharing fashion. Without that, peace and
reconciliation will be nothing more than a pious wish.

The Government of Burundi therefore counts on
the United Nations, the universal Organization
ensuring the values of peace, right and morality, to help
Burundi and the surrounding region to build the future
on solid bases enabling the flourishing of future
generations and saving them from the scourge of war
and hatred.

