Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, we are pleased that under your
presidency the Security Council once again has
recognized the harmful impact of the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and consequently has
decided to include this item on its agenda. This body
has already adopted a number of valuable
recommendations, such as the request that all States
use end-user certificates in their arms transfers. There
was an appeal to weapons-exporting countries to
shoulder greater responsibility, an invitation to
establish national registers of arms brokers and an
appeal for sanctions against those who violate arms
embargoes.

The implementation of all of all of these
recommendations is essential but not sufficient. The
action of the international community in the area of
small arms and light weapons must go far beyond
marking and implementing existing arms embargoes. It
is now time to look at the problem of small arms from
a human rights perspective. It is now time to ban the
transfer of military materiel and personnel and
financial and logistic support to those States whose
military units or security forces participate in
systematic violation of human rights. It is now time to
ban the sale of weapons to those who do not respect
democratic principles or who have not ratified the main
human rights instruments and international
humanitarian law.

We should ask ourselves seriously if the 191
Member States of the United Nations have the political
will to regulate the international trade in weapons in
order to eradicate those practices, transfers and sales
that, due to a lack of transparency and conscience, have
irresponsibly contributed to the proliferation of death
and the violation of the entire range of human rights. In
the past five decades we have not seen the exercise of
responsibility stemming from Article 26 of the Charter,
although that explicitly recognizes the link between
disarmament and development by entrusting this body
with establishing arms control systems in order to
promote the establishment and maintenance of
international peace and security with the least
diversion for armaments of the world's human and
economic resources.

In a world of limited resources where all States
must establish spending priorities it is
incomprehensible that developing countries - which
include my own - spend 22 billion dollars a year to
purchase weapons, when that amount would enable us
to achieve the Millennium Development Goals with
regard to universal primary education and to reducing
infant mortality, for example. The overstockpiling and
underdevelopment equation is a sad reality, which,
unfortunately, continues to drain many of our peoples.

Security is not achieved by increasing the number
of weapons, as history has shown far too often. It can,
however, be achieved by righting wrongs, overcoming
deficiencies, pursuing shared objectives and
disseminating universal values. However, with a few
exceptions, we have followed a path based on a
misunderstanding of security, which has left us
completely vulnerable to poverty, ignorance and
epidemics. We have given priority to a kind of security
that has consumed a considerable portion of the limited
resources available and has hampered and halted
development.

In 2001 alone, more than 16 billion units of
ammunition were manufactured - that is, more than
2 bullets per person on the planet. That means that we
all are targets and that, every minute of every hour of
every day, a person dies.

While we welcome and are grateful for the
Secretary-General's report, and we fully agree with its
12 recommendations, we regret the fact that no
reference is made therein to the need to draft an
international and legally binding instrument that would
put an end to all irresponsible sales and transfers of
weapons which contribute to violations of international
humanitarian law and of human rights.

Because we are sickened and horrified at the
bloodshed and its unconscionable nature, we decisively
and enthusiastically support the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT), and we appeal to all Member States that are
committed to transparency in the arms trade and to full
respect for of human rights to support that preventive
instrument. The ATT sets a series of limitations on the
arms trade that are based on existing obligations under
international law and on expected use.

It encompasses existing obligations stemming
from the Geneva Conventions, the Mine-Ban Treaty
and the Convention on Genocide, with a View to the
incorporation of those criteria into the national
legislation of each State. It is time to put an end to the
irresponsible trafficking in weapons, and time to empty
the arsenals of illicit weapons. To date, nine Member
States, including a permanent member of the Council,
have publicly expressed their support for such an
initiative, and Costa Rica is honoured to be one of
them.

As a basic principle, the draft framework
convention establishes that authorization is required for
all arms transfers. The text further stipulates a number
of restrictions on transfers that devolve directly from
existing obligations on States under international
humanitarian law, such as the ban on the use of
weapons or weapons whose effects are deemed to be
indiscriminate or excessively cruel. Additionally, the
draft establishes a number of bans on weapons
transfers when it is foreseeable that they will be used
in violation of the Charter of the United Nations, to
commit serious violations of human rights or of
international humanitarian law, or to perpetrate
genocide or crimes against humanity.

The ATT does not seek to create new obligations.
It seeks simply to spell out categorically the logical
and necessary consequences of existing norms and
principles.
In addition, the draft calls for the adoption of
innovative precautionary measures that, in principle,
should be borne in mind in authorizing any arms
transfer. We hope that this draft will become a model
for internationally binding agreements that, once
adopted, will facilitate coordinated and specific action
aimed at regulating arms transfers.

The Security Council must devise new
mechanisms to ensure compliance with arms
embargoes. The most recent report of the Secretary-
General makes clear once again that compliance with
recommendations on embargoes continues to fall short.
We need only recall that, in 2001, 54 countries were
linked to transfers or resales, in express violation of
existing arms embargoes. In the meantime, the
sanctions committees established by the Security
Council to verify compliance with those embargoes
were incapable of taking more effective action.

But sanctions committees are political bodies that
do not have the technical capacity for genuine
verification. For that reason, we deem it necessary to
consider creating within the Secretariat a mechanism
that would proactively monitor the implementation of
arms embargoes and provide technical support to the
political work done in the sanctions committees.

