Mrs. Matar (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Malaysia for organizing this
open debate on the issue of children and armed conflict.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing at
the beginning of this debate, as well as his Special
Representatiave Leila Zerrougi and Mr. Anthony Lake,
Executive Director of UNICEF, for their respective
briefings and their commitment to children.
We have seen a horrendous increase in recent years
in the number of crimes against children during armed
conflict, especiallly in Africa and the Middle East.
Those conflicts are the source of long suffering for
many families in the war zones. Owing to their greater
vulnerability, this constitutes a violation of the rights
of the child. While the international community has
recognized that children do not belong in war zones,
we nevertheless see ongoing systematic violations of
children's rights. Children and victims and soldiers.
They die in bombings. Extremist armed groups, sush as
Da'esh, Al-Qaidia in Iraq, Libya and Syria, the Houthi
militias in Yemen 4 all of them violate the rights of
children. Not only have they destabilized regions, these
extremist terrorist groups are kidnapping children in
order to recruit them into their ranks and to exploit them
in suicide bombings, which have become commonplace
in all those conflicts.

For its part, the Israeli occupation is violating the
rights of children in the occupied Palestinian territories.

The Kingdom of Bahrain therefore condemns the
violations of human rights by violent extremist groups.
While we condemn their acts in general, however, we
especially condemn those targeting children.

Today's debate is a crucial step forward in terms of

evaluating the progress that has been made to address

serious violations against children's rights. We therefore
welcome that the coalition for the re-establishment of
legitimacy in Yemen has been removed from the annex
to the annual report (S/2016/360) of the Secretary-
General. We would draw the Council's attention to
the fact the coalition in fact invited a United Nations
group to visit Riyadh to observe what is being done in
humanitarian and military terms by the coalition.

In conclusion, we reiterate the need to make serious
efforts to end these acts against children. We call upon
the international community to endeavour to take the
necessary steps to end this phenomenon, in particular
via cooperation and the provision of technical and
logistical support to ensure that those who perpetrate
such crimes do not enjoy impunity.

