Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I too
would like to express our gratitude to His Excellency
President Chiluba for coming to the Council and giving
us an interesting briefing concentrating on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but also drawing attention to the
need for the Council to pay special attention to what is
going on in Africa at the moment and to how the Council
can contribute.

We too would like to congratulate President Chiluba
on the role that he has played in leading a number of
African leaders to address directly the problem of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and on carrying out
personal diplomacy at a high level and of a high quality.

 

The Lusaka process is the basis of what the Security
Council will now wish to do on the problem of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. President Chiluba has
set out for us a number of interesting proposals, which we
already had in our minds, on what the next step should be.
I am sure that the Council is going to consider these. As an
example of the interest of members of the Council, the
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and the President of
the French Republic had a private meeting yesterday at
which they agreed that the area of the Great Lakes was of
high importance to their two countries together. In the joint
approach that the United Kingdom and France are taking to
Africa, we will be contributing to the further evolution of
a solution to the problems of the region.

But President Chiluba has with justification pointed
out that the Security Council has not often been either swift
or successful in addressing the conflicts of Africa. I want
to say to President Chiluba and to all our African friends
that there is not a lack of willingness by the Council to
address the problems of Africa or to get to grips with the
problems of Africa. There is a need to work with the
leaders of Africa and to have a structure to what we are
doing in addressing the problems of Africa. It is a vast
continent with a variety of different problems in its various
regions. And the approach of African leaders themselves is
not always united across the whole continent.

The Security Council has to take account of the
realities of what we are doing. If we are to have a
peacekeeping force or a coordinated operation on a problem
like that of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we need
to know what we are getting into, what we are going to do
and what the countries of the region are going to contribute.
And our parliaments and our peoples will want to know
what the resource costs are going to be and when we will
be able to finish our work and hand the responsibility back
to the leaders of the area. So there are practical and
pragmatic considerations that we have to consider, as well
as giving expression to our wish to see the continent of
Africa more at peace, seeking greater prosperity - with
success - and better able to manage its own affairs.

In the light of that, and looking at the next steps
regarding the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I would
like to add to President Chiluba's list of questions a couple
of others. First of all, we need to make sure that the parties
to the conflict stick to their guns, are going to stay in the
committees, are going to live up to their public and
expressed and political obligations. Is there a role that
President Chiluba thinks that outside players, particularly
the Security Council, can play in keeping all the parties to
the Agreement to their responsibilities? And does he want
to see constant action from outside the continent and from
the Security Council, or would he prefer that African
diplomacy should lead on this particular item, that of
having the parties to the conflict stick to their obligations?

Secondly, to follow up on my theme of structure,
does he believe that there would be a role, given that we
want to see even economic prosperity and political
stability entrenched in the region, for an international
conference - as France, for instance, proposed long
ago - that brings together the countries of the Great
Lakes and sets a longer-term strategy for what we all
want to do for the Great Lakes region and regarding the
problem of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
particular? If so, is there a particular timing for that
conference that would fit in well with the efforts and
operations of the leaderships of the region?

