Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): On 19 November 1999 my
delegation supported and voted in favour of resolution
1275 (1999), authorizing a two-week extension of the oil-
for-food programme for Iraq, on the clear understanding
that there would not be any linkage between its adoption
and the negotiations on the draft omnibus resolution on
Iraq which is currently being discussed among the
permanent members of the Council, with a view to its
consideration by the full membership of the Council
before its adoption.

We made our position very clear before the adoption
of that resolution. Indeed, assurances were given at that
time that there was no attempt to establish such a linkage
and that the two exercises were independent of each
other. We welcome these assurances, and in order to de-
link the two processes, my delegation will repeat its
earlier proposal, which is for you, Mr. President, to
consider bringing the draft omnibus resolution forward for

 

the consideration of the full membership of the Council as
soon as possible, so that the entire membership of the
Council can evaluate the issue and make the appropriate
assessment and recommendation to their respective
Governments.

Regrettably, today we are asked to vote on another
draft resolution extending the oil-for-food programme for
one week. This clearly establishes a linkage and is apparent
for all to see. The one-week time-frame is arbitrary and is
based on three major, but not necessarily right,
assumptions.

The first assumption is that the ongoing discussions on
negotiations among the permanent members of the Council
on the omnibus draft resolution on Iraq will lead to an
agreement within a week. My delegation would, of course,
warmly welcome such an outcome, for such a breakthrough
would facilitate Council consideration of the omnibus draft
resolution.

The second assumption is that once there is agreement
among the permanent members of the Council the Council
will immediately act on that draft resolution. My delegation
cannot share that assumption. Inasmuch as we would
welcome agreements among the permanent members on the
omnibus draft resolution on Iraq, my delegation would need
to convey that outcome to my Government for an in-depth
consideration of it before determining Malaysia's final
position on the matter. Such a process would obviously
require a little time. That is only natural, as my delegation
was not party to the protracted negotiations on the draft
omnibus resolution.

One would expect a full and detailed consideration and
negotiation of the draft resolution among all 15 members of
the Council before action could be taken on it. If the
permanent members took five months to hammer out an
agreement among themselves, assuming they were able to
do that, when there are just five of them, surely the non-
permanent members - and there are ten of us - would
expect the courtesy of being given some time to consider
what is a very complex subject before offering our
comments and proposals.

The third assumption is that once the Council reaches
agreements on the omnibus draft resolution its
implementation can be effected immediately. This is too
optimistic a scenario, as there is necessarily a time lag or
transition period, which may be long or short, between the
adoption of a resolution and its implementation.

This is why my delegation considers a one-week
extension of the oil-for-food programme as an arbitrary
and artificial time-frame and a transparent attempt to
stampede the process of reaching an agreement on the
larger issues pertaining to Iraq that are being addressed in
the so-called omnibus or comprehensive draft resolution.
Its adoption would create uncertainty and unpredictability
for the oil-for-food humanitarian programme for Iraq as
well as technical problems of implementation.

As regards the omnibus draft resolution, my
delegation firmly believes that it should be
comprehensive, incorporating a sanctions-lifting plan as
we strive to ensure that Iraq meets its remaining
disarmament requirements. Reconciling the two is never
an easy matter. Any consideration of the Iraq sanctions
regime should not be artificially forced or hurried if we
are to achieve the twin goals of alleviating the grave
humanitarian situation in Iraq and ensuring Iraqi
compliance with the requirements in respect of its alleged
remaining weapons of mass destruction.

My delegation is in favour of a simple technical roll-
over of the oil-for-food programme for the normal
duration of six months. This extension carries no risk, and
could be reconciled if the Security Council reaches a
consensus any time during its implementation. A one-
week extension, in our view, will not serve any practical
purpose beyond giving the Office of the Iraq Programme
breathing space to catch up with the backlog of
applications and putting dubious pressure on some
permanent members of the Council. It is technically
difficult, if not practically impossible, to conclude
contracts and lift oil within a short period of time. In the
meantime, the programme will lose millions of dollars in
oil revenue.

For these reasons, I regret that my delegation is not
in a position to support the draft resolution before the
Council. If it were not for the fact that the Council is
dealing with the serious matter of the grave humanitarian
situation in Iraq, my delegation would reject it. In these
circumstances, however, it will abstain on the draft
resolution.

