Mr. Skracie (Croatia): My delegation would also
like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. We express our appreciation to Ambassador
Heller and his team for the excellent work done during
the previous month.

At the outset, Croatia would like to express its
gratitude to Ms. Landgren for her comprehensive
briefing updating us as to the situation on the ground,
especially in light of the most recent, alarming events
that have taken place in Nepal. Croatia joins others in
expressing its deep concern over the current political
turmoil in Nepal generated by months of continuing
divisions and tensions among key political parties,
which have continued to seriously impede the
consolidation of peace. It is especially worrying that
they have been allowed to culminate in the
destabilization of the coalition Government and the
paralysis of Nepal's fledgling democracy following the
resignation of the Prime Minister over the controversial
sacking and reinstatement of Nepal's Army chief.

The disturbing turn of events over the past few
days has only served as a stark reminder that Nepal's
troubles are far from over and that Nepal's peace
process is facing its most severe test to date. In order to
prevent any immediate collapse of the fragile
architecture of the peace process, we call upon all sides
to exercise full restraint and to avoid political or
military retaliation, emphasizing the need to resolve
the current crisis through dialogue and consensus with
complete respect for the Constitution.

Following the current political impasse, we urge
all parties to remain loyal to the commitment to the
Nepalese people by re-establishing a consensus among
all political parties, based on a genuine political
dialogue aimed at completing the political process,
underpinned by an inclusive State with full regard for
human rights, and at ending impunity, so as to ensure
the Nepalese people a durable democratic and
prosperous future.

We are encouraged by reported assurances by
some political parties of their commitment to the peace
process despite the current situation. To that end, we
urge all political stakeholders to resume the progress
made to date in the important process of building a
constitution and to seriously address the remaining and
difficult issue of supervision, integration and
rehabilitation of Maoist combatants through the
effective working of the Special Committee and
specially mandated Technical Committee, and we urge
the Government to implement its commitment to
discharge minors from cantonments sites, all of whose
ultimate success is central to lasting peace in Nepal.

Given the immense fragility of the current
political situation, we support a clear and unanimous
message from the Council that takes note of the
problem. We further call on the Government to fulfill
its assurances to the international community by
continuing to take the necessary steps to create
conducive conditions for the completion of the work of
the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), while
recognizing the importance of maintaining
international engagement in and in support of Nepal's
peace process.

Finally, we would also like to express our deep
appreciation and our full support for the important
work of the Representative of the Secretary-General
and her team in UNMIN under increasingly complex
circumstances, as well as for the country team and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Nepal.

