Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): I wish to congratulate you, Madam President, on
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council. Your
country's neutrality and your presidency provide this body
with the serene atmosphere and more human feeling that it
often needs. Thank you for that.

The Rwanda delegation is joining the community of
nations in commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of the
United Nations. In acceding to membership of this
Organization, Rwanda wished to join other countries of
good will to bring about peace and security in the world.

The great success of this Organization is that it has
allowed the nations of the world to meet, to exchange
views and to engage in dialogue.

We wish to pay tribute here to the countries which,
after the Second World War, took the initiative of putting
together this world Organization, which is an ideal forum
for all the nations of the world.

While the world has succeeded, thanks to the existence
of this honourable institution, in avoiding other world wars,
in the third-world countries it has not succeeded in avoiding
hundreds of conflicts among its Members and sustained by
its Members. After 1945, wars were transferred from the
Northern Hemisphere to the Southern Hemisphere.

During this century, a third vicious and spectacular
case of genocide has just occurred, in Rwanda, a Member
State of this honourable Organization. The Secretary-
General of the United Nations denounced it - we are
grateful to him for that; the Security Council opted to
withdraw its peace-keeping forces; and the rich countries
showed their people, thanks to television, the direct killing
of innocent civilians.

Those who masterminded this genocide have been
rewarded by the Member countries of this august
Organization, signatories of the Convention on Genocide.
Given illegal protection, they were fed, housed, cared for,
trained, and militarily equipped so they could return to
power in their country by force. Conferences are now
being prepared to facilitate that task for them.

In this regard, Madam President, I take this
opportunity to thank your country, on behalf of my
Government, for having given help to the children who
were wounded and traumatized during that massacre. I
also wish to thank, on behalf of my Government, the
countries that have taken concrete measures to help the
Rwandan people - the United States, the United
Kingdom, Germany, the Netherlands, Ireland, Spain, to
mention only those countries.

"Ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
now encroaching upon the heart of Europe. The more
groups created to solve the problem, the more soldiers
sent to halt the damage, the more "ethnic cleansing"
flares up.

Africa was a victim of world politics for five
centuries. First it was emptied of its population and then
it suffered under the yoke of foreign Powers. Before it
could catch its breath, it was caught in the crossfire of the
cold war between the East and the West. Since the cold
war ended, the observable trend has been towards the
marginalization of this continent.

So long as there is no equitable justice for everyone
in the world, there will be no peace and security. So long
as there is no social and economic development equitably
conceived for all, peace and security will be vain words,
empty of meaning.

After 50 years of operation, the United Nations
needs to pause, review its goals and revise its
programmes. Since the end of the cold war, the need to
reform and revitalize the United Nations has become an
overriding imperative. It is important for the United
Nations to be restructured to meet the aspirations of
Member States, in particular the developing countries
which benefit the least from it.

With regard to the Security Council, there must
equitable geographical representation in it through an
increase in the number of permanent and non-permanent
seats. In this restructuring of the Council, Africa must
have some permanent seats, with all the relevant rights
and duties. This is a right owed to that continent and not
a privilege.

The Security Council has a great need for internal
democratization and for greater transparency both among

 

its members and vis-a-vis other organs of the United
Nations.

I would like to conclude by recalling once again that
justice and development are key elements if peace and
security are to reign in this world. That is the raison d'etre
of the United Nations, and it is the only wish that the
delegation of the Rwandan Government expresses in this
regard.

