Mr. Lemoyne (France) (spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking the Secretary-General, the
representatives of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
and the Commonwealth of Independent States for their
briefings on the actions oftheir respective organizations.

Terrorism is one of the greatest threats to
international peace and security today. That threat
persists. Despite the loss of its territorial foothold,
Da'esh, to name but one terrorist group, continues to
pose a serious threat to international peace and security,
particularly through its affiliates and the attacks it
continues to inspire. The fight against terrorism is
therefore at the heart of the Council's action. It requires
an organized, firm and united response from States
and the international community as a whole and cannot
be effective unless it fully respects human rights, in
line with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted by the 193 Member States.

In that regard, the United Nations has a major and
growing role to play at the global level, which requires,
first, the creation of norms and obligations to ensure
that States have robust counter-terrorism mechanisms;
secondly, the adoption of sanctions to deprive
terrorist groups of the means to carry out attacks;
and, finally - and this is what brings us together
today - the strengthening of international and regional
cooperation to encourage States to collaborate further
and exchange good practices.

At the regional level, Central Asia continues to face
significant economic, political and security challenges,
as noted earlier. The deteriorated security situation and
political uncertainty in Afghanistan are, obviously,
destabilizing factors, especially for its neighbours. I say
that because I remember our recent visit to Tajikistan.
Our Tajik friends, who took in French contingents
when we were in Afghanistan, must know that we will
stand by them in the face of these challenges, and the
same applies to the other States of the region. The risk
of terrorism spares no one today and often thrives in a
context of social frustration, particularly among young
people who may be tempted by radicalization.

This fragile context makes cooperation essential
among all the actors in the region, particularly States
and international and regional organizations, whose
Secretaries-General I welcome today. The United
Nations has an important role to play in encouraging
such cooperation, as demonstrated by the Organization
in May at the regional conference of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism on the crucial issue of
combating the financing of terrorism through drug
trafficking and organized crime.
The work of the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia must also
continue. Its activities were welcomed by Sheikh Al
Sabah, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, and
Mr. De Croo, Deputy Prime Minister of Belgium, and
we associate ourselves with those words. Supporting the
countries of the region in developing national responses
to such challenges and encouraging them to strengthen
regional cooperation are priority objectives.

The European Union, as a regional organization,
also fully participates in the fight against terrorism,
particularly in Central Asia. Over the past decade,
we have developed important border management
programmes, namely, the Border Management
Programme in Central Asia, and counter-narcotics
programmes, such as the Central Asia Drug Action
Programme. A few months ago, in June, we adopted
a new Central Asia strategy, which explicitly seeks to
strengthen our counter-terrorism cooperation to prevent
violent extremism and radicalization by addressing the
root causes. The European Union is therefore fully
engaged and committed and intends to continue its
efforts in the area of regional cooperation. Moreover,
we may extend to Afghanistan certain dialogue and
cooperation frameworks established with the Central
Asian countries.

Young people and education are another significant
area of work under the new European Union strategy.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the synergies
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the fight against terrorism work. It is up to us, as
Security Council members, to support them. Rest
assured that France will fully play its role in that regard.

