Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for agreeing to hold this meeting in open session today.
Enough is enough. We need to break with tradition and
have this debate in public because it is vital that the
world hear the reality of life in Syria. I therefore thank
Under-Secretary O'Brien for his sobering briefing.

It is also vital that the world hear each and every
member of the Council respond to the horrors described
today. We cannot hide away behind closed doors. We
cannot stay silent in the face ofsuchbarbarism. Hundreds
of civilians are being killed and injured in attacks from
the air and ground. Hundreds of thousands more are
now suffering in an ever-expanding humanitarian
crisis. As we have just heard, eastern Aleppo city is
now encircled by the regime. The Castillo road, a vital
route for food, medicine and supplies, is cut off. Three
hundred thousand people are now effectively besieged.
Yet another humanitarian catastrophe awaits.

We have seen this before, and we know what happens
next. Only six months ago, we held an emergency
briefing on the siege of Madaya (see PV.7605). We all
remember the pictures of emaciated children from that
town - children like Olah, only 12-years-old, who died
after the regime ignored requests to evacuate her. She
starved to death. The Syrian American Medical Society
reports that 64 others suffered the same horrific fate.

We owe it to Olah, her family and the people of
Madaya to stop history repeating itself in Aleppo.
There are 300,000 reasons why we cannot afford to
fail, but we are running out of time. We welcome the
foresight of the United Nations to preposition food
supplies in the city, but those supplies will feed less
than half the city's population and only for a month.
Food prices are soaring, the price of flour has doubled,
the price of vegetables has tripled and it is only going
to get worse. We all know what is needed: sustained
and unhindered humanitarian deliveries. All of us here
today - the Council, the United Nations, the world
outside the Chamber - must keep pressing for such
access, both for Aleppo and all other destinations
agreed in the July plan.

We support Under-Secretary O'Brien's call for
a weekly 48-hour pause to allow aid into Aleppo,
and I call upon all other Council members to express
their support today. We again call on Russia to use its
influence on the regime, not just to reopen the Castillo
road and other routes, but also to respect fully the
cessation of hostilities, so that convoys can proceed
securely and Syrians can live safely. Those are not
unreasonable requests. They are not even new requests,
and yet they have fallen on deaf ears time after time and
week after week. Without sustained and unhindered
land access, we must continue to push for air access,
and we look to the World Food Programme and the
United Nations for an update on their plans to request
approval for such delivery.

So far this month, only two besieged places have
been reached by the United Nations. The report of
the Secretary-General (S/2OI6/63l) explains that that
is because of security concerns. That comes as no
surprise, given the regime's military offensives. It is
also because of administrative delays. I am sorry,
but no person or child should ever face starvation
because of an administrative delay. The Council should
therefore be united in its condemnation of any effort
to delay or restrict access. As the Secretary-General's
report makes clear, granting access should never be
conditional, dependent on political negotiations or used
as a bargaining chip in talks.

As crucial as humanitarian access is for the people
ofAleppo, Madaya and so many other places in Syria, it
will count for very little ifthe bombs keep falling. I was
e-mailed recently by Dr. Hatem, a Syrian paediatrician,
who I have quoted in the Chamber before. He wrote to
me:

"There are close to 90,000 children in Aleppo. In
front of each of them, now lies the siege and above
them the threat of bombs".

What good is it to feed, to clothe, to heal someone
only for them to die under the rubble of a bomb blast?
In Daraya, over 700 barrel bombs fell in less than three
weeks. That is on average 1 bomb every 40 minutes for
20 days. In Aleppo city, only this weekend, 6 medical
facilities were attacked within the space of 24 hours.
The only paediatric facility in east Aleppo was hit twice
within 12 hours. These are just a handful of examples;
there are many more. Such attacks are unconscionable.
They are unjustifiable. And yet they are commonplace.
Al-Assad's consistent disregard for the cessation of
hostilities is an affront to the Security Council and to
the International Syria Support Group.

In the coming weeks and days, therefore, it is not
enough to grant unhindered access to all besieged
areas. It is not enough to unblock Castello road. We
need to see all of that and more, including a genuine
recommitment to the cessation of hostilities, an end to
the bombing of medical facilities and an end to attacks
on civilians. That is the only way to save the people of
Aleppo and the people of Syria. As Doctor Yahya of the
Aleppo Children's Hospital told me by e-mail earlier
today, if nothing is done, we are surely facing death.

