Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): My delegation
warmly congratulates you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. In the same vein, we
commend your predecessor for his excellent handling
of the affairs of the Council in September.

We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies (S/2004/616), and applaud you,
Mr. President, for the priority you have given to the
discussion of that topic, the significance and relevance
of which are evident in every part of the world today.
As the Secretary-General remarked in his address to
the General Assembly at its 3rd meeting, on
21 September, "the rule of law is at risk around the
world".

Sierra Leone particularly welcomes the
opportunity to participate in this debate because of our
bitter experience with the maladministration of justice
and abuse of the rule of law before and during our civil
war. For nearly 11 years we witnessed the commission
of horrendous crimes that resulted in many deaths,
injuries and the wanton destruction of property. The
experience of my country clearly demonstrates that the
absence of the rule of law creates an atmosphere in
which egregious crimes against international law can
be perpetrated with impunity.

Sierra Leone welcomes the Secretary-General's
report and endorses its observations and
recommendations. Those observations and
recommendations are consistent with the views of
Sierra Leone that the rule of law is a necessary
prerequisite for and an essential ingredient of justice
and accountability.

Sierra Leone believes without a doubt that the
International Criminal Court (ICC) is the instrument
for bringing to justice alleged war criminals and
reinforcing individual criminal responsibility for
crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide. The
Government and people of Sierra Leone view those
crimes seriously, and because of that we were among
the first countries to sign and ratify the ICC Statute,
whose objective is to promote the rule of law and deter
impunity.
We now have a functioning ICC; nevertheless, we
must recognize that much remains to be done to
establish a fully effective international criminal justice
system, with the ICC at its heart.

Respect for the rule of law within States, at the
national level, promotes peace and stability. Equally,
respect for the rule of law at the international level
promotes international peace and security. Support for
the ICC should be seen in that perspective. As the
Secretary-General points out in paragraph 49 of his
report, there is a great need for universal or near-
universal ratification of the Statute of the ICC. In his
statement to the General Assembly two weeks ago, he
reminded us that every nation that proclaims the rule of
law at home must respect it abroad.

My delegation would like to add that while
ratification of the Statute is an important contribution
to the rule of international law, it is equally important
that the Statute be incorporated into domestic law to
deter impunity.

Promotion of the rule of law and reform of the
administration of justice system, especially in States
emerging from conflict such as Sierra Leone, is very
expensive. Respect for the rule of law cannot be
separated from the problem of the availability of
resources. It is not enough to recruit police, magistrates
and other law enforcement officers; it is not enough to
give them the best professional training, if they lack
the means - the basic equipment and logistics - for
doing the job for which they are trained. At the same
time, they need incentives, such as decent salaries, if
only as a weapon for eliminating corruption - that
cancer in the body politic of many nations in the world
today.

That is why, in that connection, Sierra Leone
appreciates the assistance of the International Military
Advisory Training Team and the United Kingdom, not
only for the training of our security personnel, but also
for providing their communications and other logistical
needs. The United Kingdom is also supporting, among
other things, Operation PEBU, the new housing project
for our security personnel. The assistance provided by
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone for the
construction of police barracks in the eastern and
southern provinces of Sierra Leone is a very good and
practical example of the role that the United Nations
can also play in the administration of justice and the
promotion of the rule of law.

As my Foreign Minister told the General
Assembly last week (see A/59/PV.15), the Government
of Sierra Leone is struggling, with limited resources, to
reform its own system for the administration of justice.
The current state of the justice system is reflected in
the latest report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (S/2004/724). We
have here another example of the important role the
international community can play in providing concrete
assistance in the promotion of the rule of law.

My delegation is also concerned about the serious
financial situation of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, which was established in my country to address
impunity and foster respect for the rule of law. Let me
reiterate that the efficacy of the Court, and indeed its
credibility, could be questioned unless urgent measures
are taken to address its problems of funding. The
Secretary-General, in paragraphs 40 and 41 of his
report (S/2004/616), acknowledged the important role
that ad hoc tribunals and hybrid courts such as the
Special Court for Sierra Leone play in the quest to end
impunity and bring about peace and reconciliation.

In this regard, let me renew our appeal for
continued voluntary contributions, as well as the
requested subventions for the Special Court from the
regular budget of the United Nations. We recall
President Kabbah's observation during the formal
opening of the Court in March. He said this:

"This is a Special Court for Sierra Leone, a
symbol of the rule of law and an essential
element in the pursuit of peace, justice and
national reconciliation for the people of Sierra
Leone. It is also a Special Court for the
international community, a symbol of the rule of
international law."

The least we can do for the victims of the heinous
crimes committed in Sierra Leone is to ensure that
justice is not only done but seen to be done. One sure
way of doing this is to provide the Court with the funds
it needs to perform its responsibilities.

I have the honour to inform the Security Council
that one of the accountability mechanisms established
in Sierra Leone, the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, released its report yesterday. The
Commission was established with the assistance of the
United Nations and the international community. This
event is in itself an eloquent testimony of what the
international community can achieve in fostering the
rule of law. I should like to extend the profound thanks
of the Government and the people of Sierra Leone to
the international community for this practical
contribution to the rule of law in Sierra Leone and the
rule of international law.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that justice and
respect for the rule of law are the foundation, as well
as the lubricant of the wheels, of peace and stability,
development, accountable governance and democracy.
By providing support for emerging democracies and
post-conflict transitions to establish and/or strengthen
mechanisms for enforcing justice and the rule of law,
the United Nations will be adding a critical dimension
to its efforts for peace. We look forward to the
implementations of the recommendations contained in
the Secretary-General's report.

