Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
can be relatively brief this morning, not least because
the representative of Spain will be speaking later in the
debate on behalf of the European Union. But, before
starting my statement, I did want to mark the presence
with us this morning of Prime Minister Howard of
Australia and of the Irish Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs. I think it was particularly apposite to have
Prime Minister Howard with us this morning in View of
the enormous contribution that Australia has made in
East Timor since the events of two years ago. And I
very much welcome the presence of our Irish
colleague, which I know symbolizes the tremendous
concern and commitment felt by the people of Ireland
for the situation in East Timor.

As always, Sergio Vieira de Mello's briefing was
a masterpiece of the genre. I am very grateful to him
and to his team for giving us such a useful, exhaustive
and comprehensive report on what has happened in the
territory since we last met. I particularly welcome the
progress he was able to report on a number of areas,
and I would strongly endorse what he had to say about
the criminal and justice systems, the importance of
getting this right and the progress that has been made
with the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation. It will come as no surprise to Council
Members that the United Kingdom remains very
concerned about serious crime issues throughout the
panoply of the United Nations activities, and East
Timor must be no exception in this regard.

On the first part of the work we have before us
today, we strongly support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the mandate of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) should be extended to 20 May. Together
with the delegation of Singapore, we have been
working on a draft resolution to put that into practice,
and I think I can assure Mr. Vieira de Mello that action
on this will be taken well before the end of this week. I
anticipate no problems whatsoever.

On the next stage of our remit, we welcome very
much the outlined proposals for a successor mission for
a limited period after independence, as set out in the
Secretary-General's report this time, and we look
forward to receiving more specific proposals from him
as we move towards independence.

For the follow-on mission, we support the
recommendation that a number of key civilian
positions be funded from assessed contributions for a
limited period. These positions will, after all, be crucial
to the stability of the new administration. They have
already been advertised, and it is important that
recruitment takes place in good time to ensure a
smooth hand-over of responsibilities at the time of
independence. I would add in parentheses that I think
the decision taken by the Secretariat to go ahead and
advertise these posts in advance of formal approval of
the successor mission is admirable and fully in line
with the general thrust behind Lakhdar Brahimi's
report on peace operations and a real gesture of the will
and determination in the Secretariat to ensure that
United Nations operations in these sorts of areas can be
made to run as smoothly and seamlessly as possible.

On the political front, we very much welcome the
announcement of presidential elections, which will take
place in April this year. We urge all parties to conduct
the election campaign in a peaceful and transparent
way. And, in a slightly different part of the political
forest, we hope that the extension of the constitutional
process to allow broader consultation on a number of
proposed amendments to the Constitution will be put to
good use. It is very important that the Constitution of
the independent East Timor should have the support of
all the people of the territory. I hope that it will be
possible to take account of all the suggestions that have
been made and put forward to an appropriate degree,
including those from some of the more minor political
parties.

As Prime Minister Howard just said, East Timor
will need more than the help and good will of its
nearest neighbours. We look forward to the completion
of the National Development Plan. This will provide
the basis for donors to determine the scope of their
future support to an independent East Timor and, not
least, will help define disbursement mechanisms.
Indications of future support for East Timor will, we
understand, be sought at the May Donors Conference.
It goes without saying that donors will appreciate the
early completion and dissemination of the development
plan in order to prepare for that Conference. The more
time that can be allowed for preparation, the better the
eventual results will be.

I have two other points to make, and then I will
finish. First, it is good that refugees have continued to
return since the August election, but we remain deeply
concerned about the plight of the remaining refugees in
West Timor. We understand that there could be up to
80,000 of them. I would like, here and now, to urge the
United Nations and the Government of Indonesia to
complete the negotiations for the Memorandum of
Understanding to enable international agencies to
return to East Timor and facilitate the resettlement of
the remaining refugees.

Finally, I would like to make it very clear that the
United Kingdom remains fully committed to
supporting the East Timorese people and the United
Nations to create a stable, independent and democratic
State. I am happy to be able to say that a Minister from
the Foreign Office will attend the independence day
celebrations in Dili on 20 May and that the United
Kingdom will retain a diplomatic presence in Dili after
independence.

