Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the briefers
and our colleagues from the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of
Experts for their excellent work in facilitating the
comprehensive review of the resolution.

Italy aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union and with the European
Union report in support of the full and universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Italy is concerned about the proliferation risk posed
by non-State actors. All Member States, international
organizations and institutions should constantly update
their response to these developments by improving
transfer controls for sensitive materials and by
enhancing the role of information and communications
technologies and social media in countering
terrorist narratives.

We welcome the increase in the number of national
reports and voluntary national implementation action
plans. We are also pleased to recall that last year Italy
deposited its instrument of ratification to the 2005
amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material. Significant progress has also been
made on the ratification of the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.

We believe that the cooperation among Member
States and the 1540 (2004) Committee should be
enhanced. An increasing number of States are inviting
the Committee, together with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, to conduct visits, which is another positive
sign of States' commitment in this field. In that regard, I

would like to recall the Committee's visit to my country
last year.

Italy promoted the Nuclear Security Summit Gift
BasketonNuclearSecurityTraining and SupportCentres
in support of the work of the Centres of Excellence in
enhancing nuclear security worldwide. Every year we
organize the International School on Nuclear Security
at the International Centre for Theoretical Physics, in
Trieste, which trains professionals from countries of the
developing world on the international legal framework
on nuclear security.

To counter the risk of the proliferation of chemical
weapons, Italy has conducted several chemical security
programmes in collaboration with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
whose inspectors are often trained at Italian chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear defence centres.
Italian chemical industries participate widely in the
OPCW Associate Programme, training experts from
other countries in various industrial operations in
order to facilitate industry-related implementation
of the Chemical Weapons Convention. Italy has
also contributed to the Joint United Nations-OPCW
multilateral operation that safely and security
transported and destroyed Syrian chemical agents,
including providing the United Nations-OPCW Joint
Mission with in-kind and financial assistance.

Finally, we made a voluntary contribution to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
project on the regional implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), concerning the comprehensive review of
chemical safety and security in Ukraine.

Italy believes it would be appropriate to continue to
focus on four main areas.

First, we invite those States that have not yet
submitted their first national report to do so as soon as
possible.

Secondly, we need capacity-building initiatives in
States that lack the necessary means, which should be
supported by providing the Committee with appropriate
technical, humanitarian and financial resources.

Thirdly, the active involvement of the private sector,
civil society, national Parliaments and academia should
be encouraged in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), while cooperation with industry representatives
would strengthen control on dual-use material transfers.
Fourthly, border controls and the protection of
sensitive materials and goods experts are key tools for
fighting the proliferation, smuggling and trafficking
of weapons of mass destruction. The European Union
expert control regulation, which is legally binding and
directly applicable to all Member States, is a valuable
example of border-control policy aimed at curbing
illegal trafficking.

In conclusion, Italy reiterates its support for a
renewed commitment by the Security Council to
preventing and countering the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery. Italy
remains fully committed to further enhancing it by
participating constructively in all relevant international
organizations and initiatives, as well as through active
engagement by Italian industry, civil society and
academia.

