Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I would like to begin my
statement by thanking the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/20l3/350) and Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing.

We welcome the positive signals coming from
Afghanistan. On Tuesday, Afghanistan's military
assumed the top leadership role in security matters
for the entire country. We have confidence that the
Afghan security forces have the capacity to fulfil
that challenging responsibility. Further boosting their
capacities and competencies within a rule of law
framework remains a key priority.

Preparations for the 5 April 2014 presidential
and provincial council elections are ongoing. The
appointment of the Chair of the Independent Election
Commission and the adoption of relevant electoral
legislation will help to build a credible framework
for independent, fair and free elections. We support
efforts aimed at achieving a democratic and inclusive
electoral process which involves political parties and
civil society, and commend, in that regard, the efforts
of all relevant Afghan authorities, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
United Nations Development Programme.

The successful continuation of Afghan-led peace
and reconciliation efforts will constitute another
important step towards security, stability and political
transition. From the outset, Turkey has supported the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process with the
High Peace Council at its core. We are fully aware of
the difficulties and challenges of the process. We hope
that different perceptions regarding the reconciliation
process will be reconciled, leading to a sincere,
inclusive and results-oriented dialogue.

One year after the Tokyo Conference, we are glad
to see increased efforts to move on to substantive
issues in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework,
both by the Afghan Government and the international
community, to ensure the concrete implementation of
mutual commitments. We look forward to the meeting
of senior officials to be held on 3 July in Kabul,
where the progress in meeting the goals of the Tokyo
Framework will be reviewed.

Despite positive signs, major political, economic
and security challenges remain. The security situation
continues to be a matter of grave concern. Recent
deplorable terrorist attacks have led to unacceptable
human costs. Civilian casualties seem to have increased.
Natural disasters, such as floods and earthquakes,
epidemic diseases, chronic poverty and increasing
internal displacement pose grave humanitarian threats.
As data put forward in the report clearly indicates,
the most vulnerable segments of society, especially
children, women and girls, continue to be at risk. The
United Nations and its partners, as well as international
humanitarian bodies, seem to be under heightened
threat. I strongly condemn the recent attacks on
international humanitarian personnel.

As Afghanistan moves forward towards a political
and security transition, we must remain in touch with
those realities on the ground. The continued display of
will by the international community will strengthen
the hopes of the Afghan people for the future and
help ensure that a smooth transition is under way. As
Afghanistan's regional and international partners, we
should spare no effort to contribute to the vision of a
secure, peaceful and self-sufficient Afghanistan. That
is in the mutual interest of all of us.

As the international presence is being reduced,
the importance of regional cooperation for achieving
stability, security and prosperity is being increasingly
recognized. The Istanbul Process continues to gain
momentum. The spirit of regional ownership, the
engagement and technical support of the United Nations
and its agencies, and the interest and support of the
international community have made that possible. We
are pleased to see the adoption of implementation plans
for the six priority confidence-building measures at the
third ministerial conference of the Istanbul Process,
held in Almaty in April. The ministerial declaration
emphasized the need for demonstrable progress in
agreed activities and called for interim, ad hoc funding
by participants. We would also like to welcome China's
offer to host the following ministerial conference next
year.

We welcome the recent trilateral meetings held
on issues such as development, education, trade,
investment, transportation, anti-terrorism, counter-
narcotic efforts and reconciliation in Afghanistan.
We also appreciate the constructive role played by
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in support of
Afghanistan.

Further connectivity will facilitate economic
development, stability and self-sustainability and help
create a more favourable business environment in
Afghanistan. We attach particular importance to the
completion and maintenance of local railroad and land
routes, the development of regional economic projects
and the enhancement of civil aviation capabilities.

Turkey will always remain in solidarity with the
Afghan people and continue to contribute to a safe,
secure and prosperous Afghanistan, as we have done
for many decades.

In conclusion, I would like to voice our strong
belief that the United Nations will continue to play its
crucial role during and after the transition. I would
particularly like to commend the valuable efforts of the
United Nations, and UNAMA in particular, and express
our heartfelt gratitude to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kubis and his hard-working team.

