Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would first of all like to thank you, Mr. Minister, and the
Canadian presidency for having organized this debate,
thus giving us the opportunity to express our views on an
issue of crucial importance. I welcome the participation
of the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) in this morning's debate, and I wish to pay
tribute to the tireless efforts of the ICRC on behalf of the
victims of armed conflicts throughout the world.

Switzerland welcomes the draft resolution submitted
to the Security Council for consideration, which describes
the initiatives that the Council and the entire international
community could undertake in order to improve the
protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts.

In earlier statements, I have had the opportunity to
affirm my country's priorities for action in the
humanitarian field, such as respect for international
humanitarian law, the protection of civilian populations,
unimpeded access to victims of conflict and the security
of humanitarian personnel. I will therefore confine myself
today to three specific points that I believe to be of major
importance and deserving of in-depth consideration.

First, the question of the protection of civilian
populations in armed conflict compels us to consider the
current evolution of these conflicts throughout the world.
The proliferation of complex and prolonged emergency
situations, as seen recently in Somalia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola, Burundi, Sierra Leone,
Afghanistan and many other countries challenges the
bases on which human rights and international
humanitarian law instruments have been developed.

Respect for the provisions of these legal instruments
is broadly based on the responsibility of States; but we
see that non-State armed actors - armed groups, private
militia - tend to be increasing. It is deeply disturbing to

 
see that in the most recent internal conflicts, civilians not
only are the victims, but are becoming targets for the
warring parties. Many studies have been made of this
situation, including very recently in the excellent report of
the Secretary-General on the millennium.

It is therefore important to ensure respect for the rule
of law and for humanitarian principles by non-State armed
actors. We are obviously aware of the concrete problems
that this poses. Suffice it to mention the question of
recognition of these actors as subjects of international law
or the question of the legitimacy accorded them by
involving them in a political dialogue. Yet it must be noted
that armed groups often have considerable power over the
territory under their control. As military entities, they may
also be called upon to ensure protection of the civilian
population and to facilitate humanitarian operations in the
areas under their control. They are also actors who must be
taken into account if peace negotiations are to begin.

As we reflect on these issues, we must necessarily be
guided by common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions,
which enshrines the minimum rules of conduct that apply
to all of the parties to a conflict and which admit no
derogation.

The second priority also falls within the framework of
the human security strategy. In addition to what should be
a continuing struggle to eliminate anti-personnel mines and
to strengthen victim assistance programmes, the question of
small arms and light weapons must be at the forefront of
our concerns. My delegation believes that it is urgent to
establish stricter control over these weapons and their
transfer, which would involve preventive and regulatory
measures alike. Our agenda in this field must include the
marking of small arms and light weapons, measures to
monitor their trade and the development of codes of
conduct and actions to reduce the number of these weapons
already in circulation in areas of conflict.

The Security Council, as the organ with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, can also contribute to these efforts and provide an
impetus for all partners concerned to do likewise.

Lastly, I wish to mention here the need more closely
to involve the economic actors, and in particular the private
sector, in the search for lasting solutions to armed conflict.
Recent discussions on Angola and Sierra Leone have made
this clear. We have reason more systematically than in the
past to try to achieve cooperation among representatives of
the humanitarian community, the States concerned and the
economic actors.
Finally, the development of, and respect for, codes
of conduct and thorough work within the framework of
the global covenant proposed by the Secretary-General
could also yield the innovative solutions that we urgently
need.

