Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his informative report on the situation in the Middle
East and the occupied Palestinian territories. We also
listened carefully to Ms. Adele Raemer's briefing.

We can only concur with the Special Coordinator's
key conclusion that negative trends with regard to a
settlement in the Middle East are not simply dominant
but are approaching a critical point. We have been seeing
dangerous tendencies in that direction recently, with the
growing use of unilateral steps and aggressive revisions
of previously concluded agreements. The voting in the
General Assembly this month and last month on the
Middle Eastern block of resolutions has affirmed the
unity of an overwhelming majority of States Members
of the United Nations with regard to the generally
recognized principles for a settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. Russia has always supported a
just solution to the Palestinian issue on a basis of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative, which provide for the establishment of
an independent, sovereign, and territorially contiguous
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

We disagree profoundly with the United States'
recent decision that it would no longer consider Israeli
settlement activities to be a violation of international
law, claiming as its excuse that it is recognizing what
it calls the real situation on the ground. It is of a piece
with the United States Administration's decisions on
Jerusalem and on its illegitimate recognition of Israel's
sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan, which are
flagrant violations of international law. In that context,
we once again want to affirm that the Golan Heights
are unquestionably part of Syrian territory. We believe
that attempts to remove the task of finding a lasting
resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict from
the agenda are counterproductive. The only reliable
way to resolve all the existing disputes is through
direct negotiations between the parties. In our view,
it is pointless and dangerous to abandon the aim of
relaunching the negotiations and replace them with
economic initiatives that are mere palliatives.

Unfortunately, in our recent discussions on this
subject we have been going in circles and repeating
the same things again and again. The fact that there is
still no resolution of the Palestinian problem, which is
key for the entire region, continues to fuel extremist
attitudes inside and outside it. Armed clashes around the
Gaza Strip erupt periodically and discontent is growing
among ordinary Palestinians and Arabs. The Israeli
settlement activity and the demolition of Palestinians'
homes remain constant sources of contention and their
expanding use is mentioned in the Secretary-General's
recent related report (S/2019/938).

In the circumstances, it is more important than ever
to mobilize the efforts of the constructively disposed
representatives of the international community in
support of the generally recognized foundations of a
settlement in the Middle East. We want to coordinate our
efforts with international stakeholders with influence
and with the United Nations. It is essential to continue
working with our Palestinian and Israeli partners and
with the States of the Middle East and North Africa.
Sending a Security Council mission to the region would
seem timely in that regard.

In the interests of calming the situation and creating
conditions conducive to the quest for political solutions,
we urge the Israeli and Palestinian sides to refrain from
aggressive rhetoric or action. We consider settlement
activity, the demolition of Palestinian homes, attacks
on Gaza and announcements about plans to annex the
Jordan Valley unacceptable, as are rocket strikes on
Israeli territory and incitements to violence.

Israel and Palestine have important religious
significance for millions offollowers ofthe monotheistic
religions. The city of Jerusalem has a unique status
and is a place where the need to find ways to ensure
peaceful coexistence for the followers of all religions
is acutely felt. We want to point in that regard to the
historical role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as
the custodian of Jerusalem's holy sites. Establishing
lasting peace in these places is in the interests of all
Christians, Muslims and Jews.

We also consider it extremely important to support
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We
have said many times that UNRWA's activities possess
a political dimension as well as a humanitarian one,
and they have a stabilizing effect on the Palestinian
territories and the countries of the Middle East. In
that regard, we consider attempts to discredit UNRWA
and deprive it of its funding short-sighted. It is naive
and dangerous to hope that the problem of Palestinian
refugees will disappear along with the Agency, and we
hope that the Agency's change of leadership will not
affect its activities, which have shown their relevance
and effectiveness for decades.

