Mr. Dacie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I am not going to engage in
polemics with Ms. Citaku, as that is not my intention.
In the first place, as I have already said many times,
I would like these meetings to be constructive, and
therefore, again, I will not comment on what she
said - although I could do so, of course, as could she.

Moreover, I would like to add something to what I
heard from the representatives of some of the countries
present here. I am glad that the 10-year anniversary
of the independence of Kosovo and the establishment
of diplomatic relations was mentioned, particularly
by the representative of the United Kingdom. But I
would also recall that last year marked the one hundred
and eightieth anniversary of the establishment of
diplomatic relations between Serbia and the United
Kingdom. The first British Consul to Serbia was
George Lloyd Hodges, appointed in 1837. I hope that is
also gratifying, in addition to the 10 years of diplomatic
relations with Kosovo.

In addition, I would like to recall that next year
we will observe 180 years of diplomatic relations with
France, as ties were established in 1839. This year
also marks 180 years of diplomatic relations with the
Russian Federation, beginning in 1838. In 1881 - 137
years ago - we established diplomatic relations with
the United States. In 1899 - 119 years ago - we
established diplomatic relations with the Netherlands.
I am referring exclusively here to the Kingdom of
Serbia, not Yugoslavia. In 1917 - 101 years ago - we
established diplomatic relations with Sweden. And
we established diplomatic relations with Poland 99
years ago.

Therefore, I would like to recall that we are an old
State with which Council members have traditional
and friendly relations. In fact, as one exits the United
Kingdom's Foreign and Commonwealth Office one
can see a mural, erected after the First World War, that
depicts Britannia with children representing Belgium
and Serbia as the countries that made the largest
contributions and had the largest number of victims in
the war. We lost 40 per cent of our male population
in the First World War. Consequently, I would ask
the Council to consider those aspects when talking
about our relations and our problems - all the more
so considering that these issues are very difficult and
painful to us.

I ask the Council to show greater understanding
for our desire to be partners with every member. We
have a long-standing tradition of diplomatic relations,
several centuries. I also ask the Council to remember
that history and what Serbia did for its allies in the First
and Second World Wars. I do not want to delve too far
into the past, as some might accuse us of dwelling
there, but one cannot make plans for the future based
exclusively on respect for Kosovo's interests. Serbia is
willing to compromise, but that means respecting the
interests of both sides.

Many countries in the world are facing problems
similar to Serbia's. They are now reviewing their
decisions to recognize Kosovo for those very same
reasons - because they are now facing their own
separatist movements. How can they recognize these
principles in one situation and not in another? One
could perhaps say that Kosovo is sui generis. Anyone
can say that their case is sui generis. Moreover, this is
not a fight for self-determination or freedom, because
the Albanians in Kosovo are not a people who did not
have a State of their own. They are a national minority
that lived in Serbia. Albanians, as a people, have
already exercised their right to self-determination by
establishing a State of their own - Albania. The fact
that diplomatic relations were such that Kosovo was
recognized as an independent State does not mean that
the same determination will prevail in, say, 20 years,
when the same problems appear at one's door.

We do not wish conflict. Serbia is a serious
country, an old country that shaped international order
over several centuries for Christianity, for Europe and
for the world at large. That must be taken into account
when other countries are called upon to recognize
Kosovo. I would never call upon other countries
to violate any other country's territorial integrity.
We would like to be partners with all countries, but
partnership also implies that we should remember that
in this country and in the United Kingdom 100 years
ago, Serbian Day was observed during the First World
War. I can bring a poster of that to the next meeting of
the Security Council.

Has anything changed for the British people
over the past 100 years? Probably, but the same thing
happened in the United States. All of us here must be
aware that these are not lies, but rather historical facts
that can be researched. That is why, in Serbia, we will
erect a monument to Woodrow Wilson, President of
the United States, who clearly defined the relationship
of his country to Serbia - the largest victim of the
First World War - as a country that was included in
Wilson's 14 points and one that made a huge historical
mistake by creating Yugoslavia and enabling others to
break free from other occupiers. That is an error that we
will have to pay for. I ask the Council to consider that.

The United Kingdom says that it is glad to
commemorate 10 years since the independence of
Kosovo, but I have not heard that Great Britain is
gratified to have enjoyed 170 or 180 years of diplomatic
relations with Serbia. The same is true ofother countries
as well. Serbia is the only country in the world that has
a monument in honour of France. We love France as
France loved us.

This is history. Some will say that history is
not important. However, those that have a history
cannot possibly say that; only those that do not have a
history can.

The members of the Security Council have a history.
I would therefore like to thank them for everything that
they said - whether good or bad for us. Everyone has
the right to choose their own future. We understand
that there are no long-standing friends or enemies, but
there are in fact long-standing friends. Do not break old
friendships because of new ones.

