Mr. Carneiro (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; English text furnished by the delegation): Allow me first, on behalf
of the Government and the people of Angola, to greet all
the members of the Council, and to express our deep
gratitude for the attention and efforts devoted by the
international community to the peace process in our
country.

I must once more bring to the attention of this
Council the profound concern of my delegation at the
situation of instability in Angola brought about by the
destabilizing activities carried out by the Uniao Nacional
para a Independencia Total dc Angola (UNITA), which
have significantly damaged the prospects for immediate
peace.

These armed activities, which both my Government
and the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MON UA) have identified as originating from the UN ITA
leadership, must be stopped to prevent another armed
confrontation in Angola, which could have catastrophic
results.

Let me stress that some one million displaced
persons have already returned to their areas of origin and
to urban centres. State administration is already starting
to have its effects in areas formerly controlled by UNITA,
and little by little, the lives of rural populations have been
slowly returning to normal.

However, all of this is being impeded by obstacles
to the free circulation of people and goods and by
increasing attacks on villages and towns by UNITA
military forces. This instability does not augur well for
the efforts made by the Government and the international
community aimed at the full and total implementation of
the Lusaka Protocol.

As everyone knows, and as the commander of the
United Nations forces in Angola has stated in his report,
UNITA has hidden military forces and equipment from
MONUA and continues to recruit and train citizens in
various parts of the country. These forces are rearming as
rapidly as possible. Taking into account that MONUA has
not been able to demilitarize UNITA in the last three and
half years, this task will fall to my Government, with the
assistance the international community.

The current involvement of UNITA's President with
foreign forces that are now destabilizing Angola's borders
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo likewise
poses a threat to the whole region, including the Great
Lakes area. We call on the members of the Security
Council to face the dangers these forces may cause if
steps are not taken.

 

The Blue Helmets are currently being withdrawn from
Angola, in accordance with Security Council resolution
1164 (1998). My Government is aware of the implications
of this withdrawal and will do everything in its power to
ensure its completion by 1 July 1 1998 without incident.

The Security Council is meeting formally today to
vote on a new draft resolution on Angola, in view of the
impasse now prevailing and the plan announced by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General aimed at
resolving this crisis.

In my Government's view, this draft resolution could
help find a common denominator that will lead UNITA to
adopt a more constructive attitude, to act in good faith to
complete the peace process without further delays and to
assume the responsibilities assigned to it by the Lusaka
Protocol.

The Government of Angola accepts the content of this
draft resolution and supports its fundamental positions. We
hope that it will promote tangible action allowing for the
preservation of progress already made in the course of the
peace process.

We must force UNITA's leadership to clarify its
position. We cannot keep thousands of UNITA members
working for peace, development, democracy and stability in
Parliament, in the Government, in the armed forces and in
the National Police while UNITA's leaders create military
obstacles to the completion of the peace process and the
fulfilment of the Lusaka Protocol, seeking to reverse the
positive progress accomplished in the recent past and again
bring suffering to thousands of Angolan citizens. We must
all recognize once and for all what the UNITA leader
stands for.

As far as the Government is concerned, we reaffirm
our firm commitment to the peace process. We will do
everything possible to ensure the extension of State
administration to the entire territory of Angola, without
incident and with greater control of all agencies of the local
State administration.

We pay profound tribute to all United Nations
personnel who have lost their lives while working for peace
in Angola.

Lastly, we would like to extend our appreciation for
the efforts made by the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and the troika of observers to the peace
process for their efforts to find a solution to the Angolan
cr1s1s.

