Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your presidency of the Security Council for
this month of August. My delegation is also happy that you
took the initiative to organize this meeting for the purpose
of discussing the all- important subject of the protection of
children in armed conflict.

On this occasion, as many delegations have noted, it
is fitting to pay tribute to Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, for his tireless crusade to save children
from the scourge of war throughout the world. Today he
presented a candid and graphic report on the prevalence of
the acts of inhumanity being committed against women and
particularly children in conflict situations throughout the
world. It is my delegation's hope that the Council would
pay special attention to Ambassador Otunnu's
recommendations and suggestions aimed at improving the
human condition of children.

As we meet here, we are united in the global outrage
against the exploitation of children under age who serve as
soldiers. This meeting is therefore an unequivocal
expression of the international outrage against the
unrelenting exploitation of children under arms, which has
led to the growing consensus to raise the age limit to 18
years for serving in the military.

It is appalling that more than 300,000 children under
18 years of age are currently participating in the 50 or so
armed conflicts that are under way worldwide. There are
chilling reports of some guerrilla movements, in South
Asia, fighting legitimate Governments using young girls
as suicide bombers. There are equally chilling accounts in
Africa, where more than 120,000 children under 18 years
of age are being used as soldiers. These children are also
subjected to other forms of cruelty, such as physical
brutality, with girls suffering humiliation, exploitation and
sexual abuse.

Again, all too often we get reports of poor children,
perhaps without parents and without access to education,
being lured into armed groups by promises of payment,
food or protection. Some children are forcibly
conscripted, but are told to say they volunteered. For all
intents and purposes, the distinction between forced,
compulsory and voluntary recruitment is blurred, hence
the need to have a complete prohibition on child
participation in combat altogether.

Zambia fully supports strengthening the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted
in 1989. We strongly support the draft Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child relative to
children in armed conflicts, which aims to raise the
minimum age limit to 18 years for recruitment into the
armed forces.

The time has come to stop the scourge of child
soldiering, because all too often war becomes a
permanent way of life for many children, some of whom
are recruited at the tender age of seven years. In many of
the world's protracted internal conflicts, such children go
for years deprived of education or training in marketable
skills. Hundreds of thousands of children under conflict
conditions have become street children, traumatized and
without hope for the future.

It is not surprising, therefore, that such children
continue violent activities long after the original conflicts
have ended. In a significant number of cases, the dividing
line between warfare and outright banditry completely
disappears.

 

My delegation applauds the International Labour
Organization, which adopted on 17 June 1999 the
Convention on the worst forms of child labour, intended to
end the exploitation of the millions of children under the
age of 18 who are involved in all forms of slavery or
practices similar to slavery. Such practices include the sale
and trafficking of children, debt bondage, serfdom and
prostitution.

Zambia believes that all recruitment of child soldiers
must stop now. For the sake of all children the world over,
we need a total ban on the use of child soldiers under 18
years of age.

The phenomenon of small and light weapons has
introduced a new and disturbing dynamic in modern
warfare. It has led to a vast expansion in the involvement
of children under age as both victims and perpetrators.
Handguns, rifles, machine guns, grenades and anti-
personnel landmines are all weapons of choice in conflicts
where children are used as both soldiers and perpetrators.
Light arms are wreaking havoc on, and ruining the lives of,
young children.

The issue of small and light arms should therefore be
a matter of public concern, to the international community
in general and to the Security Council in particular. We
therefore urge the Council to take concrete steps to control
the overflow of small and light weapons on the
international scene.

In all war-torn countries the world over, the existence
of international humanitarian law and human rights law has
not led to a better life for ordinary innocent civilians,
including children. There is absolutely no commitment
whatsoever to such international norms. If anything, there
is but mockery of these international standards by warlords
and their supporters. This must stand as a challenge to the
international community, and the Security Council should
find more lasting and effective ways to hold culprits to
account and to ensure that all concerned abide by their
obligations under international law.

We call upon parties directly or indirectly involved in
conflicts to respect existing international standards and to
make every effort possible to protect children from
Violence. We reaffirm the fundamental principle that
children must live out their childhood in peace, freedom
and security, free from abuse, violence and exploitation.

