Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
at the outset to extend my sincere thanks for organizing
this open debate meeting today.

We had hoped that this meeting would be really
open to all those who are interested in participating.
However, and unfortunately, we were surprised by a
practice that is very difficult to explain- namely,
preventing the representative of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, Ambassador Jovanovic, from taking
part. This practice does not allow this open debate to
realize its objective, because a major viewpoint is
already absent from this debate.

Raising the issue of the succession of Yugoslavia
as an excuse to deprive the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia of the opportunity to take part in this
meeting is an illogical excuse and is not in harmony
with the Charter of the United Nations. Articles 31 and
32 permit a Member State of the United Nations, as
well as a non-member, to take part in discussing any
issue that is before the Security Council and which
particularly affects its own interests.

On the other hand, preventing the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia from taking part in this
meeting happened at a time when there is a
proliferation of hearing sessions and open meetings
held by the Council. Whoever is interested in taking
part in these meetings is allowed to, ranging from the
representatives of the rebels in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to Senator Jesse Helms, who
lectured the Council at length, disdaining the Charter
of the United Nations. So why is the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, an independent State and a Member of
the United Nations which is directly concerned with
this particular matter, an exception here?

The current situation in the Balkans is
characterized by fragile balances in all political,
military and economic matters. The events of recent
years have proved that any foreign intervention that has
suspicious intent, and any violation of the Charter of
the United Nations - particularly of the principles of
respect for the sovereignty of States, non-interference
in the internal affairs of States and the inadmissibility
of the use or the threat of the use of force in
international relations - have further complicated the
situation in the Balkans.

The NATO aggression led by the United States
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on 24
March 1999 struck a hard blow for all the efforts by the
international community to solve the crisis. It was also
a hard blow for the Charter of the United Nations, as
well as the rules of international law and the authority
and prestige ofthe Security Council.

The Secretary-General was right to say that the
use of force without Security Council authorization
jeopardized the essence of the collective international
security system based on the Charter of the United
Nations. In the wake of the military aggression against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, we saw the
persistent use of other forms of aggression: attempts to
bring about isolation and exclusion; the imposition of
sanctions; and interference in the internal affairs of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, including threats to its
territorial integrity.

At this very meeting we heard the representative
of the United States of America call upon members of
the Council to meet with the representative of one of
the entities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. That
amounted to a call for the partition of an independent
State and blatant interference in its internal affairs. It
also set another grave precedent in the work of the
Security Council. It is a destructive policy whose real
purpose is not to establish peace and stability in the
Balkans, but rather to further the expansionist political
interests of certain influential international parties at
the expense of the peace and stability of the Balkans
and ofthe territorial integrity of its States.

Peace in the Balkans will come about through
respect for the United Nations and through serious-
minded, direct dialogue among all parties in the region.
What is required is a comprehensive outlook regarding
all elements of the crisis, with a View to resolving it.
Moreover, the international community must provide
impartial and sincere assistance in bringing peace and
stability to the Balkans.

