Ms. Zahir (Maldives): My delegation wishes to
thank the Dominican Republic for convening today's
open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate the newly elected
members of the Council - Belgium, the Dominican
Republic, Germany, Indonesia and South Africa, which
became members of the Council this month.

The Government and the people of the Maldives
attach great importance to the issue of the Middle East,
especially the question of Palestine. I wish to reiterate
my Government's steadfast support to the Council and
to the Secretary-General in all ongoing efforts to bring
lasting peace to the Middle East.

The conflict in Palestine has been going on for seven
decades despite the numerous discussions, debates and
resolutions adopted at the United Nations, including
by the Council. To this day, the illegal occupation of
Palestine continues with the demolition and seizure
of Palestinian-owned property, the building of illegal
settlements and the gross violation of the basic human
rights of the Palestinian people.

The Government of Maldives condemns those acts
of aggression and calls on Israel to lift the blockade
imposed on the civilian population in Gaza and to cease
the disproportionate attacks on Palestinian civilians,
including women and children. The restrictions imposed
on the movement of people and goods into and out of
the Gaza Strip must be lifted immediately to ensure the
safe delivery of humanitarian assistance. The Security
Council must take urgent action to protect civilians
and to ensure the delivery of the basic humanitarian
assistance much needed by millions of Palestinians.

Through resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980),
the Security Council declared null and void the Israeli
occupation of Palestine, the annexation of the holy city
of Jerusalem and the moving of the Israeli capital to
Jerusalem. It also declared it illegal for any country to
decide to recognize Jerusalem as Israel's capital and
to move its embassy there. Through resolution 2334
(2016), the Council called upon all States to distinguish,
in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the
State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967.
Yet we are witnessing that some countries are ignoring
the Council's resolutions.

The Maldives has always believed that an
independent and sovereign State of Palestine, based
on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side in peace and harmony with
Israel, is the best and only solution to the conflict. It is
depressing to see that such a solution, to which all sides
in the conflict once subscribed in the past, seems to
move further and further away.

The Maldives therefore calls on Israel to fully
implement the resolutions of the Security Council and
to respect the legal obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations. We also urge the Security Council and
the entire United Nations membership to redouble their
efforts to end the conflict so as to bring meaningful
and lasting peace to the people of Palestine, as well
as Israel.

The conflict in Syria has already claimed the lives
of hundreds of thousands of people, including children.
It has levelled entire cities and towns to the ground and
reduced them to rubble. The resulting environment of
fear and uncertainty has caused millions of Syrians
to flee the country. Neighbouring Lebanon, Jordan
and Turkey struggle to cope with that mass exodus of
refugees, further exacerbating the humanitarian crisis
faced by the Syrian people. Yet the conflict is locked in
a stalemate with no end in sight.

We are encouraged by the recent discussions,
including the Brussels conference on supporting
the future of Syria and the region, co-chaired by the
European Union and the United Nations in April 2018.
We acknowledge that the conference provided an
opportunity to gather political support for the peace
process and to mobilize aid for the Syrians. However,
the United Nations and the international community
must do more to reinvigorate talks in order to reach a
peaceful settlement of the conflict.

The war in Yemen has affected millions of
civilians, and children are the hardest hit. The Maldives
supports the United Nations-mediated ceasefire agreed
to by all the parties in December last year and the
establishment of humanitarian corridors supervised by
the United Nations. The Maldives is encouraged by the
Council's decision to adopt resolution 2452 (2019) on
16 January to establish a special political mission to
support the implementation of the ceasefire agreement
of 13 December 2018.

Conflicts such as those in Yemen and Syria are a
breeding ground for terrorism, a global menace that pays
no heed to borders and does not distinguish between the
young and the elderly or women and men or respect
any religion or culture. It is a global threat to peace
and security, and therefore requires a global solution
rather than a local one. The international community
needs better coordination, information-sharing and
cooperative strategies to tackle the threat of terrorism.
The Security Council is the most vital organ of the
United Nations. It has the responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security. It therefore needs to
do more to ensure that its authority and legitimacy
are not compromised. The Council needs to step up
its efforts to ensure that its decisions are respected by
everyone - every Member State and every member of
the Council.

