The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Kubis
for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the State of Kuwait.

First of all, I would like to highly commend
the efforts of the United Nations in assisting the
Government and the people of Iraq at such a sensitive
and difficult juncture, in particular following the
liberation of all Iraqi territories from Da'esh. I also
thank the United Nations for its work and coordination
through the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) with the Iraqi Government pursuant
to resolution 2367 (2017). I reiterate as well Kuwait's
support for Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of UNAMI, and his
Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs in
Iraq, Ms. Alice Walpole. We also appreciate the work
of her predecessor, Mr. Busztin.

I once again congratulate the Government and the
people of Iraq on their historic Victory in liberating
their territories from Da'esh. At the same time, we
highly commend the sacrifices of our brotherly Iraqi
people, which embody the ideal of heroism in combating
terrorism. We hope that the Iraqi Government will
successfully hold accountable perpetrators of these
criminal acts, in coordination and cooperation with the
international mechanism pursuant to resolution 2379
(2017), in order to strengthen the country's relevant
national judicial capacities.

We recognize the challenges facing Iraq following
the defeat of Da'esh. His Highness Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber A1-Sabah called for holding an
international conference on the reconstruction of Iraq,
which took place in Kuwait last week. It was co-hosted
by Kuwait, the Republic of Iraq, the United Nations,
the European Union and the World Bank, and aimed
at helping Iraq overcome its current sensitive and
critical phase. Pledges at the conference amounted to
almost $30 billion from participating States, the private
sector and civil society organizations. They were made
in the form of investment loans and credit facilities
that would improve the livelihoods of Iraqis, develop
infrastructure and provide the basic services needed to
establish a secure environment in the liberated areas of
Iraq. The State of Kuwait announced its contribution
of $1 billion in the form of loans within the framework
of the Kuwaiti Fund for Arab Economic Development,
and an additional $1 billion earmarked for investing in
projects in Iraq. Two years ago Kuwait also contributed
more than $200 million in voluntary assistance at the
governmental and public levels in response to the
humanitarian impact caused by Da'esh's invasion of
Iraq. Last week, Kuwait also hosted the ministerial
meeting of the Global Coalition to Defeat Da'esh
to ensure the ongoing coordination of international
counter-terrorism efforts and the implementation of the
strategy developed by the Coalition to put an end to that
criminal organization.

With regard to international obligations and
humanitarian issues related to missing Kuwaiti citizens
and third parties, as well as missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives, we will continue
to honour our obligations and monitor the periodic
reports of the Secretary-General and the briefings of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Iraq, pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 2107 (2013).
I again call upon everyone to make a greater effort,
devise an innovative approach to meet obligations
with regard to Kuwait in order to make progress on the
issue, given the importance and historic value of such
archives, in accordance with resolution 2107 (2013),
and end the suffering of the families of prisoners and
of those who have been missing for more than 27 years.

In conclusion, we hope that cooperation will
continue in the same amicable spirit with Iraq. We would
like to honour the remaining obligations of the tripartite
mechanism and its technical committee headed by the
International Committee of the Red Cross, according
to the relevant Security Council resolutions, with the
aim of achieving substantial and tangible results. I
would again like to commend the efforts of UNAMI.
We reiterate that we will cooperate fully with UNAMI
in order to complete its mandate to the fullest.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those other Council
members who wish to make statements.

