Mr. Helg (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like first of all to thank Ambassador Arias for
his briefing on the work done and the efforts made in
recent months by him and all others involved in
producing the report on the revitalization of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) (S/2004/124, annex).

The fight against terrorism concerns the entire
international community, and it is therefore essential
that all States - not only the members of the Security
Council - be given an opportunity to express their
views. I therefore welcome this open debate.

Switzerland hopes that that same concern for
transparency will guide the future work of the
Committee, in particular the discussion of the Action
Plan that the new Executive Director will submit on the
strengthening of the role of the Committee. All
Member States should be able to take part in the
discussion of that plan from the outset, and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
should be established with full respect for the
prerogatives of the Secretary-General and the
institutional rules that govern the functioning of the
Organization.

The report on the revitalization of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee is a first important step towards
strengthening the role of the Committee. I would
therefore like to highlight several aspects of this issue
that Switzerland considers particularly important.

First of all, there should be closer cooperation
between the Committee and other international bodies
concerned with terrorism. The Committee's activities
should not duplicate or compete with what is being
done elsewhere. There is a need for synergy both with
regional organizations and with specialized bodies such
as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
located in Vienna.

As for visits to Member States, Switzerland
welcomes the fact that clear guidelines will be
established. The Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions
Committee, as well as experts from the Monitoring
Group, are also carrying out such visits. It is vital that
we exploit more effectively any future synergy between
that Committee, its experts and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee.

On several occasions, Switzerland has expressed
its determination to participate in the fight against
terrorism and has demonstrated that determination
through numerous specific measures. The necessary
fight against terrorism can and must be carried out
Without sacrificing respect for human rights,
democracy and the rule of law. In its resolution 58/187,
adopted on 22 December 2003, the General Assembly
underlined the importance of respect for human rights
in formulating measures to combat terrorism and called
for greater consideration of existing instruments and
mechanisms in the area of human rights. In that
context, I would like to stress two points.

First, with respect to the planned improvement of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee's ability to collect
information, I would like to emphasize that it is
necessary to collect and process that data in
compliance with international rules on the protection of
individuals and data.

Secondly, it is important to strengthen
collaboration between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Switzerland welcomes the fact that
this is among the proposals in the report on the
revitalization of the Committee. We would be
interested in learning more about the concrete setting
up of that liaison mechanism.

The creation of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
was an exceptional measure that was taken to respond
quickly to an urgent situation. Today, we know that the
fight against terrorism and its financing is a protracted
challenge. Thus, it is necessary to think of the long
term rather than of emergency measures. The planned
re-examination of the Committee's new structures will
provide an opportunity to reflect on the Committee's
role in the long term.

My country is of the view that the crucial
question is whether the fight against terrorism within
the framework of the United Nations should continue
to be the primary responsibility of a subsidiary body of
the Security Council. A possible alternative would be
to establish a central office under the authority of the
Secretary-General. In any event, a new formula should
be found to enable all States to participate more fully
in the current efforts to combat terrorism.

