Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation joins those who spoke before me in
addressing to you, Sir, its heartfelt congratulations and
wishing you every success on the occasion of this first
debate in October, devoted to the role of young people
in the promotion of peace and security in Africa, which
marks the beginning of the South African presidency of
the Security Council. My delegation also commends the
Russian Federation on the excellent work accomplished
over the past month, and all the briefers for their excellent
briefings and the relevance of their recommendations.

Data relating to the ongoing conflicts on the
African continent, as well as the numerous studies on
new forms of crime in our States, teach us that, despite
the enormous potential that young people represent,
they continue to be unsuccessful in making a significant
contribution to peacebuilding, owing to many political
and social obstacles. In view of these considerations,
the African Union has expressed its determination
through the road map of the African Peace and Security
Architecture for the period 2016 to 2020 to promote
youth-empowerment policies in order to increase
their contributions to peace processes, national
reconstruction and post-conflict development. In other
words, it is all about harnessing the potential of young
people and encouraging them to invest their energy
and creativity in conflict prevention and peacebuilding
activities by ramping up their involvement in efforts
to combat the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons (SALW), as well as in the political processes
involving solutions to crises and peacebuilding.

As part of its strategy for resolving crises,
Cote d'Ivoire has placed particular emphasis
on associative-sector tools to better channel the
contribution of young people into social cohesion and
peacebuilding activities. The establishment of the
Youth Parliament represents one such case, which not
only provides a framework for democratic expression
and active participation in governmental policy to
promote national reconciliation and social cohesion,
but also promotes the formation of a civic conscience
committed to achieving peace and lasting stability.
Represented throughout the country by a network of
partner associations, the Parliament is a genuine bridge
connecting young people and the different strata of
Ivorian society.

Furthermore, my delegation believes that our
shared ambition to silence the arms must be based on an
unwavering fight against insecurity and unemployment.
These two scourges are the primary causes of violent
extremism and radicalization of young people, which
is the segment of the population most vulnerable to
the entreaties of transnational criminal networks and
armed groups. It is therefore necessary to invest more
in the education and training sectors and to provide the
necessary conditions for private entrepreneurship to
thrive and the creation of decent jobs.

While it is undeniable that the joint efforts of the
international community are crucial to silencing the
arms in Africa, it should also be recognized that States
have the primary responsibility for implementing
national arms control strategies. Accordingly, the Cote
d'Ivoire has established a national legal framework
linked to the Convention on Small Arms and Light
Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related
Materials ofthe Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Arms Trade Treaty. At the
operational level, combating the proliferation and illicit
trafficking of SALW has been carried out in parallel
with the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process, which, it should be stressed, has focused on
the reintegration of former combatants.

With regard to the implementation of the Convention
on SALW and the Arms Trade Treaty, I am pleased to
welcome and cite as an example the cooperation among
the National Commissions to Combat the Proliferation
and Illegal Movement of Small Arms and Light Weapons
of the ECOWAS member States. This outstanding
cooperation is contributing to strengthening national
capacities in combating arms trafficking and promoting
the regular exchange of experiences and good practices.
In this regard, it has enabled member States to make
significant progress in the area of controlling, marking
and securing stockpiles of weapons and ammunition.

Cote d'Ivoire takes this opportunity to advocate
pursuing the multifaceted support of the African
Union and international partners for strengthening the
capacities of regional organizations so as to increase
their effectiveness in combating arms proliferation,
awareness-raising and community disarmament,
together with civil society organizations.

In conclusion, my delegation urgently calls on the
international community, in particular the Security
Council, to support the African Union Silencing the
Guns by 2020 initiative, which is a manifestation of the
will of its States members to work to achieve peace,
security and development in Africa.

