I begin by expressing our deepest condolences on the passing away of Mr. Saeb Erekat, Secretary General of the Palestine Liberation Organization, to the Palestinian people and to his family. Saeb Erekat was a tireless advocate of achieving the two- State solution through negotiations. Belgium shares the vision of a negotiated solution based on the coexistence of two States, with the city of Jerusalem as the future capital of both, in accordance with internationally agreed parameters. We regret to note that the multiplication of faits accomplis runs counter to that goal and risks destroying the possibility of ever achieving it. We once again call on all parties to work towards creating an environment conducive to the resumption of negotiations and act accordingly to that end. Israeli settlement policy and related measures continue unabated. The policy is not only illegal under international law, including resolution 2334 (2016), but is also counterproductive. It undermines all trust necessary for resuming constructive dialogue and credible negotiations. We share the deep concerns expressed by the High Representative of the European Union following the decision of the Israeli authorities to open the bidding process for the construction of housing units in the Givat Hamatos settlement. The Heads of Missions of the European Union and other like-minded countries were able see the reality on the ground once again this week. Building settlements in certain sensitive areas is likely to destroy the possibility of Jerusalem becoming a shared capital and preclude contiguity between East Jerusalem and the rest of the Palestinian territory. Any initiative of this kind must be condemned in the strongest terms if we are to give achieving a viable and credible two-State solution a chance. In that regard, it is incumbent upon us to recall our shared responsibility to distinguish in our relevant dealings between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967, pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 2334 (2016). Making the distinction also serves as a tool for preventing settlement and annexation regardless of terminology or scope. The destruction of more than 80 structures in the village of Khirbet Hamsa Al-Fawga is a distressing example of the alarming increase in the number of demolitions and confiscations, including of humanitarian structures and property, in Area C in the West Bank. The trend is all the more worrisome in the context of the current pandemic and its significant humanitarian impact on already vulnerable communities. We call on the Israeli authorities to cease the demolitions, repair the affected property and provide compensation for the damages incurred, in accordance with international humanitarian law. We are particularly concerned about the demolition of schools. Like all children in the world, Palestinian children have the right to education. Belgium therefore calls on the Israeli authorities not to carry out orders to demolish schools in Ras Al-Tin, Jinba and Khirbet Al-Fakheit, and safeguard the 52 schools in the West Bank that are at risk of being demolished. We are deeply concerned about the economic and fiscal crisis in Palestine, exacerbated by the suspension of civil and security cooperation with Israel and the current pandemic. We welcome the announcement of the resumption of coordination between the Palestinian Authority and Israel, based on previous agreements, given its impact on the Palestinian population and as a confidence-building measure. We call on Israel to also take steps to underline its commitment to those agreements. We call on all Palestinian factions to engage in good faith in the reunification of Gaza and the West Bank under a single legitimate and democratic authority. We strongly encourage the holding of democratic elections in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem and Gaza. In that regard, it is important to safeguard the space necessary for Palestinian civil society and the full exercise of civil liberties. In conclusion, let me underscore the important role played by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in the absence of a lasting solution, not only for the Palestinian refugees but also for the viability of the two-State solution and regional stability and security. The international community's continued robust and predictable political and financial support is important, especially in the context of the current pandemic.
