Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): It is a pleasure,
Mr. President, to address the Council under your
presidency.

At the outset, I would like to thank both
Ambassador Denisov and Executive Director Ruperez
for their briefings this morning and to extend to them
our best wishes for their future work.

Liechtenstein strongly condemns all acts of
terrorism, irrespective of their motivation, wherever
and by whomsoever committed. We are committed to
international cooperation to fight terrorism, in
particular through the 12 United Nations conventions
and protocols in this area, all of which have been
ratified by Liechtenstein, and through the work of
United Nations bodies such as the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions
Committee. We are further of the view that the fight
against terrorism must not be carried out at the expense
of international legal standards, in particular in the area
of human rights.

Beginning with the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001), the Security Council has acted forcefully
to live up to its responsibility with respect to the global
threat of terrorism. In March 2004, the Council
adopted a set of measures aimed at reinforcing the
effectiveness of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. We
hope and are confident that the new structure will be
operational by early 2005 and that it will live up to the
high expectations that we all have of it.

The CTC should continue to work in a
transparent manner, inter alia, through regular formal
and informal briefings for all Member States. The
Council itself is similarly called upon to uphold the
principles of inclusiveness and transparency when
acting to foster international cooperation against
terrorism. With the adoption of resolution 1566 (2004),
the Council took the fight against terrorism to a new
level. We regret that the wider United Nations
membership was not given an opportunity to express
its views on the draft of that resolution, given its
important implications for our common fight against
terrorism worldwide. We therefore take this
opportunity to express our views after that draft
resolution's adoption.

We welcome all the Council's efforts to increase
cooperation and coordination among all international
actors in the fight against terrorism, and we appreciate
that resolution 1566 (2004) is part of that effort. Our
concerns regarding resolution 1566 (2004) revolve
around the issue of the rule of law, which the Council
had discussed only two days prior to the adoption of
that resolution.

First, the resolution employs broad language,
directing States to extradite or prosecute persons who
are considered to be involved even indirectly, in
terrorist acts. The definition of such involvement is
unclear, and this poses the danger of including persons
who could not even be considered as having acted with
intent, as is required under international law. Secondly,
the resolution attempts to define terrorist acts in a way
that leaves questions of interpretation open, while
calling on States to prevent and punish acts of such
nature. Thirdly, it raises the question of the relationship
between the work of the Council and the efforts
underway in the General Assembly, the law-making
body of this Organization, to agree on a definition of
terrorism.

Finally, the resolution envisages new practical
measures to be imposed upon individual groups or
entities involved in or associated with terrorist
activities beyond those who are designated by the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the
Taliban and Associated Individuals and Entities. A
working group will make recommendations on such
measures, especially regarding criminal prosecution
and freezing of assets.

Together with others, we have repeatedly
expressed the view that due-process standards with
respect to the current sanctions regime under resolution
1267 (1999) and 1455 (2003) should be improved, in
particular with regard to the need for access to legal
remedies and the possibility of delisting in cases of
factual errors. It is thus crucial that an expanded
regime be equipped with the necessary mechanism to
establish the facts objectively and to review decisions
in a fair and independent manner. This will greatly
facilitate and enhance implementation by States that
wish to respect rule of law standards in carrying out the
legally binding decisions of the Council. We hope that
the working group will proceed in an inclusive and
transparent manner and on the basis of respect for the
fundamental principles of due process.

