The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

I will now deliver a statement in my national
capacity as the Foreign Minister of Nigeria.

I would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his presence at this
debate and for sharing his perspectives on security
sector reform. I also wish to thank the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and European
Integration of Montenegro, His Excellency Igor Luksic';
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, His
Excellency Hans Brattskar; and the State Secretary of
the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of the
Slovak Republic, His Excellency Peter Burian, whose
participation in today's debate is another illustration of
the strong commitment of their countries to security
sector reform.

It is gratifying to note that security sector reform
has become firmly established as an essential element
of multidimensional peacekeeping. Effective security
sector reform contributes to conflict prevention by
making security institutions effective and accountable.
That fosters a sense of safety and security among the
population and sustains the conditions of peace.

Security sector reform (SSR) is of cardinal
importance for the entire peacebuilding continuum,
extending beyond post-conflict reconstruction to
include conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
development. In October 2011, during its presidency of
the Council, Nigeria had the privilege of presiding at
an open debate (see S/PV.6630) that culminated in the
Council's adoption of a presidential statement on SSR
(S/PRST/2011/19). That statement built on previous
initiatives ofthe Council on the subject. It is my pleasure
and honour to be here today for this important debate,
which seeks to explore further the crucial question of
United Nations support for SSR as a vehicle for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The presidential statement of October 2011 requested
the Secretary-General to conduct a comprehensive
review of the United Nations engagement in security
sector reform. We are pleased to note that the Secretary-
General responded to that request by issuing his second
report on security sector reform in August 2013,
entitled "Securing States and societies: strengthening
the United Nations comprehensive support to security
sector reform" (S/2013/480). We welcome that report
with appreciation and stand ready to work with both the
Secretariat and Member States in the implementation of
that important recommendation therein.

In our efforts at international and multilateral
security cooperation, one major lesson that Nigeria
has learned is the increasing value and, indeed, the
indispensability of horizontal exchanges of experiences
by countries that have undergone or are undergoing
SSR. We have come to recognize than an exchange of
experiences is a valuable element of security sector
reform support, in addition to a traditional focus on
technical and financial assistance. Nigeria reiterates
its commitment to South-South exchanges and strongly
encourages the Secretary-General to further explore the
possibilities offered by such horizontal relationships
between Member States in supporting national
security sector reform processes. Nigeria is also firmly
committed to engaging the General Assembly on the
critical issue of the United Nations role in supporting
SSR.

Nigeria would like to send a message of solidarity
to other States that have shown commitment to
promoting SSR on the agenda of the United Nations.
Worthy of particular mention and commendation is the
United Nations Group of Friends of SSR, initiated by
Slovakia, and now co-chaired with South Africa. That
Group has played a commendable role in expanding the
perspectives of security sector reform among United
Nations Member States.

At the regional level, Nigeria takes note of the
progress made by the African Union (AU) in its efforts
to define an African framework for SSR. One major
development in that regard was the adoption by the AU
Heads of State and Government, in January 2013, of
the first continental policy framework on SSR. That
represents a major initiative at the regional level to
help define the global framework being elaborated by
the United Nations. Nigeria is committed to working
closely with other members of the African Union for
the effective implementation of the AU SSR policy
and to ensure its integration in the African peace and
security architecture.

At the subregional level, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) is also in the
process of drawing up a regional framework on SSR
and governance. The aim of that initiative is to enable
ECOWAS to fulfil its role of assisting member States
to put in place early warning mechanisms and rapid
response to threats to regional peace and security. In
addition, ECOWAS has adopted a code of conduct
for armed forces and security services and a conflict
prevention framework, which contains elements of
security sector governance. Those instruments seek to
address transnational threats to security that are beyond
the capacity of the security sectors of any one country
in the subregion. Such threats include transnational
organized crime, piracy, human trafficking and
terrorism.

We are also seeking to expand our existing
partnerships in SSR. In that regard, the partnership
with the Republic of South Africa on developing
African perspectives on SSR here in New York is
particularly significant. That is an important forum at
the level of permanent representatives, which began
in May 2010 and has since become a biannual event.
A second forum was held in 2012. Nigeria will have
the privilege of hosting the third forum this year. We
are reminded, by the nature, complexity and sources
of insecurity in the world today, that security cannot
mean the well-being of the State alone. Enduring
security must therefore address human security in all
its ramifications. That implies that the State cannot be
safe while the well-being of its citizens is constantly
threatened or jeopardized.

Security institutions can be alienated from the very
societies they are meant to serve and protect. In such
contexts, they cannot be viably reformed without a
transformation of the broader relationship between the
State and society. That requires addressing the social
contract on which the entire governance framework
is based in order to achieve greater transparency,
accountability and adherence to the rule of law. I
therefore wish to stress that Viable reform of the security
sector must extend beyond train and equip activities to
include democratic governance and civilian oversight.
That is the only way to guard the guardians and to
ensure that those who are charged with the provision of
security do not themselves become threats to the larger
society. National ownership of the process is therefore
important. The United Nations should bear that in
mind as it seeks to implement aspects of its mandate
to support the national processes of SSR in various
countries.

We now have a unique opportunity to take another
important step towards consolidating the progress
made in the United Nations on that important matter.
A Council draft resolution on SSR will be the first of
its kind, if agreed by all members of the Council. It
would enable the Council to codify and operationalize
the key principles of SSR. In adopting that important
draft resolution, we would be demonstrating our
resolve as member States to effectively address the
vulnerabilities in our security environment. We would
also be providing the strategic direction and leadership
that is expected and required of the Council.

It is my privilege and honour to be part of such a
pioneering enterprise. I thank all Council members for
making that possible and, on behalf of the people and
Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, I thank
all other delegations for participating in this debate.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the other members of the Security
Council.

