Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
have read the reports under consideration today (see S/2016/669, S/2016/670, S/2016/975 and S/2016/976)
very attentively and wish to commend the progress
made by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). We express our support for
their continued efforts to complete their work within
the established time frame.

We congratulate the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals following
the opening of the headquarters of the Mechanism, in
Arusha. We thank the Government of Tanzania for
hosting the Mechanism.

The Security Council, in creating the two
international criminal tribunals, reaffirmed the
principles of justice and the rule of law and thereby
demonstrated the commitment of the international
community to dealing resolutely with war crimes and
crimes against humanity; to ensuring accountability
for the perpetrators of such crimes; and to enshrining
the principle of the combat against impunity at the
international level.

Both Tribunals have made tremendous and
praiseworthy efforts in ensuring fair trials, the protection
of witnesses and reparations for victims. The ICTR has
completed its work; the ICTY will do so next year; and
the Residual Mechanism, with its two headquarters, in
The Hague and in Arusha, will take over the Tribunals'
case files. In that respect, we welcome the transfer of
power to the Residual Mechanism.

As we near the end of the ICTY's mandate, the
Council must continue to help the Tribunal to complete
its work as soon as possible. It is vital to arrive at
effective solutions to the various challenges it faces
in this respect, in particular making the most of the
experience of the Tribunal's staff on the eve of the
completion of its mandate.

The delegation of Egypt will continue to support
the work of the Tribunal. In that respect, we reiterate
the need to ensure the optimal use of the financial and
administrative resources available so as to facilitate the
work of the Residual Mechanism and the ICTY.

International criminal tribunals are an essential
instrument created by the international community in
order to guarantee and enshrine international law and
to prosecute those responsible for serious violations of
such law. That is why the experience gleaned in, and
the lessons learned from, the work of both Tribunals
must be studied and recorded so that they can serve as
a reference in future, so as to prevent similar problems.
Indeed, the judicial legacy of the two Tribunals belongs
to the international community as a whole. The United
Nations and its Member States must take the steps
necessary to preserve this legacy.

In conclusion, Egypt is following with great interest
the issue of the detention of one of the Mechanism's
judges in his country of origin following the levelling
of accusations against him. We hope that current
contacts between the President's secretariat with the
authorities of that country will allow for the finding of
a solution that makes it possible to preserve the dignity
and independence of the international judiciary, in
accordance with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations charter.

