I wish to welcome Ambassador Bashar Ja'afari and to wish him Ramadhan Kareem. I would also like to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen. It is good to see him looking well. We are glad to hear that there is significant calm relative to the apexes of violence of previous years. That is a positive development, albeit still a fragile situation. Since this is the holy month of Ramadhan, we hope that the calm situation will prevail. Since we will have another video-teleconference meeting on Syria later this afternoon, I will aim to limit my statement to the political aspect, albeit both political and humanitarian issues are indeed closely linked. As we all know, the path to a lasting political settlement of the Syrian conflict faces an additional obstacle. The threat of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) could potentially distract from, if not disrupt, the efforts to begin the political track, particularly the ongoing process of the Constitutional Committee. However, my delegation believes that, if all key parties are committed to working constructively together to advance the peace process, we will be able to overcome these obstacles. Obviously, it is not easy, and the road ahead is still long. In that context, I would like to stress the following points. First, we fully support the appeal made by Special Envoy Pedersen for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire throughout Syria. We are pleased to hear that the ceasefire is holding in the north-west, and we commend Russia and Turkey for their strong efforts and appreciate the joint patrol to ensure calm. However, the situation is still fragile, with occasional shelling being reported. In addition, we must not lose focus on other areas at potential risk of violence. My delegation is particularly concerned about the ongoing tension in southern Syria, where more security incidents were reported. During this very complex situation, we cannot afford to have more hostilities in the country. Secondly, all the relevant parties need to remain firm in their commitments to an inclusive Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process, facilitated by the United Nations. Indonesia reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic as a necessary foundation for advancing the political process within the framework of resolution 2254 (2015). Thirdly, strengthening the levels of diplomatic cooperation is badly needed. My delegation supports the Secretary-General's call in his latest report (S/2020/327) for extensive levels of diplomatic cooperation and fortitude to refocus on the political process and to bring an end to the conflict. We also strongly support the work of Special Envoy Pedersen and his team in engaging all key parties to reconvene the Constitutional Committee in Geneva. Clearly, the pandemic has not made that possible. However, the preparation needs to continue. We wish to re-emphasize that compromises and flexibility are required in that regard. I am glad to hear that Special Envoy Pedersen continues to engage with interlocutors and all related parties amid the difficulty of COVID-19. The political track needs to continue for the sake of the people of Syria. As the pandemic spreads, the impact will be unpredictable and potentially catastrophic. The Syrian people therefore need all parties to lay down their weapons as part of a nationwide ceasefire to confront COVID-19. We appreciate the efforts that have been undertaken by the Syrian Government to combat COVID-19, but the international community should continue its support with the needed health capacity and medical supplies. We would like to echo Geir Pedersen's appeal in that regard. In the context of achieving a political solution, as I mentioned earlier, the road ahead is indeed still long, but we believe that there are opportunities at every turn. We have full confidence in the Special Envoy's efforts to maintain the momentum for peace.
