Mr. Solana (spoke in French): As you can
imagine, it is an honour for me and a great pleasure to
be here in the Council today to discuss a topic to which
the European Union attaches particular importance.

I would like to thank the French presidency of the
Security Council and you, in particular, Mr. President,
for the efforts you have made to organize this
important meeting.

(spoke in Spanish)

Allow me also to recall a very moving moment
that occurred in this very same Chamber in September
1994, when, the Security Council met to discuss Haiti.
I, in my capacity as Foreign Minister of my country,
had the tremendous honour and pleasure to preside
over that important meeting, which, I believe, had
some significant impact on the destiny of our beloved
Haiti.

(spoke in English)

I would like first of all to thank all the members
of the Security Council for giving me the opportunity
to address the Council. I would like especially to thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Balkans, Mr. Carl Bildt, for his opening remarks,
which have set the scene for this morning's discussion.
I would also like to thank my good friend Ambassador
Monteiro for his statement as representative of the
Presidency ofthe Council of the European Union.

The European Union has for many, many years
been an important voice in many areas of United
Nations work, in particular in fields such as human
rights, social and economic issues and development.
Increasingly, this is also the case on security issues.
The European Union is developing faster than ever
before into an organization with access to the full range
of external policy instruments, from economic relations
to crisis management. This makes our relationship with
the United Nations, and in particular the Security
Council, even more important. The principles that
underlie the European Union's common foreign and
security policy reflect the objectives of the United
Nations as set out in the Charter. It is therefore not only
an immense honour for me to address the Security
Council, it is also a historic step in the development of
the European Union's foreign policy.

This morning's debate is not a response to a
specific crisis in the Balkans. Such crises in the past
have been an inevitable part of the evolution of the
Balkans. There is no guarantee that we will not face
further crises in the future. But I have no doubt that, as
in the past, such crises will be overcome.

My intervention this morning is by way of
explanation as to why I remain optimistic over the
future of the Balkans despite the many, many problems
and difficulties which we continue to face. It is not by
chance that I have been called upon to spend much of
my time, in the nine months since I took up my current
post, focusing on the Balkans and, of course, on the
situation in Kosovo in particular. It is, rather, a
reflection of the importance that the European Union
attaches to a region with which it shares common
borders and with which it has so much in common.

The European Union, which was founded with
the very objective of avoiding future conflict, cannot,
and has not been prepared to, sit back in the face of
conflicts on its doorstep and do nothing. This is not
simply a matter of sentiment. Long-term stability in the
Balkans will bring greater security and greater
prosperity for Europe as a whole. This is why the
European Union has made a long-term commitment to
the region. It is a commitment in which the member
States, and of course the European Commission, have a
vital role to play. And, it led to me being asked
specifically by the European Union's heads of
Government to address the issue of the coordination of
the policies of the European Union in the Balkans and
to give greater visibility to its efforts.

Our objective is the fullest possible integration of
the countries of the region into the political and
economic mainstream of Europe. This is already
happening as a result of the historic decision taken by
the European Union at the end of last year to extend its
existing process of enlargement. Enlargement is our
most important tool for guaranteeing the continued
stability of the whole of the continent of Europe. The
process itself is already binding countries such as
Slovenia, Bulgaria and Romania into the mainstream of
Europe, with positive spillover for the whole region.
Enlargement is proving to be a catalyst for greater
regional cooperation. It is, for example, encouraging
the countries of the region to address in a positive
manner the sensitive issue of minorities.

The enlargement process is a key element of the
comprehensive regional approach that lies at the heart
ofthe European Union's policy towards the region. But
it is not the only one. We have established a
stabilization and association process that aims at
integrating the countries of the region into European
structures. This process encourages internal reform, as
well as the development of relations between countries
in the region.

The Stability Pact is another key tool for
supporting economic development throughout the
region. It also encourages internal reform and provides
support for the integration process. But one of its most
important elements is the promotion of regional
cooperation. For the European Union, this is one of the
most important challenges for the Stability Pact.

We have of course been the main provider of the
financial support that is necessary to underpin this
policy. The figures speak for themselves. Since 1991,
the European Union and its member States have
contributed to the Balkans as a whole over €l7 billion,
which makes it by far the biggest donor. In Kosovo
alone, we have spent more than €3 billion on
non-military programmes. This is in addition to our
substantial military commitment, which includes the
provision of 28,000 troops for the Kosovo Force
(KFOR). The European Union has also deployed 1,430
policemen, with a further 270 set to arrive before the
summer.

These figures testify to our engagement in the
Balkans. They are the instruments of an inclusive
policy encompassing the whole region. Of course, there
are specific situations that call for quite specific
responses. Kosovo is the obvious example. But we
have to maintain an overall comprehensive approach to
the region if we are to hold out any hope of achieving
our objective of bringing the Balkans into the European
family of nations. The alternative would merely
reinforce the divisions and the tensions that lie at the
heart ofthe problems that have already caused so much
suffering.

There is one major obstacle to pursuing a
genuinely comprehensive approach to the whole
Balkan region. That obstacle is the resistance to
political change in Belgrade. Our hope for the region is
that it achieve lasting stability. But stability is not an
isolated ideal. It depends also on democracy, respect
for human rights and the rule of law, and the prosperity
that comes from openness and engagement with one's
neighbours. These values are being systematically
violated by the actions and policies of President
Milosevic. The European Union is not prepared to
stand idly by in the face of continuing repression. This
is why we are actively supporting democracy and
freedom of expression in Serbia and developing links
with representatives of Serbian civil society. We are
ready to extend our economic assistance programme to
Serbia once it has embraced those same values that
underpin the European Union. We want to help the
Serbian people, but for the moment the current regime
in Serbia remains an obstacle to that objective.

Elsewhere in the region, Croatia in particular has,
through its recent successful democratic transition,
given cause for optimism and has helped increase the
potential for widening regional cooperation. In parallel
to this, we are committed to continuing our support for
the democratically elected Government of Montenegro.
We shall also continue to support Bosnia, both
politically and economically, in its own transition
process, in which the forthcoming elections will play a
key role. Much still remains to be done, and this
process will continue to require sustained commitment
by the international community and Bosnia itself.

My firm conviction is that the best chance for
realizing long-term stability in the Balkans is through
the steady integration of the region into the European
mainstream. This will not happen overnight; it is a
long-term process. But it is very important. The Irish
politician John Hume once described the European
Union as the best example of conflict resolution in the
history of the world. The European Union has
successfully maintained peace and stability in Western
Europe for half a century. It is now inconceivable that
member States of the European Union would settle
their differences by anything other than peaceful
means. The European Union offers a model for
regional integration as a guarantee for peace. It is a
powerful and effective symbol of reconciliation. It also
provides protection for minorities within an
overarching regional framework. No other solution
offers such hope for the Balkans.

In order to achieve this long-term objective, we
have set ourselves a number of priorities for the
months ahead.

First, we shall concentrate our energies on the
various elections taking place in the region in the
autumn - as has already been mentioned by Mr. Carl
Bildt- in Kosovo, Albania, Bosnia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and, hopefully, also
in Serbia. They present a major opportunity to
strengthen democracy and the rule of law in the region.
We will support as full a participation as possible in
these elections, and we shall unambiguously stand by
those who genuinely stand for democratic reform.
Indeed, we shall lend our support only to those parties
and individuals that are uncompromising in their
commitment to ethnic tolerance, democracy and the
rule of law.

Secondly, we shall continue to support civil
society. This is of particular relevance with regard to
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, but it is also
important throughout the region. A vibrant and strong
civil society is the key both to economic and political
development and to bringing these countries closer to
the European Union. We are placing particular
emphasis on working with local authorities, the media
and non-governmental organizations to help them in
their contacts with counterparts in the region and the
European Union.

Thirdly, we shall pursue our policy of bringing
the countries of the region closer to the European
Union. We shall concentrate on developing the
stabilization and association process, which is the
foundation of our policy towards the region.
Negotiations are currently underway with the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and are expected to
begin soon with Croatia. We are also working closely
with Albania and Bosnia to ensure that the conditions
for beginning such negotiations are met as soon as
possible. For the moment, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia remains outside this important process. I
look forward to the day when it will join its neighbours
on the same path to European integration.

Finally, we shall remain committed to promoting
regional cooperation. This is still much less developed
in the region than in many other parts of Europe. It is
the key to the economic success of the region and will
accelerate its integration into the European Union.
Progress in this area is one of the key objectives of the
Stability Pact. I have just received a mandate from the
European Council to press for better cooperation in
combating organized crime and illegal immigration in
the region. I am also sure that the summit meeting to be
held this autumn between the European Union and the
countries of the western Balkans proposed by President
Chirac will give a strong impetus to reform and
cooperation in the region.

I would like to close by looking specifically at
our priorities in Kosovo. The full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) remains our
key objective. The overall positive development of the
situation over the past month has been overshadowed
recently by the flare-up of inter-ethnic violence and the
subsequent decision of the Serb National Council to
suspend its participation in the interim institutions.
Together with United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and with the Member
States I have been working very hard in the last few
days to address the legitimate concerns of the Serbs
and to encourage them to return to interim institutions.

The municipal elections to be held in autumn this
year are intended to lay the foundations of democratic
development and political consolidation in Kosovo.
The registration process is advancing, and a multi-party
structure is gradually taking shape. We shall, however,
need to work very hard to ensure a positive
environment for the elections.

Successful municipal elections will, in turn, pave
the way for the establishment of an interim
administration structure, in conformity with Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). These structures need
to be prepared under the authority of the Special
Representative of the United Nations Secretary-
General in an open and inclusive process, with the
active involvement of all the major groups of Kosovo's
population. UNMIK will be able to properly fulfil its
mandate during this critical period only if we give it
the necessary resources. The shortages of high-quality
police officers, notwithstanding recent improvements,
and of judges and prosecutors, as well as the overall
shortfall in staffing, continue to hamper UNMIK's
work in key areas. Today the European Union is
already bearing carrying the lion's share of the
international community's efforts in Kosovo. We will
continue to do our utmost to make this Mission a
SUCCGSS.

Let me close by recalling the commitment of the
European Union to the region. The experience of the
Balkans has been a sobering one, but it has also
provided us with an opportunity. We have dedicated
ourselves to the region, to a wider Europe and to a
more outward and mature common foreign security
policy. We all stand to gain from that.

