Mr. J osselin (France) (spoke in French): The
ongoing Angolan conflict, after 26 years of civil war, is
a matter of deep concern for France.

The establishment of a lasting peace in Angola
appears to be a distant aim, since the hopes of reaching
a final settlement of the conflict have not materialized.
The refusal of Jonas Savimbi to comply with the
Lusaka Protocol, signed on 15 November 1994, has
caused the deadlock in the peace process and the
resumption of fighting since the end of 1998.

Considering that UNITA bears most of the
responsibility for these failures, France would like to
strengthen the effectiveness of the sanctions system
against the rebels in order to compel them to respect
their obligations and comply with the requirements of
the Lusaka Protocol. This is why France, in its capacity
as a permanent member of the Security Council, has
supported the adoption and maintenance of
international sanctions against the UNITA authorities.
It continues to give its unswerving support to the
Monitoring Mechanism, whose mandate the Security
Council has decided to extend.

In this connection, we urge the creation of a
standing mechanism for monitoring targeted sanctions
and the traffic of raw materials in conflicts, as
recommended by the Monitoring Mechanism. Since
diamond trafficking finances the bulk of the war effort
of UNITA, we would fully support effective measures
to control the trade at the worldwide level.

While the Government has managed to
considerably weaken the UNITA forces, UNITA has
preserved its guerrilla capacities throughout the
country. Attesting to this fact are the recent terrorist
attacks against the civilian population, which were
condemned unanimously by the international
community. France, together with the Security Council,
has strongly condemned the train attack perpetrated on
10 August by UNITA forces, which caused more than
250 civilian casualties. Such acts are unacceptable and
do nothing but strengthen the determination of the
international community to enhance the effectiveness
of the sanctions against UNITA.

The consequences of the conflict are tragic for the
Angolan people, the great majority of whom have
never known peace. Combat and guerrilla activities
sow terror among the population. Roads and railways
are the target of these murderous attacks. Finally,
dissemination of several million landmines throughout
the territory makes it very difficult to travel by road. I
ask Minister Miranda to understand that France is
conscious of the suffering of the Angolan people.

This devastating conflict has lasted far too long.
Accordingly, France encourages the protagonists to
implement the Lusaka Protocol, which charts a possible
course towards peace and national reconciliation. The
policy of open-mindedness exhibited by the
Government of Angola is an encouraging sign in that
regard. Let me mention, among other examples, the
measures taken with regard to amnesty and the
reintegration of former combatants and the
announcement of elections and institutional reforms, to
which the international community should, at the
appropriate time, give all the necessary support. I also
welcome the Government's overtures towards
Mr. Jonas Savimbi inviting him to engage in a regular
dialogue, under certain conditions, and asking him to
set a date for the cessation of hostilities or to solemnly
renounce war.

Above and beyond those gestures, which
illustrate a willingness to make peace, we must now
realize this policy of national reconciliation. A return
to dialogue is possible, particularly thanks to the
mediation of civil society. We therefore keenly
encourage the Government not to let up on its efforts to
involve all political groups and all civil society actors,
whose vitality we salute.

The role of the churches should be particularly
encouraged. Don Zacarias Kamuenho, Archbishop of
Lubango and President of the Inter-Denominational
Committee for Peace in Angola, has received the
congratulations of both President Dos Santos and Jonas
Savimbi after having been chosen by the European
Parliament to receive the Sakharov Prize for human
rights. France would be pleased to welcome him during
his next visit to Strasbourg. We encourage the
Government to invite the churches to resume dialogue
with the rebels in order to convince them to lay down
their weapons and return to the negotiating table on the
basis of the Lusaka Protocol and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

The international community must provide a
massive and rapid commitment in order to accompany
Angola in the peace process and to help rebuild the
country. In that regard, France supports the mission to
be undertaken to Angola by Mr. Gambari at the end of
the year to examine how the United Nations can
contribute to finding a negotiated peace. The role of
civil society that has now been recognized in the area
of reconciliation deserves greater support from the
United nations. I support the proposal put forward by
the delegation of the United Kingdom last month for
the speedy convening of a Security Council meeting
under the Arria formula with representatives of civil
society. Non-governmental organizations and the
churches could thereby share with us here in New York
their experience in the field with a view to
brainstorming on possible ways out of this crisis.

Finally, I should like to refer to a matter of the
utmost concern to the Government of France, namely,
the seriousness of the humanitarian situation. The latest
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Angola, published in October, shows that there has
been a considerable deterioration in the humanitarian
situation. Particular attention should be given to the
fate of civilians in areas where security cannot be
guaranteed by the Government. These are rural areas
under guerrilla control and areas under the control of
UNITA. The number of displaced persons since the
resumption of the conflict at the end of 1998 reached
more than 3 million at the end of August, 1.3 million of
them confirmed by humanitarian organizations.

Access to such populations in distress is very
difficult. The poor state of runways, the lack of fuel
and the precarious security conditions are impediments
to the intervention of humanitarian organizations. The
Government and UNITA must facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian aid throughout the territory. It is
absolutely necessary that UNITA cease threatening the
security of humanitarian convoys. The Government, for
its part, must do its utmost to ensure security in the
areas under its control. I also call upon it to authorize
humanitarian organizations, where possible, to enter
into discussions with UNITA forces to negotiate access
to populations in distress. The success of such
negotiations would be an initial sign of the genuine
will of the rebels to make pace.

Lastly, I should like to pay tribute to such
humanitarian organizations as Doctors Without Borders
and Doctors of the World, which are working tirelessly
under difficult conditions to come to the aid of millions
of Angolans. We thank them for that.

I should like to recall that, in the longer term,
national reconciliation and the return of stability in
Angola require an improvement in the economic and
social situation on the basis of a structural adjustment
agreement to be concluded with the International
Monetary Fund, and through the establishment of the
rule of law and the protection of human rights. Those
are areas in which the international community can
play an essential role in supporting the peace process.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate France's
confidence in the determination of the Angolan
Government to promote national reconciliation. The
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is the only
viable basis for a political settlement to the conflict.
France extends its full support to the efforts under way
to finally put an end to the Angolan tragedy.

