Mr. Martinez-Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Honduras has always supported efforts
towards a just and lasting peace, guaranteeing security
and stability in the Middle East region. We have always
considered that full compliance with the agreements
reached between the Palestinian people and the
Government of Israel is essential to achieve peace
between Arabs and Israelis.

For this reason we View with just concern the
present situation in the occupied territories of the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip caused by Israel's closure of
borders in those areas.

The Government of Honduras condemns and
laments the terrorist acts committed by Hamas activists in
Jerusalem and Ashkelon on 25 February 1996, and
against the Dizengoff Centre on 4 March 1996.

However, we are concerned that following those
attacks measures have been adopted that are detrimental
to the well-being and the economic Viability of the people
of Palestine.

My delegation believes that the complete closure of
the territories of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip is an
unprecedented measure. Because of it thousands of
persons are confined to cities and Villages; they have lost
free access to their jobs, to food, to medical care and to
schools: the situation is becoming a real crisis.

One cannot disregard the impact of this dangerous
situation on the Palestinian people, on its economy and on
prospects for peace. My delegation believes that a policy
for defending a country's security should not become an
instrument to undermine or destroy the well-being of a
nation. That is why we believe that the measures adopted
by Israel, which punish the Palestinian people in the areas
under the control of the Palestine National Authority,
must cease.

The continued closure of Israel's borders and the
borders of the West Bank and Gaza with Jordan and
Egypt, as well as the maintaining of restrictions on the
freedom of movement of persons and goods in Palestinian
territory, jeopardize the peace process. Likewise, the
interruption of the continuity of the Palestinian territory
and the imposition of restrictions on entry into East
Jerusalem affect, respectively, the implementation of the
agreements reached between the parties to establish a safe
passage between Gaza and Jericho and the special status
of the city of Jerusalem for the Palestinian people.

 

These measures also have a negative impact on the
socio-economic conditions of the Palestinian refugees in the
West Bank, and on the distribution of food to them, who
constitute the poorest segment of the Palestinian economy.

My delegation therefore appeals to the Government of
Israel - for the sake of the peace process, the agreements
reached between the parties and the well-being of the
Palestinian people - to bring this deplorable situation to an
end.

