Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
My delegation congratulates you, Mr. President, on
your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. We thank
you for having scheduled this debate on children and
armed conflict. My delegation also welcomes the
participation of individuals who travelled to this
meeting, that is, His Excellency Mr. Samuel Lewis-
Navarro, Vice-President and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Panama; His Excellency Mr. Bernard
Kouchner, Minister for Foreign Affairs of France; His
Excellency Mr. Charles Michel, Minister for
Development Cooperation of Belgium; and His
Excellency Mr. Vittorio Craxi, Under-Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs of Italy.

My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2007/757). We also thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children in Armed Conflict, for
her presentation. We thank Ms. Ann Veneman,
Executive Director of UNICEF, and Ms. Jo Becker,
Representative of Watchlist on Children and Armed
Conflict, for their respective statements, which are
very useful for a good understanding of the subject.

Rwanda is profoundly concerned with the well-
being of children - not just in Rwanda, but also in the
region of the Great Lakes and in the world in general.
Thus we welcome the progress achieved, as reflected in
the report of the Secretary-General. We are also
profoundly concerned to note the still-considerable scale
of the scourge of the use of children in armed conflicts
and of rape and other sexual violence against children
and women in conflict areas. My delegation thanks the
United Nations and other actors for the progress
achieved and welcomes the recommendations made.

When my delegation speaks of children in armed
conflict and of rape and sexual violence committed
against children and women in conflict areas, we speak
from experience, having suffered that scourge during the
1994 genocide. After the halt of the genocide, my
Government made demobilization of child soldiers and
combating rape and sexual violence major objectives of
its policy. We welcome the results achieved, which mean
that not only are there no more child soldiers in Rwanda
and that combating rape and sexual violence has greatly
reduced the scale of that scourge, but also that a
vigorous policy for the protection and advancement of
women is in force and that laws to severely punish those
who violate these rights and to promote the rights of
children and women have been adopted.

With regard to the recruitment of children by
armed forces in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the rape and sexual
violence committed there, my delegation deeply
deplores the situation and is doing everything in its
power to contribute to its resolution. However, my
delegation would like to draw the attention of the
Security Council to the fact that the real solution lies in
the resolution of the problem, which is the root of this
evil: disarmament and repatriation of the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) and
the ex-FAR and Interahamwe, who, after having
committed genocide in Rwanda in 1994, continued
their murderous work in the Kivus. The threatened
population found refuge in Rwanda 10 years ago, and
the genocidal forces continue to occupy the land whose
owners languish in refugee camps in Rwanda and
bordering countries. Those genocidal forces make
massive use of child soldiers and rape young
Congolese girls and women. That was clearly set out in
the report of Under-Secretary-General John Holmes.
Those forces continue to threaten Rwanda, where they
still desire to finish their dirty task of genocide.

My delegation finds that the most appropriate
way to free children and women in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo from the scourges
described in the Secretary-General's report is through
the liberation of the region from the genocidal forces
who have chosen to take up residence there and who
live openly, under the nose of the Security Council and
of the broader international community. It is essential
that the United Nations Organization Mission in the

Democratic Republic of the Congo, in cooperation with
the countries concerned, make that a priority. Thus it
would serve the cause of children and respond to the
expectations of the Nairobi communique and to the
conclusions of the Goma Conference of January 2008.

