Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia supported the adoption of resolution
2290 (2016). In voting for it, we based our decision on
the significant progress recently achieved towards the
settlement of the conflict in South Sudan, including
the establishment of the Transitional Government
of National Unity. We also take into account the
sensitivity of the current situation and the need for
effective international support for the peace process in
that country.

We have repeatedly expressed concern that
excessive pressure, particularly that exerted by
sanctions, can undermine those achievements and
entrench the positions of the South Sudanese parties.
Russia cannot in principle accept a situation where
anyone - especially a member of the Security
Council - should seek to use sanctions instead of
undertaking serious political and diplomatic work.
We therefore strongly opposed the inclusion in today's
resolution a provision warning of the broadening of
the Security Council sanctions regime against South
Sudan in the coming months, including the imposition
of an arms embargo. Let us not forget the needs of the
Government of South Sudan in ensuring security, law
and order in the country.

We are glad that common sense prevailed in the
Council in the end. However, our support for resolution
2290 (2016)as a whole does not mean that we agree
with all its provisions. Unfortunately, as in the case of
other Council resolutions on South Sudan, the authors
did not take into account the serious and reasonable
concerns of a number of delegations. We believe that
it is inappropriate - especially in a Security Council
sanctions resolution - to include a provision on the
review of the Non-Governmental Organizations
(NGOs) Bill. This provision not only serves to create
advantages for foreign NGOs, but also distorts the
South Sudan Peace Agreement.

Nor can we justify inclusion in the text of a
reference to the reports of the High United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. The Security Council
did not request these reports; they were discussed in the
Human Rights Council. The contents of the document
have nothing to do with the primacy of Security
Council leadership. We are also disappointed by the
refusal of some delegations to include in the resolution
reference to the importance of international assistance
in normalizing the situation and overcoming the
economic and humanitarian problems in South Sudan.
In our view, the international partners should apply not
only sanctions, but also positive incentives to South
Sudan. No one is interested in its economic collapse.

We hope that in the course of the work on a new
draft resolution on South Sudan in July, these legitimate
concerns will be taken into account. Otherwise, the
unity of the Council and its effective performance in
South Sudan may again be threatened.

