I would like to thank Mr. Grandi for his important briefing and for spotlighting the key refugee-related trends and issues set forth in the annual report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). We would also like to thank UNHCR for doing its utmost to ensure that operations on the ground can be sustained during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I would like to share some thoughts on this issue. First, Indonesia reiterates its support for the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. We must continue to ensure sustainable humanitarian assistance for refugees in a safe and dignified manner while we mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Unfortunately, the global pandemic has created a perfect storm for irregular migrants. Poor living conditions renders them more susceptible to infections. In some cases, they have no access to social or health services, as policies to limit movement, while necessary to manage the virus, hamper access to various basic services and may exacerbate inequality, discrimination and exploitation. In that connection, we welcome UNHCR efforts to help countries address those challenges, including the recent extension of the tripartite agreement among UNHCR, the United Nations Development Programme and the Government of Myanmar to improve conditions in Rakhine. We also believe that effective inter-organizational cooperation between UNHCR and other relevant United Nations organizations, such as the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, will have a greater impact on our collective efforts to resolve the various challenges facing Palestinian refugees. Indonesia calls upon all Member States to maintain their support to ensure the safety and well-being of Palestinian refugees during these difficult times, especially given the severe threat posed by the current pandemic. Secondly, no country can resolve refugee crises in isolation. We need to continue fostering a global perspective that promotes the collaboration and participation of all regions and countries - origin, transit and destination. In response to refugee movements, Indonesia has taken action to address irregular migration despite not being party to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its Protocol. In the Bali Process, we have sought to create a comprehensive approach to irregular migration through border management, the development of a victim- centred approach and raising awareness of safe migration. Recently, Indonesia also proposed a practical mechanism to address irregular migration during the pandemic. Thirdly, let us not lose sight of our humanity during the pandemic. We all face difficult circumstances. However, as the Secretary-General mentioned in his policy briefing, ensuring the safety of others ensures our safety. Indonesia hopes that the international community will continue to approach the refugee issue in the spirit of equitable burden-sharing and shared responsibility, and that each country will take action according to its respective responsibility and capacities. We should promote durable solutions through increased cooperation between countries of origin, transit and destination or resettlement. Indonesia urges countries with the means to do so, particularly State parties to the 1951 Convention - to honour their commitments, especially with regard to funding for transit countries, which are predominantly developing countries. In conclusion, I wish to emphasize the need for relevant international organizations to continue strengthening their capacities and assisting countries in handling irregular migration while adhering to the applicable health protocols.
