Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would
like to thank Egypt, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council, for having convened this important
open debate to discuss cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in the areas of peace
and security, especially as it refers to the future of
the African Peace and Security Architecture in the
framework of the implementation of the provisions
set out in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, on regional arrangements.

Similarly, we appreciate the briefings made by the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Herve' Ladsous; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the African Union, Mr. Haile
Menkerios; Ambassador Tete Antonio, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Macharia Kamau.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela highly
values the role of regional entities in the peaceful
settlement and mediation of conflicts, given the
successful experience of Latin America and the
Caribbean through bodies such as the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States and the Union
of South American Nations. Our country also values
the close relationship it has with African countries, as
evidenced by the conclusion of the second Summit of
Heads of State and Government of South America and
Africa held on Margarita Island in 2009.

The efforts of the United Nations in Africa should
take place in a context that takes into account the
root causes of many of the conflicts that are currently
affecting that region, which date back to the colonialism
that affected the continent until the middle of the
twentieth century and which have led to territorial,
ethnic and religious divisions motivated by imperialist
interests. Despite those obstacles, the peoples and the
countries of Africa managed to achieve independence
following years ofbloody wars ofliberation, exemplified
by men such as Gamel Abdel Nasser, Ahmed Ben Bella,
Patrice Lumumba and Nelson Mandela, who played
decisive roles in those movements aimed at achieving
independence, justice, democracy and human rights.
Despite the trauma of colonialism, Africa has built
its own institutions and established its own structures
in the framework of the African Union, the best setting
in which to confront challenges in the areas of peace,
security and development facing the African continent.
The legitimacy of the African Union has allowed it to
become a point of reference in the resolution of its own
problems and challenges.

Given that the agenda of the Security Council
largely remains focused on addressing issues that
threaten peace and security on the African continent,
it is even more necessary to consolidate and strengthen
the strategic partnership between the two multilateral
forums at the operational, political and tactical levels,
and on the basis of mutual respect. In that regard,
my country recognizes the fundamental mediation
role that the African Union has been playing in the
peaceful resolution of conflicts in Africa within the
framework of the African Union's Agenda 2063 and
the 2016-2020 road map for the African Peace and
Security Architecture. Likewise, we highlight the
initiative entitled "Silencing the Guns: Prerequisites
for Realizing a Conflict-Free Africa by the Year 2020".

It is crucial that the Security Council allow the
African Union to play a more active role when it
comes time to take action on issues concerning that
region. Unfortunately, we have noted with concern the
Council's tendency to apply measures under in Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations - instead of
giving priority to Chapters VI and VIII, which confer
a significant role to the peaceful settlement of disputes
and to regional arrangements - neglecting the need to
include the African Union in those processes.

Constant interference in the internal affairs
of African countries remains a critical factor
of destabilization and conflict on the continent.
Unfortunately, the national interests of some members
of the Council in relation to the countries and conflicts
in Africa has turned this organ into an element of
interference and pressure, as evidenced by the fact
that about 70 per cent of Council sanctions regimes are
applied to African countries.

Another example of that situation was the hasty
application of coercive measures under the prerogatives
of Chapter VII of the Charter in Libya in 2011. African
Union mediation efforts already in progress were
dismissed by the decision of the Council. Five years
later, we continue to suffer the serious consequences
of that unfortunate decision and the actions of
the international community in Libya - foreign
intervention - led to the institutional collapse of
the Libyan State, the destabilization of North Africa
and, among other things, contributed to the spread
of terrorism, violent extremism and illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons in the subregion,
phenomena that fuel many of today's conflicts and
result in bloodshed for African peoples.

Similarly, it is paradoxical that, despite the African
Union's position as a vital United Nations partner in
matters of peace and security, the assessments and
observations of our African brothers on certain issues,
including on the question of Western Sahara and the
migrant crisis, are not taken into account. It is worth
recalling that Venezuela abstained in the voting on
resolution 2240 (2015), concerning the migrant crisis,
adopted by the Security Council. We believe that the
resolution did not address the concerns of African
countries, which were the ones most affected by the
migrant crisis. The Observer for the African Union
was not even allowed to participate in the debate,
and Chapter VII of the Charter was cited to address a
problem that is multidimensional and from which the
African people continue to suffer.

Western Sahara provides another example of the lack
of inclusion and the policy of double standards used by
the Security Council on all African issues. The Council
has been unable to react to the operational weakening
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara, and to the refusal of some members
to allow the representative of the African Union for
Western Sahara to address the Security Council. In that
regard, it should be recalled that resolution 690 (1991)
gives the African Union an important role in support of
the United Nations as a facilitator of the organization
and supervision of a referendum on self-determination
for the people of Western Sahara, the last existing
colony in Africa.

As such, the relationship between the Security
Council and the United Nations and the African
Union Peace and Security Council must improve and

be strengthened. That was one of the main elements
considered in the context of the comprehensive review
of the question of peacekeeping operations in 2015. We
believe it necessary to continue making progress in the
consolidation and strengthening of those operations
and in the development of common and integrated
strategies to address emerging challenges in Africa,
based on mutual responsibilities and comparative
advantages between them, with a View to achieving
better coordination and synergy between the two
bodies. Hence, we hope for the timely conclusion of
a joint United Nations-African Union framework for
an enhanced partnership on peace and security, the
platform of which will guide the commitment of both
organizations before, during and after conflicts.

Moreover, we would like to highlight that during
our presidency of the Council in February we held an
open debate on peacebuilding (see S/Pv.7621), the result
of which was a confirmation of the synergies that should
exist between the two institutions in order to promote
peace and the development of countries emerging from
conflict and to prevent them from lapsing back into
such situations.

For Venezuela it is vital to prioritize the role that
can be played by regional and subregional organizations
in the peaceful and political resolution of conflicts
and in preventing them, and in the formulation of
coordinated maintenance and consolidation strategies
for peacekeeping and peacebuilding, since it is clear to
us that the Security Council on its own is not sufficient
to meet the peace and security challenges ofthe African
continent, and that the African Union has a recognized
authority and political legitimacy in the region. Hence,
the relationship between our distinct bodies should be
one of complementarity.

That is why Venezuela considers it imperative to
continue to strengthen the cooperation and strategic
partnership between the two bodies. That is the course
of action that would be most beneficial in addressing
shared challenges, such as addressing the structural
causes of conflicts that threaten peace and security
on the African continent, including poverty, foreign
interference, the exclusion of their people, as well as
addressing the great challenges facing the continent,
such as the spread of terrorism, violent extremism
and the migrant crisis, transnational organized crime,
particularly in the Sahel region and the Horn of Africa,
and the resolution of latent conflicts, such as the
conflict of Western Sahara.

In conclusion, this open debate provides an
opportune moment to recall the legacy of former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who, in
2004, pointed out that at the time there was greater
fatigue concerning problems on the African content
than there were 5 or 10 years before then. The former
Secretary-General also asserted that the situation had
been much worse. Today, more than 12 years later, his
remarks remain fully valid. We therefore encourage
the international community to support in a decisive
and continuous manner the efforts to promote peace,
stability and economic and social development
of Africa.

