Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his very useful briefing. I also appreciate the
statements of Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and of Ambassador Vlora Citaku.

Poland shares our European partners' assessment
with regard to the overall stability of the situation in
Kosovo, which does not warrant the current frequency
of reporting. We also believe that the time has come for
the strategic review of UNMIK, which should lead to
the re-evaluation of the level of international presence in
Kosovo. Having recognized Kosovo's independence, in
2008, we remain confident that its political institutions
are capable of realizing the potential of the country's
future, which lies in its integration into the European
Union. It will require the full engagement and consensus
of the Kosovo political forces and society in order
to implement the necessary reforms and meet, to the
fullest extent, the obligations under international law.

That brings me to the issue ofthe attempts to repeal
the law on the Specialist Chambers and Specialist
Prosecutor's Office, established to investigate the war
crimes committed between 1998 and 2000. In that
context, we would like to take positive note of the
recent statement by President Thaci that the special
court cannot, and will not, be revoked. We see that as a
reassuring sign of the acknowledgement at the highest
level of the importance of the unassigned work of those
institutions for the country's international and Euro-
Atlantic integration.

Nevertheless, we also see room for improvement
with respect to good governance and enhancement of
the role of women in public life. No efforts should be
spared in eradicating corruption and in achieving an
efficient and accountable Government, as well as in
ensuring the equitable representation of all citizens in
the Government. We see that as the best guarantee for
prosperity for all.

Lastly, we join others in strongly condemning the
recent murder of the Kosovo Serb politician Oliver
Ivanovie. We would also like to express our faith in
the ability of the relevant institutions in Kosovo to
investigate the crime in a professional manner and bring
the perpetrators to justice. I would like to conclude by
reiterating that Poland views Kosovo as fully capable of
managing its own future.

