Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank the
Venezuelan presidency for organizing today's timely
debate on the review of the peacebuilding architecture.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union and would like
to make the following remarks in its national capacity.

The international community still witnesses
too many countries relapsing into conflict within
short periods of time. While there have been notable
successes in peacebuilding, it is important to note
that, 10 years from the inception of the peacebuilding
architecture and five years from the previous review,
we are yet to realize its full potential. That serves to
underline the importance of focusing on concrete
steps on how to make the peacebuilding review lead
to concrete results. Estonia would like to highlight the
following aspects that are crucial for bringing the full
potential of peacebuilding to the fore.

We must put the prevention of conflict at the centre
if we are serious about sustaining peace. That was one
core message that came out fromlastyear'sreviews-the
United Nations system needs to strengthen its ability
to prevent conflicts from reoccurring. Peacebuilding
is primarily a political process that requires long-term
engagement. It should address the structural causes of
conflicts as well as contemporary risks of recurrence.
One of the most effective ways to sustain peace and
prevent conflict is by building national capacity,
strengthening domestic institutions and supporting
good governance. In that context, I would also like to
highlight that sustainable development is crucial for
sustainable peace.

Peacebuilding should no longer be viewed as merely
a post-conflict activity, but rather the challenge to meet
in order to sustain peace throughout the complete cycle
of our engagement. In that regard, Estonia would like to
underscore the importance of linking the peacebuilding
review to the Secretary-General's review of peace
operations, the review of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). This
holistic approach of addressing the interdependence
between peace, security and development should
include the protection of human rights, including
attention to women's rights, whose meaningful
participation in peace consolidation can significantly
improve the results.

Better coordination is needed if we are to
strengthen peacebuilding. Effective national, regional
and international partnerships enable more relevant
approaches to targeting specific peacebuilding
needs to be jointly developed. The United Nations
system - both at country level and at Headquarters
level - needs to work in a more coordinated fashion. To
that end, Estonia, in its capacity as the Vice-President
of the Economic and Social Council, has participated
in discussions with the Peacebuilding Commission on
finding ways to strengthen cooperation between the
two bodies.
Lastly, more predictable and sustained funding is
required to achieve the full potential ofthe peacebuilding
architecture. Estonia has supported the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) since 2013, as we believe that the PBF is
an effective peacebuilding instrument for providing
catalytic, fast and flexible assistance. However, since
the PBF remains a relatively small-scale strategic fund,
it has to be complemented by longer-term commitments
from other financing sources, such as multilateral and
regional development banks.

The increasing number of violent conflicts across
the globe serves as a strong reminder of why we need
to attach greater importance to peacebuilding, as it is
an important avenue for conflict prevention. Estonia
believes that we need to use the opportunity that the
peacebuilding review offers to produce bold, concrete
and significant outcomes for reinvigorating the
peacebuilding architecture.

