Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary supports all
efforts aimed at making peacebuilding more effective
and recognizes the need to apply a holistic and
integrated approach to sustaining peace. I wish to
thank Venezuela for having convened this very timely
open debate.

While we fully support the statement to be delivered
later on behalf of the European Union, please allow me
to add several observations in my national capacity.

First, we believe that much stronger emphasis
should be placed on conflict prevention through early
engagement and by using all available tools for early
warning and political mediation in order to prevent
the outbreak or escalation of conflicts. We fully
believe that peacebuilding must be understood as an
inherently political process that requires strengthening
the synergy among the related efforts of conflict
prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping, recovery and
development. Hungary also particularly welcomes the
call for strengthening the role of global and regional
partnerships aimed at peacebuilding, with a special
focus on prevention and mediation. We believe that
there is a need to further strengthen the formal and
informal mechanisms of engagement at the strategic
level, including, if possible, through the adoption
by the Security Council of a clearer methodology
for consulting with its counterparts at the regional
and subregional levels. We are of the View that the
great potential for effective partnerships between the
United Nations and international financial institutions
should be fully utilized. In addition, we consider the
engagement of civil society, religious leaders, local
communities and women and youth groups as also being
essential in assisting the realization of sustained peace.

The Hungarian Government is of the view that,
in order to be successful in preventing conflicts or
rebuilding conflict-torn countries, we must tackle the
root causes. Hungary, as co-Chair of the Open Working
Group on Sustainable Development Goals, worked
with Member States to ensure that Goal 16 explicitly
recognized the linkage between peace, inclusion,
sustainable development, justice and accountability.

The importance of women's participation in
peacebuilding cannot be overemphasized. Women are
crucial partners in the transition from war to peace.
They are key agents for promoting social cohesion,
political legitimacy and economic recovery. That is
especially relevant in places where peace has broken
down and conflict has shifted the focus away from
cooperation towards division and hatred. We hope that
the outcome of the peacebuilding review process will
adequately recognize that fact.

In that context, I would also like to stress that
education in general - in particular that of women,
youth and marginalized groups - also has an important
role to play, both in preventing conflicts and in post-
conflict peacebuilding. We deem the realization of
the right to education to be the cornerstone of lasting
peace, since ignorance, misunderstanding, the erosion
of culture and the loss of cultural identity are often the
starting points for fanaticism and conflicts.

Let me conclude my statement by emphasizing
that ensuring accountability for serious international
crimes - given its proven deterrent effect - should
be a key component of peacebuilding efforts. Bringing
perpetrators to justice helps to heal the wounds of
societies torn apart by such crimes.

