Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. The Chinese delegation will fully support your
work. We would also like to thank Ambassador Holbrooke
and the United States delegation for their outstanding work
last month in the Council. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report and Mr. Vieira de Mello
for his comprehensive briefing.

We are gratified by the positive evolution of the
situation in East Timor. This progress would not have been
possible without the joint efforts of the United Nations and
all the parties concerned. We would especially like to
express our deep appreciation to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de Mello, and to all
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) personnel for their outstanding work
under difficult and harsh conditions.

At the same time, we note that we should not be
overly optimistic about the situation in East Timor. There
are still great difficulties involved in reconstructing East
Timor, particularly in rebuilding its infrastructure, building
judicial institutions and establishing rule of law, and in
creating employment. China believes that it has not been
easy to come this far in East Timor, and this hard-won
achievement needs to be nurtured.

The most pressing tasks taken on by all the parties in
East Timor should be to maintain stability and to persist in
the reconstruction and reconciliation efforts. In this context,
the Chinese delegation would like to underscore the
following points.

First, as regards smoothly transforming the
International Force in East Timor (INTERFET) into a
United Nations peacekeeping operation, China has always
advocated the settlement of the question of East Timor
within the framework of the United Nations. We hope
that the Blue Helmets will successfully take the baton
from INTERFET as scheduled, and assume responsibility
for ensuring the security of East Timor and helping create
a stable environment for rebuilding the society. In
particular, civilian police should be deployed as soon as
possible.

Secondly, regarding the gradual assumption by the
East Timorese people of self-governance, the National
Consultative Council of East Timor (NCC) is an effective
mechanism by which the East Timorese people can
participate in administration and decision-making in East
Timor. As pointed out in the Secretary-Generals report,
UNTAET has benefited greatly from close cooperation
with the East Timorese groups represented in the NCC.
We hope UNTAET will continue its broad consultations
with all the sides and will train local personnel with a
View to the independence and self-governance of the East
Timorese people.

Thirdly, as regards maintaining the unity of the East
Timorese people and continuing to promote reconciliation,
we concur with the Secretary-General's observation that
maintaining the unity of purpose that the National Council
of Timorese Resistance (CNRT) has demonstrated so far
will be a key element in ensuring a smooth transition to
independence, and that the inclusion of pro-autonomy
groups in the NCC was an important step on the path to
reconciliation. We hope that the leaders of all East
Timorese groups will continue to play a positive role in
promoting the reconciliation process.

Fourthly, regarding the active promotion of relations
between East Timor and Indonesia, this will help enhance
stability in the region and promote the settlement of
unresolved questions, such as the safe return of refugees
now stranded in camps in West Timor. The Secretary-
General will soon make a visit to Indonesia and East
Timor. We hope that his visit will foster further
improvements in the relations between the two sides.

Fifthly, China will continue to support and
participate in relevant activities in the framework of the
United Nations, so as to help East Timor make a smooth

 

transition. We are ready to become a friend and a
cooperative partner of the region. The President of the
CNRT, Mr. Gusmao, visited China recently and was
warmly received by China's leaders.

As the first stage in its assistance, the Chinese
Government has provided $50 million yuan renminbi in
grants in aid to East Timor. Within its means, China will
continue to provide assistance to the reconstruction process
in East Timor.

At present East Timor is faced with the formidable
task of rebuilding in all sectors. Helping East Timor make
a smooth transition is a challenge for the United Nations.
We are gratified by the good beginning that has been made
and hope that all concerned will continue to maintain the
present momentum of cooperation and help the East
Timorese people overcome their temporary difficulties and
rebuild their society in good time.

Finally, I would like to say a few words about the
human rights situation in East Timor, about which we are
very concerned. We note that the International Commission
of Inquiry and the Indonesian Government have both
released reports on the human rights situation there. We
also note that the Indonesian President has stated that his
Administration will seriously study the Indonesian
Commission of Inquiry's report and, in accordance with
Indonesian national law, take action. We believe that the
Indonesian Government is able and ready to conduct
investigations, as well as to carry out prosecutions.

