Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Like other colleagues, I
should first of all like to thank Mr. Holkeri for his very
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments in
Kosovo. I think that both today's presentation and the
Secretary-General's excellent recent report on Kosovo
clearly show that Kosovo and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
require continuous attention and support.

My delegation also welcomes the participation in
our discussion of Foreign Minister Draskovic and
would like to associate itself with the statement to be
made shortly by Ambassador Ryan of Ireland on behalf
of the European Union.
We have seen some of the worst ethnic violence
in Kosovo since 1999, but we have also seen some
positive changes since the Council discussed Kosovo
in April. As Mr. Holkeri mentioned, some 270
Kosovars have been arrested for possible involvement
in the March violence, and some of those cases should
soon be going to trial. Tenders are being prepared for
reconstruction contracts to begin repairing the damage
to houses. Ministers from the Kosovo Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government have visited some Serb
communities to personally assess the damage and to
show their sympathy for the affected members of those
communities. We hope that working groups will meet
again soon to map out further progress in implementing
the "Standards for Kosovo" document.

All of these are worthy developments, but they
fall short of what we had hoped for. We want to see
clearer statements and actions by leaders of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government that will
demonstrate to extremists that they have no place in
Kosovo in future.

Political leaders should encourage their
constituents actively to assist police in investigating
the March uprisings and to testify against the
extremists who led the violence. Political parties and
Government structures should do all they can to
dismiss those who actively or passively supported the
violence which did so much harm to the aspirations of
all Kosovars.

Political leaders in Kosovo must break new
ground. Beyond the obligation to marginalize
extremists, to follow through on commitments to
rebuild communities destroyed by the March violence
and to renew the dialogue of working groups with
Belgrade, political leaders in Kosovo must find new
ways to reconcile the ethnic communities. They should
do far more to encourage minority returns and ensure a
safe environment for members of minority groups who
do go back to their homes in Kosovo. This is a problem
of society-building for which neither UNMIK nor the
international community is responsible, but the
political elite of Kosovo alone.

Political leaders must also demonstrate a greater
willingness to compromise. Further progress in Kosovo
will require some devolution of political power. That
would help bring government closer to the people and
at the same time reassure members of all ethnic groups
that they can have greater control over their lives. We
welcome the fact that Special Representative Mr.
Holkeri, under whose reserved powers issues of local
government fall, will soon prepare a concept based on
the proposals made by the Council of Europe last year
and will consult with the parties concerned. We urge
political leaders in Kosovo to move constructively and
quickly to engage in open discussion on measures for
devolution, without prejudice to the status issue.

Ethnic Serbs and other minorities must
demonstrate that they, too, are approaching Kosovo's
problems in good faith. One important step is for them
to participate fully in the working groups that will be
implementing the "Standards for Kosovo".

Clearly, much of the future progress in Kosovo
will depend on the economy. In that respect, we look
forward to progress soon to be made in the field of
privatization. Germany, both through its bilateral
assistance and by working through the European
Union, will do all it can to promote economic
development in Kosovo. But economic development
requires, above all, political stability. To secure their
economic future, all communities in Kosovo must
demonstrate to potential investors that events like the
March uprisings will not reoccur and that the ethnic
communities can live together in peace.

