Ms. Bird (Australia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2274 (2016), extending the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA).

The year ahead brings with it both opportunities
and significant challenges for Afghanistan and the
international community that stands with it. In 2016,
we see the possibility of progress towards peace talks,
another chance for Afghans to exercise their democratic
rights, and major meetings that will plot a path forward
for the international community's involvement in
Afghanistan. Security, governance and the reform
agenda remain key priorities.

The National Unity Government, under the
leadership of President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and
Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah, has proven to
be resilient and responsive to the expectations of
the Afghan people. Those expectations now turn to
the forthcoming parliamentary elections, and we
encourage the National Unity Government to advance
the reforms recommended by the Special Electoral
Reform Commission. We commend the progress made
thus far, as well as broader progress on economic and
judicial reform, and urge perseverance in continuing
this progress.

The achievements of the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group on the Afghan Peace and Reconciliation Process
in laying the groundwork for peace talks between the
Afghan Government and the Taliban should also be
commended. No one can doubt the challenges ahead,
but it is only through such a process that security and
stability will be restored. We urge all parties, including
the Taliban, to make further progress in 2016.

Major international meetings in Warsaw in July
and Brussels in October will provide opportunities for
Afghanistan and the international community to plan
the way forward. Australia will be ready to join our
partners in recommitting to Afghanistan's future. We
urge continued commitment to reforms within existing
frameworks in the lead-up to these conferences.

Insecurity and conflict continue to pervade every
aspect of life and governance in Afghanistan. Law and
order and effective policing are key to securing public
trust. The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
have fought bravely and resolutely, but the insurgency
remains defiant. The Afghan population still bears
the brunt of this war, as United Nations reporting on
civilian casualties tells us, and we condemn in the
strongest terms recent attacks by the insurgency that
have killed dozens of innocent Afghan civilians.

Through its coordination, assistance and reporting
roles, UNAMA's contribution to Afghanistan and its
people has been profound and hard-fought. We applaud
Mr. Haysom's long and distinguished leadership as
Special Representative and Head of UNAMA, as well
as the dedicated UNAMA staff, and thank them for
their service.

