Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, I wish to thank you for having
convened and for presiding over this meeting on
the agenda item on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

Chile wants to see peace in the Middle East,
especially between Israelis and Palestinians, and
supports the two-State solution so that they may live
in peace and security within internationally recognized
borders. The members of the international community
should foster, individually and collectively, the peace
process by promoting the relaunch of negotiations
and responsible conduct by the parties during
such negotiations.

Chile warmly welcomes the adoption by the Security
Council in December of resolution 2334 (2016), on all
measures aimed at changing the character or status of
the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem. We agree that the construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in Palestinian territory
jeopardizes the viability of the two-State solution,
which is based on the 1967 borders. We therefore
welcome the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016). It is
now a matter of ensuring the full implementation of the
resolution and of all prior agreements.

Chile takes note with disappointment of the Israeli
announcement at the end of March of the construction
of new settlements in occupied Palestinian territory.
We reiterate that this is illegal under international law.
We trust that the Secretariat will substantially report,
in writing, on the implementation of the resolution and
any violations thereof.

We also reiterate the importance of the parties
promoting a culture of peace and non-violence through
education and public outreach, as stipulated in General
Assembly resolution 61/271.

Chile takes this opportunity to reiterate its
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
The recent pictures that showed clearly the suffering of
women, children and other civilians were shocking and
harrowing. Now more than ever, the United Nations
must play a key role, as must its relevant institutions.

Any response to violations of the international
Chemical Weapons Convention must always take place
in the framework of international law and in line with
the Charter of the United Nations.

The Syrian conflict, as we have stated on many
occasions, can have only a political solution, towards
which the Council must work in the context of its
decision-making. In that respect, we stress that the veto
is not a right but, rather, a great responsibility. For this
reason, Chile reiterates its call for a limited use of the
veto in relation to Palestine, Syria or any other conflict,
on the basis of the code of conduct developed by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group
with regard to Security Council action in response to
genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes, as
well as on the basis of the Franco-Mexican initiative,
which we deem complementary.

Finally, the Syrian conflict and its ramifications,
despite their extreme gravity, should not divert the
Council's attention from the Palestinian question or
from the need for the full implementation of resolution
2334 (2016).

