Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
should like to express my appreciation for
Mr. Stephen's report and commend him and his staff
for their hard work in Guinea-Bissau, especially in the
area of addressing human rights. I also thank
Ambassador Kumalo for his report and the
representatives of Gambia and Guinea-Bissau for their
contributions, which were interesting elements to add
to our discussion.

We are very concerned about the fragile human
rights situation in Guinea-Bissau, as well as about the
worsening social and economic situation that others
have referred to. All of this is worsening political
tension and contributing to potential instability. The
United States believes that current conditions are not
conducive to free, fair and credible elections on 6 July.
We believe that the United Nations should consider
making its assistance to those elections conditional on
clear and irrevocable steps by the Government to
ensure that the elections are free and fair. We would not
want the United Nations to lend legitimacy to a
fundamentally flawed election process.

We also call on the Government of Guinea-Bissau
to take concrete steps regarding its rehabilitation and
peace-building agendas, including commitments on the
promulgation of the new constitution, the election of
the President and Vice-President of the Supreme Court
of Justice and the holding of fair and transparent
legislative elections. These commitments should
include guarantees that the opposition can participate
in the legislative elections without harassment and with
equal access to the media.

We also want to urge the Government of Guinea-
Bissau to demonstrate a stronger commitment to
democracy, the rule of law and respect for human
rights, as well as to engage in a constructive dialogue
with the international community on meaningful ways
to improve its economic governance so as to restore
donor confidence.

Four years ago, this Council, along with many
other bodies of the United Nations system, served as an
emergency room to address the armed conflict in
Guinea-Bissau. Four years later, Guinea-Bissau is still
in intensive care. It has shown signs that it may be
returning to a point of crisis. The international
community can and will help - we are confident of
that - but the Government of Guinea-Bissau must
itself take urgent steps to stop the downward course it
is currently on.

The Security Council delegation, when it arrives
in Guinea-Bissau next week, will press upon the
Government the need to create basic conditions for
democratic governance, peace and stability. Doing so
will help, in the words of the Secretary-General in his
report before us today,

"to restore confidence and trust within the
country and between Guinea-Bissau and its
international partners". (5/2003/621, para. 28)

In conclusion, I want to express our appreciation
to the French delegation for preparing a draft
presidential statement, which we will approve in
coming days and which the United States supports.

