Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Mr. Haysom, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Sudan and South Sudan, for their very
informative and enlightening briefings on the reality in
the Abyei Area. The inhabitants of Abyei have already
suffered for too long. That is why we believe that the
current stability in the Area must continue.

Equatorial Guinea welcomes the progress made in
fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). We therefore
support its activities in the Area and consider it a
significant factor in ending the conflict that has brought
suffering to the inhabitants of Abyei. It is important
that the parties refrain from taking actions that could
complicate the situation.

However, we are concerned about the internal
political tensions, the continuing simmering disputes
and the fact that the parties have not made use of the
relative calm on their borders to properly address the
situation in order to resolve the outstanding issues.

In that regard, we would therefore like to encourage
the parties involved - the Sudan and South Sudan - to
act responsibly and to implement the measures adopted
concerning their borders. I am referring to the
Cooperation Agreement between the Republic of the
Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan signed in
September 2012, which has played a stabilizing role in
the Area. Without that step, it will be very difficult to
strengthen the desired peace in the Area.

Furthermore, in that context the Security Council
must play a constructive role in supporting the efforts of
UNISFA to fulfil its mandate. We wish to commend its
work in facilitating access to humanitarian assistance
and its delivery, since there continue to be significant
humanitarian needs, which could be exacerbated by the
tensions among the communities and the lack of basic
services. The two Governments should also cooperate
with UNISFA in that regard.
It is important that the mission play a more active
and proactive role in support of a political solution
to resolve the final status of Abyei, including the
implementation by the Sudan and South Sudan of the
agreements concluded in 2011 on border issues and
security arrangements.

In conclusion, we would like to extend our
congratulations to all those that have facilitated the
progress in the Abyei Area that we mentioned today,
namely, the African Union, UNISFA and the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, which
have demonstrated commendable resolve in the pursuit
of peace and security in the border area. We urge them
to keep up the momentum and the spirit of commitment
required in order to implement the agreements to which
I referred.

