Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you for
successfully conducting the presidency of the Security
Council during the month of July. I express special
gratitude for holding this open meeting on the situation
in Afghanistan. I am certain the proceedings of the
Council will be handled in an excellent manner under
your guidance.

I make use of this opportunity to thank Mr. Kofi
Annan, Secretary-General, for the report dated 11 July
2002 on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security. My
delegation welcomes this report.

Eight months have passed since representatives of
Afghanistan's major parties signed the Bonn
Agreement. The Agreement and the significant
contribution to it from the United Nations could be
considered a paramount success of United Nations
peacemaking efforts at the beginning of the twenty-first
century. It is with great satisfaction that we report on
the considerable achievements made since this historic
event. I would like to express the gratitude of the
Government and people of Afghanistan to Ambassador
Lakhdar Brahimi. This admiration was mentioned in
the Loya Jirga. We thank his colleagues, Mr. Nigel
Fischer and Jean Arnaud, and all other members of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for their unceasing efforts to the peace
process, recovery and reconstruction of Afghanistan.
Ambassador Brahimi's briefing was not easy, it
was a tour de force. I admire him for having
summarized so many points in his lucid analysis at the
beginning of this meeting.

The success of last month's Loya Jirga was a
milestone achievement in Afghanistan's recent history.
After two decades of armed conflict and subsequent
years of instability, the people of Afghanistan, through
the Loya Jirga, exercised their right to self-
determination. As a result of this historic meeting, a
democratically elected, broad-based Government
reflecting the national unity of the country was
established. In this context, allow me to refer to the
broad participation of women, the presence of
international monitors during the nomination and
selection of delegates, the relatively competitive nature
of the proceedings, and the introduction of secret
ballots during the voting process, which had never
taken place in Afghanistan during previous Loya
Jirgas.

The return of relative peace and stability has
prompted massive flows of refugees from neighbouring
countries. According to recent data from the
transitional Government, from 1 March 2002 to 14 July
2002, 1,266,343 refugees returned from neighbouring
countries. Of that number, 1,161,443 returned from
Pakistan, 95,583 returned from Iran and 9,317 returned
from Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and other countries.

Upon arrival, the returnees face extreme
difficulty in undertaking the activities of daily life.
Successful programmes must be established to provide
housing, education and health services - conditions
that must be met in order to achieve a decent standard
of living for returnees. The $100 of assistance granted
to each refugee by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is not
sufficient, since a large portion of that amount is spent
on the transport of personal belongings. Additional
consideration should also be given to the restoration of
irrigation systems for returnees who are farmers, to
demining projects and to employment opportunities,
especially in Kabul and in other cities.

Among other achievements, we might mention
the establishment of a number of commissions, as
mandated in the Bonn Agreement. On 21 May 2002, a
decree established a Judicial Commission composed of
eminent Afghan scholars and jurists and aimed at
rebuilding the country's justice system. In addition, on

6 June 2002, the transitional Government established a
Human Rights Commission consisting of both men and
WOII'ICIl .

Furthermore, the back-to-school programme
launched in March 2002 has resulted in the return of
more than 3 million children - including girls - to
educational institutions. In addition, the strong
commitment of the Afghan Government to the
eradication of poppy cultivation and trafficking in
Afghanistan has led to the destruction of narcotics with
an estimated street value of $8 billion.

Despite the series of positive developments -
some of which I have discussed - much remains to be
accomplished. In order to establish its full authority
throughout the country, the Transitional Authority has
made the formation of an ethnically and regionally
balanced national army one of its main objectives. As a
means towards that objective, the Transitional
Authority has established a high-level commission
responsible for monitoring the collection of arms from
local forces, some of which are working to undermine
the central Government. Only a stable and secure
atmosphere can guarantee the reconstruction process.

The Secretary-General, in paragraph 7 of his
report (S/2002/737) dated 11 July 2002, concerning the
enhancement of security in Afghanistan, insightfully
refers to the drastic impact of limited resources on the
efforts of the Transitional Authority to widen its
authority:

"The Interim Administration's efforts to
extend its influence and control have been
hampered above all by the limited resources at its
disposal. These limitations have affected its
ability to provide services, build roads and create
jobs."

The consolidation of peace and stability and the
full implementation of the Bonn Agreement depend
largely on the international community's sustained
engagement in providing the necessary assistance for
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Afghanistan's
social and economic infrastructure. Job-creation
programmes and the extension of quick-impact projects
throughout Afghanistan will have a direct influence on
the emergence of security and on the demobilization of
former combatants.

In that context, I should like to refer to the recent
meeting of the Afghanistan Support Group, convened
in Geneva on 11 July 2002. At that meeting, Mr. Ashraf
Ghani, Economy and Finance Minister of Afghanistan,
illustrated in detail the country's economic plight and
urgently appealed for the prompt disbursement of all
pledges made at the donors conference held in Tokyo
in January 2002.

A few points mentioned earlier by the
representatives of various countries require some brief
observations on my part. First of all, I should like to
thank all those here who presented a positive and lucid
analysis of the Afghan situation, as well as all those
who described the assistance they are providing to
Afghanistan in many ways. The Afghan Government
highly appreciates the role of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) - in particular the leadership
of the United Kingdom forces, who engaged in the best
possible cooperation with Afghanistan's Ministry of
Defence. The handover to Turkey has been
accomplished in the best possible way thanks to the
cooperation of the United Kingdom forces, and also
because the Turks have been helping the Afghan army
since the 19205.

With regard to a possible role for ISAF beyond
the capital, Kabul, I should like to say that, for the time
being, there is no imminent danger that requires urgent
action. But it would be wise to think about the future,
and there is thus a possibility of increasing the role of
ISAF beyond the capital, Kabul. This could be done by
perhaps considering one individual case without
thinking immediately about having ISAF all over
Afghanistan. Take, for example, Mazar-e-Sharif or
some other selected point in Afghanistan, in
accordance with the requirements of the Afghan
Ministry of Defence. I think this is not an urgent
problem, but it is still very important to think about
what will happen beyond Kabul.

I think we must not consider Afghanistan to be a
country where no one works, or an unvisited terrain or
a tabula rasa where nothing existed. Afghanistan had a
Government; it had a national army, a police force, a
justice system. There was an equilibrium of relations
among different ethnic groups. If I may say so,
Afghanistan's best years were at the time of the two
World Wars, because my country did not participate in
those wars; it stayed neutral. But we had to pay later.
Everything that happened in Afghanistan, I assure the
Council, was because of foreign intervention. The
mujaheddin did not destroy Kabul themselves; all the
means used for the destruction of Kabul were provided
by foreign sources from 1992 to December 2001.

I assure Council members that the Afghans have a
very keen desire for peace, and that if a decent salary is
given to any worker, anywhere in Afghanistan, for very
important and necessary infrastructure projects - in
other words, for working - then that worker will never
follow what is called a warlord. And then, warlords
will become obsolete.

