Ms. Blais (Canada): Let me begin by expressing
my delegation's sincere appreciation to the Republic
of Poland for convening today's important and timely
ministerial open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Canada recognizes the urgent need for
sustained high-level attention to this issue.

At a time when violence and conflict threaten
international security, Canada is joining efforts to build
a more peaceful and secure world while putting the
protection of civilians at the forefront of our actions,
and we are grateful for the opportunity to explain
how. We do this first by consistently advocating for
compliance with international humanitarian law with
a view to strengthening the protection of civilians.
Just last month, under Canada's Group of Seven (G-7)
presidency, G-7 Ministers for Foreign Affairs committed
to using their support to State and non-State parties to
encourage effective implementation of international
humanitarian law. That will be achieved through
practical measures such as seeking commitments
from partners to enhance respect for international
humanitarian law, helping them incorporate it into their
doctrines, field training and rules of engagement, and
also assisting partners in ensuring that their judicial
structures are capable of effectively addressing their
own international humanitarian law violations, should
they occur. We urge the members of the Council and all
States Members of the United Nations to undertake a
similar commitment.

Canada is outraged that attacks on civilians,
health-care facilities and medical and humanitarian
personnel persist. We call on the Council to clearly
condemn direct and indiscriminate attacks on civilians
and demand that parties to armed conflicts comply with
their international humanitarian law obligations and
with Council resolutions.

Secondly, Canada is acting to ensure accountability.
In Myanmar, Canada is committed to working closely
with other countries, international organizations and
civil society to establish lasting peace and reconciliation,
and a clear pathway towards accountability for
atrocities committed in Rakhine state. Specifically,
we are coordinating with international partners to
support existing evidence-gathering efforts and the
Independent International Fact-Finding Mission
on Myanmar. Canada will also explore options for
assisting in investigating and documenting gross
human rights violations and abuses, including sexual
and gender-based violence, especially in Rakhine state.
Additionally, in both Syria and Iraq, Canada is funding
evidence collection, analysis and documentation efforts
to support the future prosecution of members of Da'esh
and other parties for war crimes or other violations of
international law. Let me be clear. In order to achieve
sustainable peace in conflict zones, including Syria,
the transition out of conflict must be accompanied by
an inclusive process of accountability that addresses
serious violations of international law by all parties to
the conflict.

Thirdly, Canada is working to strengthen the
protection of civilians through peacekeeping. United
Nations peacekeeping has helped to provide protection
to millions of vulnerable people affected by conflict.
On the ground, we have peacekeepers in the United
Nations missions in South Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo who are working tirelessly with
international partners to protect civilians. We will
soon be deploying personnel to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, another operation where the protection of
civilians is mandated as its top priority.

However, as the nature of conflicts changes, so
too must modern peace operations. Canada is therefore
also promoting innovative approaches to enhancing the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations. For
example, last November, we launched the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. They have so
far been endorsed by 62 Member States and are a set
of political commitments that take an assertive stance
on preventing unlawful child recruitment in the context
of peacekeeping operations. Canada also launched
the Elsie Initiative on Women in Peace Operations, a
pilot project through which we will develop and test
innovative approaches to increase the representation
and participation of women in United Nations peace
operations. We firmly believe that this will lead to
more effective missions.

(spoke in French)

Lastly, Canada is working to address the needs of
women and girls affected by conflict. The protection
of civilians must take account of gender issues in order
to be effective. That is why Canada's second national
action plan on women, peace and security includes
measures to protect women and girls from sexual and
gender-based violence in situations of armed conflict,
as well as to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse by
international personnel. We must also remember the
special challenges faced by persons with disabilities
in conflict situations, including their access to
humanitarian assistance. We encourage Member States
that have not yet done so to join the Charter on Inclusion
of Persons with Disabilities in Humanitarian Action.

When Canada last served on the Security Council,
in 1999 and 2000, we fought to put the protection of
civilians on the Security Council's agenda. Today
those considerations constitute a significant goal for
peacekeeping mandates. That is major progress, but it
is clear that our work is far from over. Today, let us
recommit together to shouldering our responsibility
to prevent conflicts, protect civilians, and hold
perpetrators of serious international crimes to account.
The Council should rest assured that Canada will do
its part.

