Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Zerrougui for her briefing today.

Last December, the Congolese people cast their
votes for change and for a peaceful transition of power,
stability and a brighter future. The United States
applauds the recent formation of a Government in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo that embraces
new leaders who could help realize such a future. We
commend President Tshisekedi for the commitments he
and his Government have made and for the first steps
they have taken to curb the Ebola outbreak, address
insecurity in the eastern part of the country and fight
corruption. Only concrete action can prove to the
Congolese people that this Government represents the
change they voted for.

We commend the efforts of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
and non-governmental organizations to fight Ebola,
especially the unique support and capabilities provided
by the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). As the largest single-country donor to
the response, the United States is deeply committed
to global health. Still, we urge others to contribute
generously to the latest strategic response plan, which
calls for $376 million in donor funding.

While the Government has rightly focused on the
chronic insecurity in the east of the country, we remain
deeply concerned about the human rights abuses in the
region by armed groups and local militias. We are also
alarmed at the continued reports of attacks by those
groups across North Kivu, as well as the resurgence of
violence in South Kivu. We acknowledge MONUSCO's
efforts amid the unrest to increase security through
an intensified troop presence as well as its support
of reconciliation efforts in the east. While an end to
violence is a necessary condition for peace, it is no
guarantee. We therefore urge the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the President
to work closely with the Mission and provincial
authorities to establish a long-term plan for justice
and reconciliation, one that addresses long-standing
grievances and structures that permit violence.

We also expect to see the Government reform its
security sector, including by improving standards in
the national police and armed forces, holding violators
of human rights to account, and demobilizing and
disarming willing armed groups and reintegrating them
into civilian life. In the east, provincial authorities
have already created an investigation commission
and two intercommunal dialogues with MONUSCO's
support. These are small but commendable steps. We
similarly recognize the President's recent overtures to
his neighbours in the Great Lakes region, and we hope
those meetings will yield a new pattern of good-faith
dialogue aimed at lasting regional peace.

The stability of democratic institutions depends on
citizens being able to trust their elected officials. We
are therefore encouraged by the recent efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to fight corruption, including a pledge to pass new
legislation to address impunity and ratify the African
Union's Convention on Preventing and Combating
Corruption. The United States strongly supports those
efforts, including through its own bilateral programmes.
Because we understand that good governance is
essential for a society to flourish, and because we want
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to flourish,
the United States is launching a new anti-corruption
programme in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in support of our bilateral partnership initiated during
President Tshisekedi's visit to Washington.

We also look forward to seeing the MONUSCO
strategic review later this month. We expect to receive
the full text of the review in accordance with the
commitments made by the Secretariat. We also welcome
any additional documents that the Secretariat would
like to provide, though we recognize that the report
will not oblige the United Nations or Security Council
members to take any particular course of action.

It is ultimately the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that has the power to deliver
resources and security to its citizens, and just as the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo marked
their ballots in favour of change, the new Government
has a vote of its own to cast - a vote against corruption
and violence and, most importantly, a vote for a better
future for the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We urge the Government to make the choice
that is best for all whom it represents.

