Mr. Satoh (Japan): Since the heinous terrorist
attacks of 11 September last year, significant progress
has been made through international cooperation in the
fight against terrorism. This progress is encouraging,
but the fight is only at its beginning stage. It is
therefore essential for all Member States to strengthen
their cooperative efforts to attain our common goal of
eliminating terrorism.

In that context, I cannot overemphasize the
importance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), particularly its valuable activities to enhance
the capacity of countries concerned with combating
terrorism. I would thus like to pay my highest tribute to
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock and the other members
of the CTC Bureau for the strenuous efforts they have
devoted to the activities of that important Committee.
Thanks to them, the CTC is already a successful
institution.

In the immediate aftermath of the 11 September
attacks, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi affirmed
that the Japanese Government is resolved to make the
fight against terrorism its own responsibility and to
engage itself actively in that fight. The full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) is a central task in such efforts on the part of the
Japanese Government.

In particular, the Government of Japan places
high priority on the swift implementation of the
Security Council's measures in order to deprive
terrorists of any possibility of withdrawing funds
before their assets are frozen. In freezing the financial
assets of the individuals and entities associated with Al
Qaeda and the Taliban pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1333 (2000) and 1390 (2002), the Japanese
Government has been taking the necessary measures
nearly simultaneously with the sanctions Committee's
decisions to add an individual or an entity to the
sanctions list. The assistance extended by the sanctions
Committee is crucially important in order to make it
possible for us to take such swift action. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso,
Chairman of the sanctions Committee, for his
cooperation.

Furthermore, in order to ensure the thorough
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and, at the
same time, to make it possible for the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism to enter into force, the Japanese Government
has submitted the relevant draft legislation to the
Japanese Diet and plans to ratify the Convention as
soon as the Diet approves it. That will complete
Japan's ratification of all 12 anti-terrorism conventions.

We highly appreciate the fact that the CTC has
been vigorously conducting its work of reviewing the
reports submitted by Member States on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Therefore, it
is all the more important to urge those countries that
have not yet done so to submit their reports to the CTC
promptly. In that connection, the Japanese Government
considers it a serious problem that many countries,
despite their intentions, have not submitted their
reports because they lack the capacity to do so.
Therefore, we would like to call on the CTC urgently
to consider what needs to be done to help those
countries.

Assistance to developing countries is essential in
order to secure the global implementation of resolution
1373 (2001), and such assistance could be better
organized if the CTC could identify countries in need
as well as the areas in which they require assistance.
Such a step would facilitate cooperation between donor
and recipient countries and would further promote the
implementation by developing countries of resolution
1373 (2001). From that point of view, we support the
CTC's intention to focus its future activities on those
countries facing difficulties in implementing resolution
1373 (2001).

In this context, it is particularly important to
upgrade the CTC directory of assistance, which already
exists to a limited extent. To that end, we must urge
those countries capable of providing assistance to
register their assistance programmes in the CTC
directory as soon as possible. The Japanese
Government, for its part, has already registered its own
technical assistance training programmes and has
decided to double the number of trainees that it will
accept for those programmes in 2002.

The Japanese Government supports the CTC's
intention to take advantage of cooperation with
regional organizations and other international forums
to promote the full implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). My Government, for its part, will work to see
to it that regional organizations and other forums to
which it belongs expand their cooperation with the
CTC.

I would like to conclude by stressing that now is
the time for all Member States to reaffirm our common
commitment to combat terrorism and to renew our
determination to support the CTC so that it can
continue its valuable work, building upon the success it
has achieved so far. The tasks that the CTC will have to
face in the future will be far more challenging than
those it faced during the initial period. In the light of
this recognition, the Japanese Government will remain
committed to do its best in support of the CTC in the
months to come.

