Mr. Kolby (Norway): My delegation would also
like to thank Special Representative Klein for his
briefing and for his active efforts as head of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH).

Norway welcomes UNMIBH's mandate
implementation plan and its important contribution to
the implementation of the Peace Agreement. We
commend UNMIBH and the International Police Task
Force (IPTF) for having made good progress in the
areas of police reform, the State Border Service and the
rule of law.

Norway remains committed to supporting
UNMIBH's efforts to fulfil its core tasks by 2002. We
therefore support the extension of UNMIBH's mandate
for another year, as recommended by the Secretary-
General.

We must give UNMIBH time and resources to
tackle the remaining challenges. Minority
representation in local police forces is too low. There is
a continued need for the training and equipping of
entity police and State border police. Judicial follow-up
demands further attention. The police and judiciary of
Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to require
international support and supervision, but local, entity
and State officials must bear the primary responsibility
for ensuring progress in the reform efforts, which are
vital to the development of a democratic society.
Establishing the rule of law is a precondition for self-
sustaining peace.

Norway has been among the major contributors to
the comprehensive international peace-building efforts
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We will continue to
provide assistance. But we expect local leaders
increasingly to do their share, in cooperation with the
international agencies operating in the field.

The international community must engage in a
more coordinated and unified manner in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We would like to see improved
cooperation between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the High Representative, the
Stabilization Force, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and all the other organizations
that have important roles to play in implementing the
Peace Agreement. We must ensure that they
complement each other, rather than compete with each
other.

Regarding the political situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Norway welcomes the formation of non-
nationalist governments at State and entity levels
following the general elections in 2000. We are
encouraged by the constructive approach of the Matic
Government, and by other positive signs. Reports
indicate a substantial increase in minority returns to,
and within, Bosnia and Herzegovina. These returns
often take place despite the continued efforts of
nationalist forces to block the return process. Norway
commends the courage of the returnees and expresses
its appreciation for the dedicated efforts of the IPTF,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and others involved.

It is unacceptable that nationalist and criminal
elements continue to hamper the return of families to
their rightful homes. In some cases, these are the same
elements that engaged in ethnic cleansing during the
Bosnian war. This underscores the need to continue to
demand that all local, entity and State governments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. The international community must also act
with greater resolve to deal with this issue.

Norway condemns attempts by the Croat National
Congress to establish a Croat entity within Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the recent ethnically motivated
violence in Mostar, Trebinje and Banja Luka. These
incidents show that nationalist forces are still active
and remain ready and willing to incite violence and to
undermine the Peace Agreement.

Norway emphasizes the important contributions
that neighbouring countries can make in promoting
stability, the rule of law and democracy in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Ethnic tension, organized crime,
trafficking, illegal immigration and political instability
can be adequately dealt with only within a regional
framework and through a unified international
approach. The trilateral agreements on combating
illegal migration and organized crime, brokered by
UNMIBH, and the establishment of an Interpol office
in Sarajevo represent very positive concrete steps in
that regard.

It is our hope that the new democratic
Governments in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will commit
themselves to further reconciliation, cooperation and
good-neighbourly relations, based on mutual
recognition of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of each State.

A promising beginning has already been made. It
is now crucial for the international community to stay
the course and assist the nations of the region in
finding sustainable solutions which promote
democracy, stability and reintegration, and prevent
further violence and disintegration.

