Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I should like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien, for his briefing to
the Security Council. I should like to share with the
Council my views regarding certain significant aspects
of that very important briefing.

First, Mr. O'Brien was right to say that the root
causes ofthe Syrian crisis must be addressed. Naturally,
they are political and not humanitarian in nature. I will
therefore proceed on the basis of that understanding.
It is not my intention to criticize the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/698) or to comment on
the Under-Secretary-General's statement; rather, I
wish to clarify the overall scenario that underlies the
humanitarian situation in my country, Syria.

As members are aware, the Security Council has
adopted a series of important resolutions to combat
terrorism. To its credit, two days ago the Russian
presidency of the Security Council organized an
important event on the ocassion of the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1624 (2005). That resolution
was followed by resolutions 1989 (2011) and 2199
(2015). While all of them prohibit inciting, funding or
supporting terrorism, above all they make it mandatory
on States Members of the United Nations not to adopt
terrorism as a policy to pressure the Governments of
other States. That is splendid as a pronouncement, but
it is not applied at all in practical terms.

There are illegal armed terrorist groups operating
in northern Syria, such as Jaish Al-Fatha, which is
financed by Turkey and Qatar. This group daily fires
thousands of shells against our people in Aleppo,
killing hundreds and injuring thousands and preventing
normal life. Another so-called army is operating in the
south, this one funded by Saudi Arabia and Jordan,
the latter being a member of the Council and a brother
country of Syria. That army carries out the same dirty
terrorist tactics in targeting our people in the south.
And then there is another such army in the town of
Duma, a suburb of Damascus, to which Mr. O'Brien
referred. That group, which calls itselfJaish Al-Islam, is
funded by Saudi Arabia. I have thus, in a single minute,
referred to three "armies" of terrorists - one working
under Turkey's command, another under Jordan's and
yet a third under Saudi Arabia and Qatar's command.

Unfortunately, the report of the Secretary-General
refers to those terrorist groups as non-State armed
groups, not terrorist groups. As the Council is aware,
this is a neutral phrase that is completely out of line
with Council provisions on combating terrorism. The
question is therefore eminently political in nature.
That, in turn, has led to the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation and led, in part, to the refugee
exodous to which Mr. O'Brien referred. That is now
the main preoccupation of world public opinion and
of international media. My people's tragedy is a major
tragedy. Unfortunately, thus far, here in the Council we
have not yet touched upon the real reason for segments
of the Syrian people leaving their country by force.
Terrorism is the main reason that the masses of Syrians
fleeing their country.

Terrorism first, but then the coercive and mis-
named so-called "economic sanctions" imposed on the
Syrian people. They, too, are a major factor in paralysing
economic activity and destroying our infrastructure,
including the shuttering of hundreds, if not thousands,
of factories, destroying employment opportunities and
increasing unemployment.

The third reason for the crisis in my country is the
huge wave of terrorists and mercenaries being sent to
Syria from all over the world- from 100 States Members
of the Organization, including Australia, the United
States, the United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Libya,
Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and
Qatar. This information is from a Council report. Those
thousands of terrorists are destroying archeological
sites in Syria and Iraq, killing and kidnapping women,
smuggling archeological artefacts as well as oil and gas
through Turkish brokers to the European Union. That
funds terrorism. Syrian antiquities are being sold at
auction in London. How did they get there?

The image of the child Aylan Turki has rendered
a great service to the Syrian people, as it served to
highlight certain aspects not being addressed by the
media, politicians or diplomats. Why are children not
going to school? Well, the reason is now clear: they
do not go because terrorists control a vast region,
where schools are located. They prevent chilren from
attending, while also developing terrorist curriculums
inspired by Saudi and Gulf State curriculums in order
to teach our children about beheading and hatred for
other religions, as well as hatred of all those with
different views.

Did the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
spring from a vacuum? No, there are those who have
sponsored, helped, funded and facilitated ISIS and its
smuggling of oil, gas and antiquities out of Syria. But
some still persist in their circular logic, concerned only
about slandering the Syrian Government, its President
and its army - to the extent that one representative
called for an Arria Formula meeting to talk about two
gay people, a Syrian and an Iraqi, as if that were the
concern of the Council instead of resolving the Syrian
crisis politically in a Syrian-led process without external
interference and in accordance with the Council's own
resolutions.

Today I sent a series of letters to the President of
the Council. The first entails a reply by the Syrian
Government to the nineteenth report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of resolutions 2139
(2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014), which is before
the Council today. I also sent another set of letters on
the number of victims in Aleppo and Damascus caused
by shelling by what the Secretary-General refers to as
non- State armed groups - the terrorist "armies" funded
by Turkey, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Jordan. There have
been hundreds of victims in those two cities, and they
are mentioned by name.
We have brought all of this to the Council's
attention over the past few years. This scenario is
still unfolding, although some ignore it and are still
referring to these terrorists as non-State armed groups.
Why is it only in Syria that they are referred to this
way? Why is it only in Syria and Iraq that terrorists are
called non-State actors? A terrorist in the United States
is called a terrorist. If a terrorist appears in France,
Spain, Belgium or Britain, he is called a terrorist. Why
is he not called a terrorist in Syria? This is a cover-
up. Why are his actions justified in this way? Why are
such terrorists called non-State armed groups? Syria's
Government is a legitimate Government whose duty
is to protect its people, implement its Constitution and
combat terrorism, but we cannot do that on our own.
We need the Council's support and assistance, and its
understanding of the magnitude of the terrorist threat
being faced in Syria, Iraq and the region. It is a threat
that is beginning to reach the countries of Council
members.

I hope sincerely that the Syrian crisis will be
addressed without reference to the interventionist
political agendas of some Governments, including
some members of the Security Council. The agony of
the Syrian people has grown far enough. Our misery is
not up for sale; we are not a bazaar ofimmoral business,
trafficking in the pain of our people. We do not want
our people to leave our country; we want them to come
back. The support for terrorism, economic sanctions,
and Turkish, Jordanian and Qatari intervention must
be stopped. The training of the so-called moderate
terrorist opposition must be stopped. At that point the
situation will be conducive to a political settlement,
and the Syrian Government is open to discussion of
it. It is open to coming to an understanding with the
national opposition in Syria, but not with terrorism.
The members of the Council themselves refuse to have
any dialogue with terrorists.

I repeat, for the last time, that our pain and agony
and sorrow are vast, thanks to foreign intervention
in our internal affairs and to misleading political
interpretations of the situation in Syria. When there
is a cover-up of actions by ISIS, the Al-Nusra Front,
Jaish Al-Fatha, Jaish Al-Islam and all those terrorist
gangs, that implies that their actions are legitimate
and that there are countries protecting them, and as
a result they persist with their terrorism. Meanwhile,
what we need is concrete implementation of President
Putin's initiative for establishing a genuinely effective
international coalition against terrorism.

