Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): At the outset, Sir, I should like to congratulate
you sincerely on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of August. We are fully
convinced that under your guidance the work of the Council
this month will be successful. My delegation stands ready
to cooperate fully with you and your delegation.

Similarly, my delegation would like to bid a warm
welcome to the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, Sir John Weston, with whom we expect to
work closely on the matters that come before the Council.

My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III). We welcome with great satisfaction the
fact that the peace process in Angola is progressing, and
that, due to the intensification of high-level contacts
between members of the Government and UNITA, the
mistrust among the parties has been diminishing. We
consider that the agreement reached among the parties for
a revised and accelerated timetable to implement the
Lusaka Protocol is an encouraging development that will
undoubtedly give fresh impetus to the peace process.

The report, however, indicates that there have been
violations of the cease-fire, some of which can be
attributed to delays in the separation of forces, acts of
banditry, and a lack of discipline among the troops, none
of which constitutes a significant violation of the peace.
The report also indicates that other elements vital to the
peace process, such as the separation of forces, the
quartering of troops and mine-clearing, are being carried
out slowly.

In that connection, my delegation considers that any
delay in compliance with any of these essential elements
could in one way or another affect the implementation of
the peace process. In particular, as the report of the
Secretary-General emphasizes,

"mines continue to be a major hazard for the
Angolan population and UNAVEM. and
humanitarian personnel". (S/I995/588, para. 14)

My delegation is gravely concerned at reports of renewed
laying of mines by the parties. We therefore appeal to the
parties to put an immediate and final end to these
activities, which inflict such damage on the civilian
population.

It is also necessary to hasten the establishment of
quartering areas for the demobilization of UNITA troops,
the withdrawal of the Angolan armed forces to their
barracks, the strengthening of the logistic infrastructure
for the unified national army, the exchange of prisoners
and the repatriation of mercenaries. In this connection, we
recognize the importance of the talks the parties held at
Luanda in the second half of June this year, at which they

 

considered questions that are basic for the implementation
of the Lusaka Protocol.

As to the humanitarian aspects, my delegation has
duly noted that the humanitarian situation in Angola
continues to improve as a direct consequence of the peace
process and the increased United Nations presence in that
country. None the less, we are concerned about the
economic and social situation in Angola. The Secretary-
General's data on health, malnutrition, infant mortality,
maimed persons, and displaced persons and refugees in
Angola are truly alarming. The situation is a challenge to
the international community. Hence, my delegation supports
all efforts by United Nations programmes and agencies
concerned with the economic and social development of
Angola, and we praise the efforts of the Government of
Angola, with the support of the United Nations
Development Programme and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, to convene a round-table meeting in
September 1995 to consider what is needed for the
economic and social reconstruction of the country.

My delegation would like to thank the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative, the three observer
States to the Angolan peace process, and the personnel of
UNAVEM. for their efforts to make possible compliance
with the Lusaka Protocol and to consolidate the cease-fire
and the peace process in that country. Similarly, we wish to
thank Member States, United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations for their contributions to meet
the humanitarian needs of the people of Angola. Finally, we
urge the Angolan parties to cooperate fully with the United
Nations peace-keeping operation in Angola with a View to
enabling it to fulfil its mandates and, in general, the
objectives of the Lusaka Protocol.

In that light, my delegation supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the mandate of
UNAVEM. Ill be extended for an additional six months,
until 8 February 1996, and will vote in favour of the draft
resolution on this item.

