I thank the President of the Council for calling this open debate today. We are also very grateful to the Secretary-General, his Envoy on Youth and our other briefers. We are particularly glad to hear those perspectives from the young briefers. They have provided a broader and more personal context for the youth, peace and security agenda, and have given us a great deal to reflect upon. I thank them all very much. Today I want to focus on three points. First, as others have done, I wish to explore the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on youth and on this agenda. Secondly, I will talk about the critical role of education. Thirdly, I will stress the importance of protecting young human rights defenders and young peacebuilders. Allow me to begin with a quick word on COVID-19. I think we all know that the world is experiencing an unprecedented challenge in the face of this global pandemic. And it is clear that we can defeat COVID-19 only if we work together to defeat it everywhere. That will require a global effort, but young people are going to be key to the global response. That means we must listen to them and ensure that their needs are taken into account and that they are involved in decisions about our handling of the crisis, as it affects their lives. As others have noted, more than half of the world's population is under the age of 30, and these young people will be hard hit by the second-order effects of the virus. They will experience the uncertainty and hardship of the global economic slowdown, social disruption and, in some places, humanitarian and conflict impacts, if we do not respond quickly to the challenges that COVID-19 will mean for vulnerable societies. We therefore need youth to join our efforts aimed at fighting the virus, and we need to ensure that they do not bear the brunt of its impact. The second point I wanted to address was education. It was really striking in Gatwal's story to hear of how his life pivoted when he was in Uganda and getting an education, freeing him from the cycle of violence that had trapped his father. While it is clear that shortcomings in education are not a new phenomenon in many parts of the world, the pandemic is also clearly having a profound impact on education systems, with over 1.5 billion children and youth out of school. More disruption will follow as the virus spreads. It is important to note that missing out on an education is a huge waste of young people's potential. More important, lack of education makes societies in which young people live less safe and less prosperous because, as Gatwal said, it was an education that gave him hope and prospects. It is without education that young people without hope and prospects turn to alternatives, including violence. We also know that school closures have a disproportionate impact on girls' lives, with girls facing increased risks of child marriage, teenage pregnancy, gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and the risk of dropping out of school permanently. It is therefore critical that, where we can, we get schools to open as quickly as possible. It is also worth noting that it is not just COVID-19 that is closing schools down. As we have heard in the Council over the last several months, in the Sahel, increased violence has forced the closure of hundreds of schools and pushed children out of education again, with a knock-on effect on the conflict there. The United Kingdom is committed to standing up for the right of every girl to have 12 years of quality education. We have consistently provided funding to deliver on this promise, and we shall continue to do so. In fact, we have added an additional $6 million to the Education Cannot Wait programme in order to provide education to the world's most vulnerable children and youth, particularly as they are being affected by COVID-19. Finally, my third point is that young people must have the freedom and rights to champion what they believe in. We have been gravely concerned by reprisals against young human rights defenders and peacebuilders. Young people face attacks and threats and restrictions on their freedom in attempts to stop them from doing their critical work, including, sadly, their work at the United Nations. Young women are at particular risk, especially when both age and gender can work against them. That is why in February this year we co-hosted an Arria Formula meeting on reprisals against women human rights defenders and women peacebuilders. Some of the women who briefed the Security Council at that meeting were young. We believe the Council must work together to foster an enabling environment for young people working on peace and security. The representative of South Africa reminded us earlier that today is South Africa's Freedom Day. In truth, it is impossible to imagine South Africa winning that freedom without the energy and mobilization of its youth. It is important to note that youth paid a high price for that freedom, from the Soweto uprisings in 1976 right through the violence that occurred in the lead-up to democratic elections. As we reflect on that history, our job in the Council becomes clear: we must ensure that the voice for the youth of the world becomes a central part of the way we govern ourselves and decide on our future, but in a way that does not come at such a great cost.
