Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union. I acknowledge the
presence of the Prime Minister of Haiti, Mr. Jean-Max
Bellerive. As President of the French Republic Nicolas
Sarkozy said during his visit to Haiti in February, it is
up to the Haitian people and to the Haitian people
alone to determine the path their nation will take.
Mr. Bellerive has, together with President Preval,
worked vigorously and effectively to present this plan,
which received the support of the international
community at the conference in New York.

I should also like to pay tribute to the Special
Representative and, through him, to all the staff of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the United Nations system, who
work tirelessly in extremely difficult conditions.
Despite the terrible losses, MINUSTAH has faced the
situation with remarkable effectiveness. The security
situation remains under control. The political process
has not been interrupted. Humanitarian aid depends on
MINUSTAH's operational mechanisms. Mr. Mulet has
played an indispensable role in ensuring the continuity
of United Nations action. He enjoys the respect and
trust of the Haitian people, as Prime Minister Bellerive
said, and should have the full support of the Security
Council.

The tragedy that befell Haiti has become an
opportunity to invent a new political, economic and
social model for Haiti based on a fairer redistribution
of resources through political, institutional and
economic decentralization. MINUSTAH has an
essential role to play in this context - aiding in the
establishment of a favourable political and security
environment. This role has not changed since the
earthquake, but the scale of the needs and challenges
has increased.

We underscore our support for the approach set
out in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/200). The political good offices, the
maintenance of order, the promotion of human rights
and the strengthening of the rule of law must, more
now than ever, be at the core of MINUSTAH'S
mandate.

We also believe, like the Special Representative,
that it is time to develop a new approach that makes

strengthening the Haitian State the priority. We
therefore support the concept of strengthening
MINUSTAH involvement in providing support to
Haitian institutions. This is a pragmatic response to an
extraordinary situation. The priority is to strengthen
institutions related to the rule of law, in particular the
justice sector. This action should, of course, be carried
out in full respect for Haitian institutions and
sovereignty, with MINUSTAH acting as a matter of
last resort and on a temporary basis.

The New York conference was a financial and
political success. The reforms that were announced -
regular follow-up on the sums allocated and the status
of progress projects - will be indispensable. We
therefore welcome the adoption by the Haitian
Parliament of the law establishing the Interim Haitian
Reconstruction Commission, which will make it
possible to implement the Action Plan developed by
the Haitian Government. However, while ground needs
to be broken in reconstruction efforts, we must not
neglect the continuing urgency of assisting the
hundreds of thousands of displaced persons threatened
by the hurricane and rainy season.

For Haiti, there is a great deal at stake in the
upcoming legislative and presidential elections. France
commends the determination of the Government of
Haiti to hold these elections within the established time
frame so that the constitutional transfer of power can
take place on 7 February 2011 as planned. Creating the
practical and political conditions for the holding of
credible elections within the electoral calendar will be
another priority for MINUSTAH in the coming months.
That will require, inter alia, the active engagement of
the Special Representative on the issue of the reform of
the Conseil Electoral Provisoire. We also encourage
Mr. Mulet to use his good offices to promote consensus
within the Haitian political class and civil society on
the modalities of constitutional reform.

France is strongly committed to MINUSTAH; our
contingent of 200 police officers has made our country
one of the top police contributors to the Mission.
Additionally, in cooperation with our partners, we will
be supporting the deployment of French-speaking
African police. France will also provide 110 vehicles in
direct support to the Haitian National Police and fire
service. In coordination with MINUSTAH, France has
also deployed military engineers to assist in clearing
Port-au-Prince and other areas requiring urgent efforts.
France will continue its efforts and commitment
alongside the Haitian people and Government and in
close cooperation with the United Nations as part of
the global effort involving the State as well as local
groups, in particular the French Departments in the
Caribbean, non-governmental organizations and the
Haitian diaspora living in France.

