Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I should like,
on behalf of Ambassador Cardi and the entire Italian
delegation as well as in my personal capacity, to thank
you, Sir, for your kind words regarding our month
presiding over the Council. We thank the Japanese
delegation and all other Council members for their
help, assistance and professionalism in assuring the
results of our presidency. Of course, I wish all the best
to the Japanese presidency and to you, Sir, personally
during this month - your last month, as ours, on the
Security Council.

Ambassador Cardi regrets that he cannot be here
because he is following very closely the possible election
of an Italian candidate to International Criminal Court;
the elections are taking place now. I want to stress this
as further proof of the importance my country attaches
to international justice and accountability and all that
we are discussing in general in the present meeting.

Italy welcomes the presence here today among
us of Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovie, the President of
Croatia, and Ms. Nela Kuburovic, Minister for Justice
of Serbia. And last but not least, I would like to thank
the Presidents of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Carmel Agius, and
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Theodor Meron, as well as Prosecutor
Serge Brammertz, for the reports of the two organs and
for their briefings.

As far as the ICTY is concerned, we welcome the
successful completion of 24 years of work and the
enormous efforts that were made to ensure completion
by the end of 2017, as requested. We highly commend
the President and the entire staff of ICTY for this
final push in their work. We also take this occasion to
recognize and express our gratitude for the invaluable
work of all those who contributed to nearly 25 years of
activity of the Tribunal. The ICTY through its seminal
and rich case law has made an enormous contribution
to the very creation of international criminal law and
international criminal justice.

As far as the Mechanism is concerned, we are
pleased to see it function effectively and efficiently
at a very dynamic pace and with an innovative
organizational model. Under the leadership of President
Meron, the Mechanism is discharging a broad range of
residual yet crucial functions, including trial, appeal
and review proceedings, as well as those for contempt.

We are confident that the search for the fugitives
related to the Rwandan cases and the handling all
prosecutions and other proceedings regarding both the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
ICTY are in safe hands. It is up to States to continue
to provide the required support, and, as far as Italy is
concerned, even if our term on the Council is coming to
an end, we remain ready to support the Mechanism in all
aspects of its ongoing work and encourage other States
to do likewise. As Italy has mentioned on previous
occasions, we have a collective responsibility to keep
building on the legacy of the two ad hoc Tribunals,
working with the Residual Mechanism as well as other
international criminal courts and tribunals, including
the International Criminal Court, which is also part of
this legacy.

Clearly the primary responsibility to ensure that
justice is done for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide rests with States. It is up to domestic
authorities to prevent, stop and punish international
crimes. And while the international community must be
ready to provide all the necessary assistance, it should
also be ready to step in when domestic jurisdictions are
unable or unwilling to do justice in accordance with
international standards.

Lack of cooperation has often been an issue of
concern at the ICTY and Residual mechanism. True
commitment to the fight against impunity, justice
and the rule of law requires full cooperation and the
adoption of appropriate measures at the national level.
The fight against impunity does not finish with the
closing of the ad hoc tribunals; it will continue through
the work that will be undertaken by domestic authorities
as well as regional and international bodies on not only
the judicial but also the diplomatic and political levels.

Finally, I should like to reaffirm another leitmotiv
of our presence in the Council. The Security Council,
which has been at the origin of the establishment of the
age of accountability for international crimes, should
assume full ownership of the work done by the ad hoc
Tribunals and, together with the Secretariat, continue
to promote justice and accountability as integral parts
of the broader United Nations prevention strategy. One
way to do more would be to have a stronger and broader
collective engagement on accountability issues.

Ambassador Rosselli Frieri of Uruguay, together
with his team, have done and are doing an excellent job
in steering the work of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals, for which I commend
him personally. We also support the proposal that
the Council mark in a significant way the closing of
ICTY. Italy, as Council members know, would like to
see the subject matter of the Informal Working Group
expanded because we think it would be a good idea
to enable Council members to deepen their common
understanding and increase their exchanges on
these issues.

It is a fact that atrocity crimes continue to be
committed and, even if the Council is at times unable
to reach agreement on a reaction when facing such
crimes, it should at least equip itself with instruments
to consider situations from the angle of accountability
and make extra efforts to try to be united in the fight
against impunity: we owe this to the thousands of
victims ofinternational crimes.

