Ms. Mohammed: I am honoured to have this
opportunity to make a contribution during this debate
on peacekeeping operations. I wish to congratulate you,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and for your leadership
since you took over. Allow me to also commend the
United States presidency for initiating this important
discussion of shared and critical interest to the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular
the African Union. Permit me to also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lacroix
and Ms. Sarah Blakemore, who just left us, for their
informative briefings.

Last year's Security Council high-level debate
on peacekeeping reform (see S/PV.8044) and the
subsequent unanimous adoption of resolution 2378
(2017) served to underscore the fact that current
complex peace and security challenges are such that no
single organization can address them on its own.

We note with satisfaction the growing recognition
of the African Union's (AU) comparative advantage in
providing immediate stability and protecting civilians.
In the same vein, we are pleased that the partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations
continues to achieve milestones as evidenced by
the Framework for Enhanced Partnership on Peace
and Security, signed in April 2017, by the Secretary-
General and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission. We also note with satisfaction the
progress made on the AU-European Union-United
Nations trilateral cooperation. In that regard, given
the evolving contemporary security challenges on the
continent, the AU's objective is to seek the alignment of
current international peace-and-security frameworks.
That includes ensuring that predicable and sustainable
financing mechanisms are available to efficiently
respond to security challenges.

In line with that goal, the AU's commitment - as
espoused in the decision of the twenty-fourth ordinary
session of the AU Assembly to fund 25 per cent of
the cost of its peace-and-security efforts, including
peace-support operations - serves as a demonstration
of its resolve to ensure that required responses to
conflict situations are timely and not constrained by
funding. Against that backdrop, allow me to reiterate
two critical areas of interest and concern for the AU.

First, there have been a number of developments
since the adoption of resolutions 2320 (2016) and
2378 (2017) that confirmed the readiness of the
Security Council to consider a cost-sharing structure
for the funding of peace-support operations. That
includes AU's continuous efforts to operationalize
its revitalized Peace Fund, whose progress has been
shared as part of the Secretary-General's update on the
implementation of those resolutions. In addition, the
AU High Representative for Financing of the Union and
the Peace Fund briefed the Council in July on progress
achieved so far, including the level of contributions
to the Fund - which stands at $47.7 million, the
highest since the establishment of the Peace Fund.
As part of that process, the AU continues to enhance
its compliance and accountability framework and
has finalized its policies on the prevention of sexual
exploitation and abuse and on conduct and discipline
in AU peace-support operations. The AU has also
completed a comprehensive review of compliance-and-
accountability practices in past and current AU-
authorized and -mandated peace-support operations.
It has also developed a selection-and-screening
framework for AU peace-support personnel and has
worked towards the establishment of a misconduct
tracking system to further enhance its prevention,
monitoring and response measures.

A second critical area for the AU is the
implementation of the AU strategic partnership
on peacekeeping, particularly in ongoing conflict
situations such as Somalia, which has enhanced
greater cooperation and consultation between the
two institutions. Since 2013, the AU and the United
Nations have jointly facilitated the development of a
concept of operations, undertaken four joint AU-United
Nations review-and-benchmarking exercises and just
completed a joint operational readiness assessment of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
Those processes have allowed for greater joint analysis,
planning and cooperation between the two secretariats.
However, more needs to be done to enable both
informal and formal joint consultations between the
two Councils so as to bring about greater coherence and
convergence on the main issues and critical concerns of
both organizations.

The Somalia experience provides important
lessons for our strategic partnership at the operational,
strategic and political levels. For instance, while the
2018 AU-United Nations joint review report and its
recommendations covered and highlighted the critical
concerns of both organizations on the situation in
Somalia and on AMISOM, the Security Council, in
adopting resolution 2431 (2018), did not clearly and
explicitly recognize critical issues relating to the AU's
political role in Somalia.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that,
notwithstanding the progress achieved thus far on AU's
access to United Nations-assessed contributions, the
discussion tends to be focused on a conditions-based
approach, with repeated calls for enhancement of the
AU's human rights and financial accountability systems.
However, that position by the Security Council should
move a step forward by adopting a substantive draft
resolution that settles this long-standing issue and sets
the pace for the operationalization of an international
framework to prevent and respond to instability and
conflict in a predictable and effective manner.

We believe that ongoing funding challenges faced
by current peace-support operations, including the
African Union Mission in Somalia, and the limited
impact of efforts to address such challenges, including
the work of the joint AU-United Nations Special Envoys
on the financing of AMISOM, should serve as impetus
for accelerated momentum on our collective efforts to
operationalize that cost-sharing structure.

