Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to
welcome Foreign Minister Jose Ramos-Horta, whose
presence in the Security Council today is essential to
convey the will of the East Timorese people to the
entire membership of the Organization. In his
statement, Minister Ramos-Horta was quite clear about
the present situation in his country and the need for the
United Nations to retain its presence in the field.

(spoke in French)

I would also like to thank the Congolese
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
public meeting on the situation in Timor-Leste, which
remains a priority for Brazilian diplomacy.

(spoke in English)

I wish to acknowledge Ambassador Wang
Guangya and the members of the Chinese delegation
for their highly competent work in the presidency last
month.

Finally, I thank Special Representative Sukehiro
Hasegawa for his detailed and valuable presentation
and especially for his tireless dedication at the head of
the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) in
promoting the empowerment and development of
Timor-Leste.

As a country that has been assisting Timor-Leste
ever since the beginning of the crisis of 1999, Brazil is
particularly encouraged by the country's remarkable
progress in the last six years. The ravaged scenario of
those gloomy days has changed into a hopeful nascent
nation. Brazil looks forward to the coming 2007
elections, the first since independence. We believe that
the successful holding of presidential and
parliamentary elections will represent a major step
toward the consolidation of democratic institutions in
the country.

Most of the merit of this transformation lies with
the Timorese people, who never gave up in spite of all
adversities. The international community also deserves
credit for what has been accomplished. The four
United Nations missions so far - the United Nations
Mission in East Timor (UNAMET), the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
the United Nations Mission of Support of East Timor
(UNMISET) and UNOTIL - were crucial in assisting
the East Timorese to stand on their feet and hold the
future in their hands. Multilateral and bilateral
cooperation in several areas is also part of the manifold
effort to ensure that Timor-Leste becomes a full-
fledged State. It is our view that the United Nations
should remain engaged as long as international support
is necessary to secure a stable and sustainable
governmental structure for the country.

The Brazilian contribution to the United Nations
missions in the country is only a part of our
cooperation with Timor-Leste. We maintain bilateral
projects in such diverse areas as eradication of
illiteracy and the fight against HIV/AIDS, in
structuring the judiciary and agriculture, in
professional training and institution building. We have
recently renewed electoral cooperation with Timor-
Leste, which we believe is essential, at this point in
time, to strengthen the institutions for the upcoming
elections. Our cooperation with the Timorese
Government and people stems from the consciousness
of a common historic heritage and solidarity, as well as
our confidence in the principle of self-determination.

There is a consensus that Timor-Leste is meant to
be a success story for the United Nations. The
investment made by the Organization in the last six
years was enormous and has so far obtained a very
positive return. But there is still much to be done, and
the assistance of the United Nations remains crucial.

Brazil, alongside other partners and the East
Timorese Government, believes that the proposal
advanced in the Secretary-General's recent report
represents the minimum necessary to ensure that
Timor-Leste continues to be a success story. The
structure proposed is meant to strengthen local
institutions and to make the security apparatus fully
functional. Thus, the Security Council should create a
new mission - an integrated office - comprising all
components proposed by the Secretary-General,
namely, military, police, civil, electoral and human
rights components.

Despite its positive evolution, the situation in
Timor-Leste remains fragile. State institutions and
democratic practices are still evolving and require
assistance from the United Nations. Recent evidence
confirms that security is still a source of serious
concern. More than just bilateral cooperation will be
needed in order to enable Timor-Leste to overcome its
present difficulties. Moreover, restricting the scope of
United Nations activities will be interpreted by those
who do not abide by democratic principles and
practices as a sure sign that the United Nations might
be about to reconsider its commitment to Timor-Leste.

The boundaries between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia are yet to be fully demarcated. Military
liaison officers are needed to defuse incidents and to
promote dialogue between the Indonesian armed forces
and the Timorese Border Patrol Unit. Providing
advisers to improve the institution of Timor-Leste's
national police is another fundamental task to ensure
the rule of law.

The United Nations and, indeed, its Member
States are not in a position to waste the human and
financial investment made in recent years by not
joining in the efforts to avoid a relapse into instability.
No budgetary savings would be justifiable if they were
to allow a predictable resumption of problems that
would entail further human suffering and future
increased expenditures. In that regard, Brazil welcomes
the initiatives proposed by Timor-Leste to investigate
the claims of the disaffected members of the military in
order to attain national reconciliation.

Recent outbursts of violence confirm that the
political atmosphere is still volatile and that instability
could increase in the coming months before the 2007
elections, jeopardizing our common accomplishments.
Brazil remains entirely committed to help make Timor-
Leste a success story - for its Government, for its
people and for the United Nations - by combining
national ownership, the rule of law and far-sighted
international support. Any hesitation on the part of the
Council would cast doubt on its steadfastness. In that
sense, piecemeal solutions are neither positive nor
viable. In our View, the Security Council must at this
time deliver a strong, unequivocal message of support
for Timor-Leste.

