Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I will deliver this statement
on behalf of the three co-penholders: Belgium, Germany
and Kuwait. Let me thank Assistant Secretary-
General Ursula Mueller for her valuable briefing on
the humanitarian situation in Syria. We would like to
extend our heartfelt gratitude and deep respect to all
humanitarian and medical workers throughout Syria, in
the region and at Headquarters for their tireless efforts
to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Ms. Nujeen Mustapha for sharing her story with us.
Her optimism and bravery in facing the challenges she
has encountered is inspiring, and she has reminded the
Security Council of the struggles that young refugees
face, especially those with disabilities. It is important
that the Council does not lose sight of the perspective of
the people living through the conflict. It was therefore
important that she could be with us today to share her
experiences. I would like to assure her that she will
never be invisible to us and the State of Kuwait.

Nujeen's story is just one of millions of stories of
Syrian civilians who have been affected by the conflict,
which has entered its ninth year. It is one of the worst
conflicts of our time. The humanitarian situation in
Syria today remains dire, with nearly 12 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance and protection. The
past few months have seen some worrying humanitarian
trends, as we heard some moments ago from Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller.

We are extremely worried by the recent spike in
aerial bombardments and shelling in north-western
Syria, which has affected the civilian population,
forcing the displacement of more than 100,000 civilians
since February. That escalation contributes to a further
deterioration of the already catastrophic humanitarian
situation in the north-western de-escalation zone.
Many civilians have also been killed and injured in
north-eastern Syria. We strongly condemn the loss
of civilian lives as a result of the recent escalation of
violence, and we remind all parties of their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure. We recall resolutions 2286 (2016) and
2427 (2018), which condemn attacks on hospitals
and schools, respectively. Abuses against civilians
in times of conflict are a clear and indisputable
breach of international humanitarian law and remain
completely unacceptable.

The fight against terrorism must not impede
principled humanitarian action. We reiterate our
call for the sustained implementation of the Russia-
Turkey memorandum of understanding in Idlib. We
also reiterate our call for a nationwide cessation of
hostilities, in accordance with resolution 2401 (2018).

The situation in the Al-Hol camp is of great
concern. The camp's population has increased rapidly
from around 10,000 people in December to more than
70,000 this month. Ninety-two per cent of the residents
of the camp are women and children, many of whom
have been exposed to violence and trauma under Da'esh
and are now living in conditions where they face a range
of protection concerns. The special needs of the most
vulnerable, including the elderly and disabled, must be
urgently addressed. We call on all parties to the conflict
to allow sustained access to displaced people. The
United Nations and its partners must be in a position
to provide needs-based humanitarian assistance to
all people in need without delay, discrimination or
bureaucratic impediments.

In Rukban, almost 40,000 people remain in the
settlement. There is a need for more durable solutions for
the people of the settlement through collective efforts
and arrangements in coordination with the United
Nations. We stress that all movements of the residents
ofthe camp must be voluntary, safe, dignified and well-
informed. In parallel, we also strongly advocate for the
continued sustained humanitarian access to Rukban
until a lasting durable solution is reached. That is a
matter of great importance, especially as the assistance
delivered to the settlement by the humanitarian aid
convoy in February is running out.

In Hajin, there are reports of shortages of basic
commodities and a lack of basic services, particularly
health services and access to safe and clean water.
Furthermore, unexploded ordnances are rife in the area,
posing a serious protection risk for civilians. Access to
Hajin should be prioritized.

Syria has witnessed some of the most serious
crimes under international law since the conflict began.
Accountability must be ensured for those who have
committed violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We stand firm
in our commitment to fight impunity. In that context,
we renew our support for the work of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism.
With regard to refugees, we would like to reiterate
that any return of refugees must be safe, voluntary and
dignified. Measures such as arbitrary detention and
expropriation, to name just two, hinder any efforts that
would allow Syrians to return. We also reject attempts
to make demographic changes in Syria.

A month following the successful third Brussels
Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria, we, as
penholders, reiterate our commitment to delivering on
our pledges announced at the Conference to support the
Syria humanitarian response. We kindly ask all donors
to make their funding available as soon as possible.

Lastly, the penholders would like to emphasize
the importance of ensuring humanitarian access by
all parties to the conflict throughout Syria, including
areas where the control changed. Humanitarian access
must be provided in an unconditional, safe, timely,
unhindered and sustained manner. We remind all
parties to the conflict of resolution 2449 (2018) on
humanitarian access and cross-border assistance,
adopted more than four months ago, which calls upon
all parties to ensure principled, sustained and improved
humanitarian assistance to Syria in 2019. It is high time
for all parties to the conflict to live up to that obligation
and to do more to ensure sustained quality access to all
in need throughout Syria.

