I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on organizing this important open debate and on bringing this topic back to the forefront of the discussions of the Security Council. Under international humanitarian law, women and men, civilians and combatants alike, have equal protection. Nearly 20 years ago, resolution 1325 (2000) identified protection from gender-based violence as a key pillar for peace. Through the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), conflict-related sexual violence was declared a war crime and a crime against humanity. Despite the ever-increasing international recognition of the serious impact that conflict and post-conflict sexual violence poses to international security and the maintenance of peace, concrete initiatives to prevent or mitigate these incidents are still not yielding the desired outcome. Similarly, steps to end impunity and dismantle the enabling environment allowing such violent acts to take place are falling short. It is concerning that, even with the adoption of resolutions, rulings in international criminal courts and existing international frameworks, there is still no robust approach to the elimination of sexual violence. It continues to be used as a tactic of war to terrorize populations, destroy the social fabric of communities and even amount to a business practice through trafficking and sex slavery. Slovakia would like to emphasize the important role of the full and meaningful participation of women in conflict prevention, resolution and _ post-conflict reconstruction activities. Their leadership and representation in decision-making processes at the national, regional and international levels are required in order to recognize and address gender-specific aspects of conflicts and mitigate their adverse impacts on the communities. Furthermore, we stress that women are key pillars in peacebuilding for the effective and long-term sustainability of activities within communities, as well as in all activities for the maintenance and promotion of peace and security. Greater participation of women in peacekeeping missions is an area where we need to double our ongoing efforts. In order to achieve consistent and substantial results, it is necessary to also engage dedicated gender specialists in peacekeeping missions, including gender advisers and women protection advisers. With the support of the Slovak chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in 2019, the OSCE Mediation Support Team and Gender Section launched a new toolkit focused on boosting the meaningful inclusion of women in peace processes. The toolkit assesses the state of women's participation in political and settlement processes throughout the OSCE space and makes recommendations to the OSCE Chair, secretariat and participating States. In addition, a photography exhibition dedicated to the women and peace agenda was displayed in Vienna in 2019 to increase awareness. Last but not least, we must turn our attention to identifying the remedies not only for the symptoms but, more importantly, for the root causes of this issue. To understand the full effect of sexual violence in conflict situations, we must first understand the societal norms and practices that exist outside war. Research shows that inequalities between men and women increase the likelihood of rape in war.
