Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to start by congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also want to express our appreciation of the work of
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
China, who ably chaired the Council during the past
month.

I would like to state that my delegation fully
supports the statement delivered by His Excellency the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan on behalf of the
Arab Group at the United Nations. We greatly
appreciate your prompt response, Sir, in convening this
meeting to consider the deteriorating situation in
Palestine, a situation that poses a threat to international
peace and security, which is the primary responsibility
of the Security Council. The bloody events that are
taking place in the occupied Palestinian territory will
soon enter their second year. Meanwhile, the situation
is worsening and becoming increasingly exacerbated
by the policies of oppression and escalation that are
being pursued by the Israelis. It has become quite clear
that the Israeli leaders are pushing the situation and the
region towards dire consequences.

At this meeting we do not want to dwell on the
war crimes that Israel is committing against the
Palestinian people. These crimes include the killing of
infants and children, the demolition of houses, the
burning of fields, the destruction of the environment,
the siege of the Palestinian territories in order to starve
the people, and the targeting of the institutions of the
Palestinian National Authority. We do not want to talk
about these aggressive Israeli policies because a since
the media show horrific examples of them day and
night - they are quite well known to everyone here. I
believe we have all gotten used to seeing Palestinian
infants and children torn apart as a result of ongoing
Israeli terrorism against unarmed Palestinian civilians.

These aggressive Israeli practices are illegitimate
and cannot but lead the Security Council to discuss the
situation, particularly since these practices reflect an
organized policy aimed at the total erosion of all the
agreements that Israel has concluded with the
Palestinian side since the Madrid Conference. This
policy is an attempt by the Israelis to shed the
commitments it made under these treaties and
agreements.

This Council held a special session dedicated to
serious efforts to protect civilians in situations of
conflict. We all remember the meetings that were held
and the statements that were made. Today, however, we
are confronted with a special situation - indeed a
dangerous one 4 which requires the international
community and the Security Council in particular to
assume the responsibility vested in it by the Charter of
the United Nations. This responsibility is simply to
maintain international peace and security.

In this context, we hope that the Security Council
will fulfil its obligations and its duty as set forth in
Article 24 of the Charter. We also hope that the Council
will take the necessary measures to fulfil its role as
clearly defined in Articles 41 and 42 of the Charter.

We do not expect miracles from the Security
Council. All we want is for the Security Council to be
an impartial judge. We want it to assume the role
stipulated for it in the Charter, so that history will
record that the Council is an impartial body - a body
that has credibility and that fulfils its duties and
obligations fully without indulging in double standards.

It is our hope that the Council will regain its
credibility, that the Council will play its role and shake
off the hesitation and inertia that have characterized it
for many years.

To put it simply, the Security Council is the
author of the two celebrated resolutions regarding the
situation in the Middle East: 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the achievement of a peaceful, just and
lasting settlement. The Council was also asked to fully
implement these two resolutions. The peace process,
which was dealt a severe blow by the policies of the
present Israeli Government, cannot be reactivated
without the full implementation of these two important
resolutions, the acceptance of the principle of land for
peace, and adherence to the references of the Madrid
Conference.

Finally, we must reiterate that the problem of
Palestine is not simply a problem of human rights,
crimes against humanity, war crimes and so forth. It is
a problem of the occupation of a land and a people by
force. It is a problem of a threat to international peace
and security. We therefore hope, first, that the Council
will adopt a resolution by which international
protection will be provided to the Palestinian people.
This request has become an international one that
gained the unanimous support of the Group of 8 during
its summit meeting held in Genoa, Italy, last month. It
is our hope that this international request will be
translated into a resolution that will be adopted by the
Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter,
which will put an end to the bloodbath that is currently
taking place in the occupied Palestinian territories.

Secondly, the Council must seek to put an end to
the ongoing Israeli occupation and to the suffering of
the Palestinian people. We expect that this Council will
take practical and tangible measures to contain an
explosive situation, and not become a free forum for
political rhetoric. The Palestinian people will continue
their struggle and resistance against the Israeli
occupation until they recover all their inalienable
rights, particularly their right to establish their
independent State on their land - and as Chairman
Arafat says and repeats and we agree with him - with
Jerusalem as its capital.

Consequently, we make an urgent appeal in this
forum to the Security Council, the co-sponsors of the
peace process and the international community to
intervene promptly to put an end to Israeli aggression
and oppressive, arbitrary measures that run contrary to
all international laws and norms, to provide
international protection to the Palestinian people and to
restore the Palestinian institutions in Jerusalem to the
status quo ante so that they will continue to play the
role agreed upon within the context of the peace
process, and thereby put the peace process back on
track.

