Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking the delegation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina for its initiative in convening
this open debate. I would also like to thank Deputy
Prime Minister Jose Luis Guterres of Timor-Leste,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Ambassador Peter
Wittig for their opening briefings.

Costa Rica has decided to participate in this
important debate because we believe that we can
contribute some pertinent ideas and experiences on
institution-building as a way to consolidate peace and
improve the well-being of people in the aftermath of
conflict. To recall the historical background, in 1948
our country went through a brief civil war brought on
by elections disputes. What made this case different
from so many others was that the victorious
Government junta soon handed over power to the
legitimately elected authorities, abolished the army and
convened an assembly that issued the Constitution that
still governs us today. Those institutional decisions,
along with longstanding political, economic and social
values and dynamics, explain our continued stability
and internal peace in a region that has so often been
affected by conflict.

During the 1980s, when wars were bloodying
Central America, our country played a key role in
setting a course towards peace. On 7 August 1987, the
Presidents of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras and Nicaragua signed the accord known as
Esquipulas II, in which they committed themselves to
initiating national dialogue processes aimed at ending
internal hostilities, holding free and fair elections and
forging a peaceful and democratic future.

The success of this process was primarily the
result of the willingness of local actors, who were
exhausted by violence and aware that the imminent end
to the Cold War would cease to fuel hostilities.
However, the active participation of the international
2

community and the existence of regional leadership to
guide those efforts also played an essential role. That
leadership was embodied by Presidents Vinicio Cerezo
Arevalo of Guatemala and Oscar Arias Senchez of
Costa Rica, who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize
for his efforts. For their part, the Organization of
American States and the United Nations were able to
coordinate efforts to promote national and regional
willingness to support the process and ensure the
implementation of agreements.

Various lessons can be learned from this situation,
as reflected in the elements to which I have just referred.
What was key to consolidating peace, however, was
understanding that a cessation of hostilities would be to
little avail if the regional agreement and the national
accords that ensued in Nicaragua, El Salvador and
Guatemala did not address the root causes of the
conflicts. That understanding was also the reason for the
decision to set up local political, institutional and
socio-economic follow-up mechanisms, along with
valuable international support.

Central America's evolution since that time also
led us to understand that if challenges are not
addressed in time they can weaken peace processes,
place democracy at risk and even damage relations
between neighbouring nations. Our region buried its
internal wars, promoted democratic processes and
opened up uncertain paths towards improving people's
well-being. However, this did not necessarily bring
with it a vigorously inclusive development process, an
end to violence - now criminal in nature - or the
widespread consolidation of democratic institutions
and practices. Today some Central American countries
are among the world's most violent. Moreover, one
country recently violated the principles of sovereignty
and territorial integrity. To varying degrees, all of this
endangers peace and coexistence at both the local and
regional levels.

But from those missteps come important lessons
about post-conflict institution-building, to which I
should now like to turn.

First, we should design policies that, in addition
to promoting post-conflict stability and economic
development, also contribute to the widest possible
enjoyment of their benefits. Social inclusion is key to
peace.

Secondly, in countries with a large percentage of
young people such as ours, it is crucial to increase
11-21335
opportunities for youth in the areas of education,
recreation and employment. Without that, both the
temptations posed by gangs and organized crime and
the continuing cycle of poverty may prove to be
unavoidable.

Thirdly, the establishment of institutions,
including political parties, must be accompanied by
good political practices. Without observing such
practices, institutions can become victims of corruption
and manipulation, or become simply window dressing
for authoritarianism, arbitrary rule and adventurism.

Fourthly, the effectiveness and independence of
judicial authorities is another key factor to lasting
peace, given that the judiciary is the ultimate resort for
the peaceful resolution of conflicts and the most
obvious barrier to impunity and crime.

Fifthly, we must keep in mind that it is more
difficult to entrench a genuine culture of democracy
and peace than to establish institutions. Peace and
democracy education is therefore essential.

Finally, fostering an independent and vigorous
civil society, a free and honest press and a culture of
accountability also substantially increases prospects for
peacebuilding.

To sum up, we believe that actions should lead to
comprehensive approaches to conflicts, both in order to
resolve them and to consolidate the progress made. The
role of the United Nations, and of the Security Council
in particular, is key to that end; as is the guidance
provided by the Peacebuilding Commission. An
essential part of the mission of the United Nations must
be working as part of the ongoing processes of conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, including
the promotion of development, institutions and a
culture of peace and democracy.

That necessarily implies a joint effort by all
organs and agencies of the United Nations at every
stage of those processes, as well as the determination
not to act only when weapons are fired but when
threats appear. That is something that must of course
start with a serious political commitment.

