Mr. Spatafora (Italy): Italy fully aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered shortly by the
Permanent Representative of Portugal on behalf of the
European Union (EU). I will therefore only add a few
remarks in my national capacity.

At the outset, I wish to thank Mr. Koenigs
wholeheartedly, not only for his enlightening briefing,
but also, more generally, for his outstanding
stewardship of the United Nations presence in
Afghanistan. Since his appointment almost two years
ago, Mr. Koenigs has been able to effectively speak
with wisdom and authority, on each and every
occasion, on behalf of the Security Council and of the
entire international community. It is crucial that we
continue to stand united in supporting the Afghan
people, rallying behind the impartial and central role of
the United Nations. Without the legitimacy provided by
the Organization, our commitment would simply be
impossible to sustain. The daily sacrifice of military
personnel and civilians, Afghan and international alike,
is dignified by our shared goals, which are at the core
of the principles on which the Organization is built.
Our solidarity goes to all the victims of the senseless
violence that Afghanistan is enduring, a violence that
has not spared Italian nationals.

The high-level event that was held three weeks
ago in this building was a unique opportunity to take
stock of the progress made in Afghanistan and to
reinvigorate our common commitment to address the
outstanding challenges, thereby helping the Afghan
people to build a peaceful, democratic and prosperous
country. The report (S/2007/555) before us, along with
the additional briefing given today by the Special
Representative, reminds us of the entity of these
challenges with remarkable frankness.

As emphasized by our Foreign Minister at the
high-level event, coordination is the key word and the
only recipe for success in such a complex scenario.
This means coordination among donors, coordination
between the donor community and the Afghan
authorities, coordination between the Government and
the international security forces and coordination
among the political, economic development and
military dimensions of our efforts. That list could be
even longer. Sometimes we fall short of our objectives
simply because coordination mechanisms are not in
place or are not properly used. For that reason, the
Compact framework and the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board mechanism are essential and must be
further consolidated, including through guidance at the
political level as necessary.

In the Secretary-General's report, compelling
arguments are put forward to define the need for a new,
integrated political and military strategy. In our
resolutions, we have repeatedly called for greater
synergy between the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), and
between them and the Afghan Government. Such calls
must be translated into action to ensure that our
military, political and reconstruction efforts make a
positive difference in the lives of the Afghan people,
rather than the opposite, and that they result in
increased public confidence in the legitimate
authorities. We fully share the Secretary-General's
emphasis on the idea that all of our actions at this
crucial juncture should be confidence-oriented and
closely coordinated with the Afghan Government. We
cannot afford to lose the trust of the Afghan people.

In this regard, we are confident that our efforts to
prevent popular alienation will be reinforced by the
renewed Afghan commitment to improve governance
and the rule of law, particularly at the local level, and
to promote national reconciliation within the
framework of the Afghan constitution. Such measures
become all the more urgent as we approach the 2009
elections.

Here, once again, the United Nations can play a
key role, on the basis of the increasingly focused
mandate of UNAMA outlined in resolution
1746 (2007). It is, therefore, essential to support the
proposal made by the Secretary-General in his report
concerning UNAMA's international staff. We believe
that Member States could hardly make a better
investment. Let me emphasize once again that, in our
view, UNAMA must be given all the political support
and resources to fulfil its complex mandate in a
challenging environment.

The representative of Portugal, speaking on
behalf of the presidency of the European Union, will
elaborate on the progress made on two issues that, in
our View, are the keystones for the sustainability of our
efforts, namely, the foundation of functional and
professional Afghan security forces and the creation of
an environment conducive to regional security. I will
only add that Italy will spare no effort to promote
further progress in those areas. For example, we are
favourably considering the Afghan request to support
the organization in Herat, later this month, of the
ministerial conference of the Economic Cooperation
Organization. More generally, we pay tribute to all
actors contributing to those endeavours. We are proud
that, through the European Union Police Mission, the
Union is actively engaged in the police reform process.

Let me conclude by expressing to our Afghan
friends our regret over the sudden interruption, a few
days ago, of the de facto moratorium on executions in
Afghanistan. Our absolute opposition to the death
penalty is very well known and has not wavered in the
least by the fact that Italian nationals were among the
victims of the crimes of which one of the executed was
convicted. A moratorium is particularly important in
those cases where further progress is still needed in the
reform of law enforcement agencies and the judicial
sector.

Finally, I would take like to take this opportunity
to reiterate that Italy remains fully committed to
helping Afghan authorities to build a professional,
accountable and effective justice system in line with
the highest international standards. I am glad to report
that we are working hard, together with our Afghan and
international partners, to ensure the full and timely
implementation of the successful outcomes of the
Rome Conference on the Rule of Law in Afghanistan,
which was held in July.

