Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): 1
would like first to welcome among us Mr. Hoshyar
Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Assistant
Secretary-General Warren Sach, who briefed us on
behalf of the International Advisory and Monitoring
Board (IAMB), and Under-Secretary-General Ibrahim
Gambari, who briefed us on the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I thank
them all for their briefings. I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for your briefings in your national
capacity on behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq
(MNF-I).

On 16 October 2003, the Security Council
authorized, through resolution 1511 (2003), a
multinational force under unified command to
contribute to the maintenance of security and stability
in Iraq. More than four years after the force was
approved, it is now vitally important for the Security
Council to evaluate objectively the goals that have
been achieved and the lessons that can be learned from
this presence.

In that respect, we have taken note of the progress
made in the security situation - some of which were
mentioned in your briefing, Mr. President - and, in
particular, the operations in the Basra region, where the
Iraqi security forces, with the support of the
Multinational Force (MNF) have made significant
progress in establishing the rule of law. As a
complement to this, we recognize the work of the
Multinational Force in providing training and
equipment to the Iraqi security forces so that, in the
future, they will be able to fully assume full
responsibility for maintaining security in the country.

We need to continue to build up the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. Our debate on
UNAMI in April (see S/PV.5878) and Mr. Gambari's
briefing describe the important work that is being done
by the Secretary-General to enhance the presence and
effectiveness of humanitarian personnel.

Humanitarian needs continue to be of concern,
not just for the general population in Iraq, but
especially for internally displaced persons and
refugees. We are also concerned by the difficult
circumstances described in the most recent UNAMI
human rights report, including the situation regarding
due process for detainees.

However, despite the difficult circumstances,
there still are reasons to be encouraged. Among other
examples, we have the International Compact with
Iraq. Additionally, and in particular, Iraq's neighbours
have recognized that the current situation has effects
which go beyond the borders of Iraq and that they need
to increase their cooperation and the complementarity
of their efforts.
We take note of the Conference held in May in
Stockholm. We urge that efforts continue to ensure that
this leads to the stepping up of international
cooperation on the ground.

It must be recognized that the current security
situation in Iraq makes it difficult to establish a strong
monitor structure to how the resources of the
Development Fund for Iraq are being used. But, we are
concerned by some of the conclusions set out in the
third interim report of the IAMB on the way in which
funds have been managed.

In this respect, we call on the Iraqi Government
to carefully analyse the recommendations made in the
interim report and to redouble its efforts to make
progress with regard to carrying out stricter and more
transparent budgetary and financial monitoring.

Finally, it may be that starting next year, the
presence of foreign military forces in Iraq will be on
the basis of bilateral negotiations and, for the first
time, not on the basis of a Security Council decision.
Panama recognizes the sovereign right of the Iraqi
Government to make decisions enabling it to meet the
security needs of the people, and we hope that this
decision and others of equal importance for the
political, social and economic life of the country will
be the result of consensus from all sectors in Iraq.

