Mr. Radomski (Poland): First of all, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this very important
meeting.

Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
present several comments from our national perspective.

We regard the issue of peacebuilding in Africa
as a matter of utmost importance, especially in
the light of recently adopted Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions on the peacebuilding
architecture that characterize sustaining peace as a
core responsibility of the entire United Nations system.
I would like to point out a few issues that we consider
significant in the current context.

Sustaining peace cannot be achieved without
inclusive, effective and accountable institutions
and the rule of law. Institutions strongly determine
the allocation of resources, functioning of markets,
delivery of social services and management of natural
resources. They often help to find effective solutions
to conflicts, improve access to justice and protection
of human rights. Economic and social reforms are
less likely to bring long-lasting changes if they are
not anchored in a stable and transparent democratic
governmental system.

Regional and subregional organizations play
an important role in the peacebuilding process. We
appreciate the role of the African Union and the
regional economic communities in institution-building.
We believe that initiatives like the African Governance
Architecture and the African Peace and Security
Architecture help to maintain peace and security
while supporting the wider integration of the entire
continent. The challenge lies in maintaining a constant
commitment to these initiatives. It is important to
assure gradual transfer of responsibility to African
partners - also in the form of co-financing - and to
mobilize resources from external actors.

The inclusion of African women, youth and civil
society in the decision-making processes is important
for the advancement of peacebuilding efforts in the long
term. We welcome the acknowledgement by African
leaders of the role of women, youth and civil society in
Agenda 2063 and the declaration of the year 2016 as the
African Year of Human Rights with Particular Focus on
the Rights of Women.

With respect to the role of youth, let me stress
that education is essential to sustaining peace, as
it contributes to political, economic and social
transformations in society. That is why Poland has
provided financial support in recent years to educational
projects in various African countries, including
Ethiopia and South Sudan.

Building the capacities of military forces and
local police, establishing a credible justice system
and fighting corruption should be high on our list of
priorities. Experience gained from various crisis-
management missions and operations indicates that
training of police and military forces should be
accompanied by proper equipment support.
It is important to strengthen the activity of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund. In this regard, we welcome the
initiative of organizing the high-level conference for
the Peacebuilding Fund under the theme "Invest in
Sustaining Peace", to be held on 21 September 2016
on the margins of the General Assembly's upcoming
general debate.

Much has been said today about Africa's unique
features with regard to peacebuilding. In light of this,
I would like to conclude by expressing our confidence
that building sustained peace on the African continent
is possible, mostly thanks to the open-mindedness,
creativity and tremendous optimism of the proud
African people.

