Mr. Okamura (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my gratitude to you, Madam President, for
your initiative in holding this debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. I would also like to
express my appreciation for your excellent work in
your capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
The Working Group has recently produced the note
by the President of the Security Council, document
S/2014/739, concerning the speaking order for meetings
of the Council. I believe that that concrete outcome
will, coupled with previous notes by the President,
enhance the efficiency and transparency of the work of
the Council.

We, the Member States, confer on the Security
Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. All Member States,
including non-Council members, are bound by its
decisions. The way the Council conducts its work
is a matter of critical importance, which has a direct
impact on the interests of all Member States. That is the
reason Japan attaches great importance to the efforts to
improve its working methods.

Some progress has been made so far, and I am
proud that Japan is one of the leading contributors
to the discussion of its working methods. I have two
books with me. Japan, in its capacity as the Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, took the initiative
of compiling presidential note S/2006/507, which is
known as the Blue Book. Japan also took the lead, as
Chair of the Working Group, to update it, and issued
presidential note S/2010/507, which is known as the
Green Book. I reiterate Japan's commitment to playing
an active role with other Member States in order to
improve the Security Council's working methods. We
must recognize that more efficient and transparent
procedures are required of the Council when it makes
its decisions in order that the Council in particular,
and the United Nations as a whole, can meet Member
States' expectations, and I urge for greater cooperation
on the part of Council members, including the
permanent members.

I would now like to briefly touch on the two topics
the President has suggested. I believe United Nations
sanctions are an effective tool for establishing and
maintaining peace and security, and Japan is firmly
committed to full and effective implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We Member
States must continue to ensure the legitimacy and
credibility of the sanctions if we are to gain wider
support in the international community. Sanctions are
directly linked to human rights issues, and it is essential
that listing and delisting be conducted according to the
principle of due process. In that context, Japan considers
the activities of the Ombudsperson very important. We
must be flexible and take the specifics of each ease into
consideration if our sanctions are to work effectively
and properly.

Regarding the Security Council's referrals to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
I would like to stress that Japan values the work of the
Court, where cases involving the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community in general
are investigated, prosecuted and decided, thus helping
to achieve justice for Victims and to uphold the rule of
law. Japan contributes to the Court not only financially
but also by sending qualifiedjudges. We are resolved to
continue to cooperate with the Court to the maximum
extent possible. Since the Security Council does not
have a specific mechanism for following up cases it
refers to the Prosecutor of the ICC, it should determine
what measures should be taken through dialogues with
the interested countries.

Last but not least, while improving working
methods is important, it is not enough on its own to
genuinely strengthen the legitimacy of the Security
Council, which should reflect the geopolitical realities
of the twenty-first century. Next year we will celebrate
the seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations. I would like to express my heartfelt wish to see
reform of the Security Council that will make it more
broadly representative, efficient and transparent and
thereby further enhance its effectiveness, legitimacy
and implementation of its decisions.

