Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Thank you, Mr.
President, for organizing this open briefing on East
Timor. We are pleased to welcome Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello back to the Council and are grateful for his
extremely useful briefing. We are also pleased to see
Mr. Ramos-Horta in the Council today.

Three months after the Council last heard from
Mr. Vieira de Mello, the situation pertaining to the
militias has not improved, and there are disturbing
reports of militia incidents in both East and West
Timor. The slaying of three Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
staff on 6 September in Atambua has highlighted the
continuing instability in and around the refugee camps
in West Timor. The Council and the international
community are justifiably outraged by the fact that
humanitarian workers have become targets of threats,
intimidation and murder as they undertake to carry out
their humanitarian tasks. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Malaysia recently made a statement about
that incident in this Council.

These out-of-control militiamen in West Timor
are a threat, not only to peace and security in West
Timor, but also to East Timor's own journey towards
independence. At the same time, the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
continues to remain at considerable risk, despite the
improvements in the overall situation since its
establishment. It is imperative that these militiamen be
effectively disarmed and the refugees protected from
their acts of intimidation.

Recently, the Council listened to Minister
Yudhoyono, the Special Envoy of the President of
Indonesia, on the measures that have been and are
being taken by the Indonesian authorities to manage
the situation. We believe that Indonesia will make good
on its promise to bring the situation under control. This
may take time, but, according to the statements made
by Council members today, time may not by on
Indonesia's side.

Like others, Malaysia looks forward to the
outcome of the investigation into the murder of the
three UNHCR personnel, as was assured in President
Wahid's letter of 7 September to the Secretary-General.
We trust that the Government of Indonesia will get to
the bottom of the incident in Atambua and will take
firm measures against those found guilty. We will have
the opportunity to raise these and other issues when
Minister Shihab meets with the Council soon.

I agree with the representative of China that we
should be understanding and supportive of the
Indonesian Government, and not take a confrontational
stance, as that would be counterproductive to our
efforts. We should regard Indonesia as a partner with
its own problems and constraints, not as an adversary,
which it is not.

Clearly, in the light of the still-precarious security
situation, the earlier plan to downsize UNTAET will
have to be considered with great circumspection until
we are sure that the militias no longer pose a serious
threat. I would appreciate it if Mr. Vieira de Mello
would share his own thoughts on this.

We would like to pay tribute to UNTAET for its
continuing work in East Timor and commend the
Special Representative and his team for the close
working relationship they have forged with the East
Timorese leadership in the effective administration of
the territory. We have heard this afternoon that
UNTAET continues to make considerable progress on
several fronts in the implementation of its mandate. Of
particular importance is the decision of the National
Consultative Council, last week, to approve a
regulation on transitional rules of criminal procedures
for East Timor, following months of consultation,
including the holding of two public hearings in August
and September.

Malaysia also welcomes the signing, in Denpasar
on 15 September 2000, of a document establishing a
Joint Border Committee, consisting of civilian
representatives from UNTAET and the Government of
Indonesia. Based on our own experience with similar
arrangements with our neighbours, we are confident
that this mechanism will help boost security along the
border between East and West Timor. We encourage
UNTAET to forge other bilateral arrangements and
mechanisms within East Timor and its neighbour,
Indonesia, which would provide a strong and solid
foundation for a constructive and harmonious
relationship between the two neighbours.

We also note other measures taken by UNTAET
in other sectors, such as the registration of cars and
other vehicles and procedures for land ownership and
property disputes, among others. These measures
represent further concrete steps towards nationhood.

My delegation welcomes the recent decision of
the transitional Cabinet of East Timor on the
establishment of a national defence force based on
option III of the independent study by King's College
released last month. The option calls for a defence
force built upon a base of members of the Armed
Forces for the National Liberation of East Timor
(FALINTIL) - retrained members - with a
professional regular corps of 1,500 volunteer reservists.

The briefing given to us by Mr. Vieira de Mello
has clearly underlined the considerable progress made
thus far. But many challenges remain which will
require the continued strong support of the
international community and the United Nations, both
during the period leading up to independence and
beyond. As a neighbour, Malaysia remains ready to
contribute to that process, within its capability to do so.

