The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Gabon.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Patricia O'Brien for her briefing and to express our
appreciation of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/360) on the modalities for the implementation
of resolution 1976 (2011). We again acknowledge the
efforts of Mr. Jack Lang, the Secretary-General's
Special Adviser on piracy.

Piracy is a critical aspect of the overall problem
of Somalia, in View of the large number of acts of
piracy and their increasing violence.

We would like to speak to two points. We stress
the importance of strengthening the judiciary and
prison capacity in Somalia, especially in Puntland and
Somaliland. In this regard, we are pleased with the
progress made in training justice auxiliaries and police
officers and officials, as well as the rehabilitation and
construction under way of courts and prisons. We
welcome the efforts of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, as well as the support provided by
the United Nations Development Programme and the
efforts of the African Union Mission in Somalia in the
fight against piracy on the ground.

Despite this progress, and while waiting for
agreement on the ideal formula, the Somali authorities
should continue to work on reviewing domestic law in
order to enable their courts to prosecute and sentence
those responsible for acts of piracy. It is important that
current Somali legislation be brought closer to
international standards for the fight against piracy. We
call on the authorities to take part in that process. Close
legal cooperation and information-sharing between the
States in the region should be strengthened.

As the Secretary-General's report emphasizes, the
Somali diaspora can contribute to the establishment of
the processes and mechanisms to be set up. The
international community must continue to support
judicial and prison capacity-building in Somalia.
Regarding setting up a specialized extraterritorial
court, we note the difficulties involved in creating such
a jurisdiction, as stated in the Secretary-General's
report.

We share the view of Russia that the rejection
expressed by the authorities of Puntland and
Somaliland, as well as of the Transitional Federal
Government, of such an institution is not a constructive
position in the face of a problem whose proportions
exceed the country's current response capacity. Gabon
welcomes the availability and willingness of Tanzania
to host the Somali extraterritorial court. We call on all
stakeholders to continue discussions and consultations
so as to reach a consensus on this question.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.

