Ms. Bensouda: At the invitation of the Security
Council, I have come from The Hague to provide my
twenty-fifth report on the situation in Darfur, pursuant
to resolution 1593 (2005).

When the Council referred the situation in Darfur
to my Office, it represented a high-water mark in the
international community's collective efforts to realize
justice and accountability for the grave crimes under
the Rome Statute committed in Darfur. Undoubtedly,
that referral not only provided hope but also raised
expectations for the thousands of victims in the
Darfur situation that justice would be done. Some of
those victims put their faith in the Council and in the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and bravely came
forward to tell my Office their accounts of the horrific
events that they had witnessed and suffered. They often
did so at great personal risk and cost.

The evidence obtained from those courageous
witnesses provided, in large part, the basis for multiple
warrants of arrest, including for Mr. Omar Al-Bashir,
Mr. Ahmad Harun, Mr. Abdel Raheem Hussein, Mr. Ali
Kushayb and Mr. Abdallah Banda. With the issuance of
those warrants - and, in the case of Mr. Banda, the
confirmation of the charges against him - hope for
justice was high. Regrettably, however, for many that
hope has increasingly been replaced by disappointment,
frustration and even anger at the slow progress in the
Darfur situation. Not one of the suspects for whom
warrants were issued has been arrested and transferred
to the International Criminal Court. Let us not forget:
those men stand accused of multiple charges for some
of the world's most serious crimes as foreseen under the
Rome Statute.

Today, in this important public forum, I say to
those Victims and their families who continue to
long for justice in Darfur, do not despair and do not
abandon hope. Despite the many challenges, hope
must not be lost, as my Office remains steadfast in
its commitment to the task. When choosing between
perpetrators and justice, time is in favour of the latter.
The United Nations ad hoc tribunals for Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia offer examples that remind us
that persistence and determination can result in the
arrest and surrender of suspects many years after the
issuance of arrest warrants.

I reiterate that my Office remains as determined
as ever to pursue justice in Darfur. Despite budget
constraints, I took the decision to add additional
investigators and analysts to the Darfur team. That
increase in the size of the team is yielding results.
Existing cases are being strengthened through the
collection of additional evidence. Extensive analytical
work is also advancing those cases. My Office is
also intensifying its investigations into new crimes
allegedly committed in Darfur. I take this opportunity
to publicly thank my team for their continued efforts
in the Darfur situation and for their determination,
resilience and professionalism in the face of extremely
challenging circumstances, not least the continued
policy of complete non-cooperation by the Government
of the Sudan and the consequent inability to conduct in
situ investigations.

Notwithstanding the challenges my Office
continues to face, there are reports of some improvement
in the conditions on the ground in Darfur. It is my
hope that any genuine improvement may present those
committed to peace and justice in the region with an
opportunity to make progress.

As the Council is aware, the work of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and other major stakeholders has led to
reports of some recent improvement in the Darfur
situation. For example, at the briefing to the Council
on UNAMID in April (see S/PV.7912) it was noted
that fighting between the forces of the Government
of the Sudan and armed opposition movements had
diminished and that the cooperation of the Government
of the Sudan had improved. UNAMID access to areas
in Jebel Marra that were previously off-limits was
reported to have improved, although, as my report
makes clear, any increased access will count for little if
not maintained.

Of course, as my report also notes, serious
problems persist in Darfur. In May, after the briefing
I just mentioned, there were reports that the Sudanese
army, supported by the rapid support forces, clashed
with armed opposition movements in North and East
Darfur.

In addition, internally displaced persons continue to
be subjected to multiple crimes, including in particular
alleged attacks against their camps and sexual and
gender-based Violence. In that regard, I note that in
resolution 2340 (2017), adopted in February 2017, the
Council deplored

"the violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights violations and abuses
committed by Government of Sudan security
forces, their proxies, and armed groups, including
those opposing the Government of Sudan, against
civilians, including IDPs, particularly in the Jebel
Marra area" (resolution 2340 (2017), sixteenth
preambular paragraph).

I welcome the Council's call, as articulated in that
resolution, for all armed actors to refrain from all acts
of violence against civilians.

My latest report also highlights a worrying increase
during the reporting period of arrests and prolonged
detentions of human rights activists and political
opponents of the Government of the Sudan. Challenges
remain in Darfur. Nevertheless, I cautiously welcome
reports of some improvement in the Darfur situation.

As members of the Council have noted on numerous
occasions, including in response to my biannual
reports, lasting peace in Darfur can be achieved only
if the root causes of the conflict are addressed. Those
causes are multiple and complex, but they include
the pervading toxic culture of impunity in Darfur for
Rome Statute crimes. Tackling impunity and pursuing
justice for atrocity crimes in Darfur is the task that the
Council mandated to my Office. It is a mandate that
I will continue to pursue independently, vigorously
and impartially, without fear or favour. But I need the
renewed support of the Council and of all States, in
particular those that are party to the Rome Statute.
In 2005, through resolution 1593 (2005), the Council
triggered its de facto and de jure relations with my
Office regarding the Darfur situation. Those relations
and obligations did not stop upon the adoption of that
resolution; on the contrary, they only commenced at
that juncture with the expectation of adequate follow-
up action and support as necessary. I once again ask
this body to provide tangible support for the work of my
Office concerning the Darfur situation. In particular,
I renew my long-standing request for the support of
the Council in relation to efforts to execute the arrest
warrants issued by the Court against the suspects in the
matter. I am equally compelled to repeat my request
for the Council's assistance in facilitating financial
assistance by the United Nations for my Office's work
in the Darfur situation.

Before the July judicial recess, the Pre-Trial
Chamber ofthe Court will decide whether South Africa
acted in non-compliance with the Rome Statute when
it failed to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir in June
2015 and, if so, whether to refer South Africa to the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the
ICC and/or the Security Council. In making its decision,
the Chamber will have the benefit of submissions by
South Africa, Belgium, the Southern Africa Litigation
Centre, as amicus curiae, and my Office. Taken together,
those submissions will allow the Chamber to formulate
a reasoned decision that, I hope, will provide the basis
for improved coordination among my Office, the Court,
States parties and the Council in future efforts to arrest
and surrender the Darfur suspects. Those collective
efforts are needed now more than ever.

In terms of travel to States parties, most recently
Mr. Al-Bashir travelled to Jordan on 29 March
2017. Despite being reminded by the Registry of its
obligations to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir,
regrettably Jordan declined to do so. As a consequence,
the Pre-Trial Chamber II invited Jordan to provide
submissions on that issue for the purpose of a
determination by the Chamber on whether to make a
formal finding of non-compliance and refer the matter
to the Assembly of States Parties and/or the Security
Council. At Jordan's request, on 2 June, the Chamber
decided to extend the deadline for those submissions
to the end of the month. Regrettably, Mr. Al-Bashir's
travel to non-States parties also continues. On another
occasion, under diplomatic pressure, Mr. Al-Bashir
ultimately did not attend the Riyadh summit in Saudi
Arabia scheduled for 20 and 21 May, as previously
planned.
Inviting, facilitating or supporting the international
travel of any person subject to an ICC arrest warrant
is inconsistent with a commitment to international
criminal justice. It is also an affront to the victims in
Darfur. The States that make up the Council have the
power, independently and collectively, to influence
and incentivize States -whether or not parties to the
Rome Statute - to assist in the efforts to arrest and
surrender the Darfur suspects. That applies equally to
regional organizations. I respectfully ask the members
of the Council to exert that influence in support of the
independent and impartial justice my Office is trying
to achieve with regard to Darfur.

At a minimum, the Council should demonstrate its
support for the work of my Office by taking concrete
action in response to decisions of non-compliance or
non-cooperation referred to it by the Court. To date, there
have been 13 such decisions, and yet not one has been
acted upon by the Council. By failing to act in response
to such Court decisions, the Council is in essence
relinquishing and undermining its clear role on such
matters arising from the Rome Statute, as negotiated
and adopted, and pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
I again urge the Council to give serious consideration
to the proposals previously advanced by New Zealand
and other States for practical and meaningful ways
to respond to such referrals by the Court concerning
non-compliance and non-cooperation.

As part of those proposals, I also recall that New
Zealand pointed to the clear need for the Council
to find a way through the current impasse in its
relations with the Government of the Sudan. My
Office wholeheartedly supports that suggestion. In
that respect, it is worth noting that in response to my
twenty-fourth statement to the Council in December
of last year, the representative of the Government of
the Sudan referred to the "important and noble goal
of combating impunity" (S/PV7833, p. 18). If the
Government of the Sudan is genuine in its commitment
to combating impunity, then the Council should invite
it to demonstrate that commitment by beginning a new
phase of cooperation with the Council and the Court.

Before concluding my update on cooperation, I
note that, while my Office faces challenges in securing
cooperation from a number of States, it continues to
benefit from the helpful cooperation of a number of
other States in relation to the Darfur situation. For
that, I express my sincere gratitude and look forward to
continued collaboration.
In conclusion, in resolution 2340 (2017) the Council
specifically calls on the Government of the Sudan to
undertake

"effective efforts to ensure accountability for
violations and abuses ofhuman rights and violations
of international humanitarian law, by whomsoever
perpetrated" (ibid, twenty-second preambular 
paragraph).

Such efforts at accountability must surely include
the full cooperation and assistance from the Sudan
to the Court. Such cooperation is specifically
required by resolution 1593 (2005), which referred
the Darfur situation to my Office. Doing so would
demonstrate in clear terms the Sudan's commitment
to justice for the victims of Rome Statute crimes
in Darfur - the country's own citizens - and a
recognition of their suffering.

I also respectfully ask for the renewed engagement
of the Council with my Office, in particular in relation
to the arrest and surrender of the Darfur suspects. It is
imperative that we work together to restore faith and
renew hope that justice for the victims in Darfur will
finally be realized. Accountability is a prerequisite for
sustainable peace in Darfur. My Office continues to seek
that accountability. I ask the Council to fully assume its
responsibilities arising from resolution 1593 (2005) and
to support our efforts in the interests of justice, stability
and sustainable peace in Darfur. Should the Council
invest in accountability by adequately supporting my
Office's work in Darfur, it will surely reap its peace
dividends. Let us not forget that the olive branch of
peace is barren without the trunk of blind justice.

