Mr. Barros Melet (spoke in Spanish): We thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and African Integration of
Chad, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for convening this
important open debate under the Chadian presidency.
We welcome and thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and the African Union High Representative
for Mali and the Sahel, President Pierre Buyoya.

At the outset, we wish to align with other States in
rejecting the barbaric attack on the school in the city
of Peshawar. We express our sincere condolences to
the families of those affected and to the Government
of Pakistan.

For Chile collective action is crucial in tackling
traditional and emerging threats and is enhanced by the
involvement of regional and subregional organizations.

It is very difficult to implement universal measures
without a regional contribution. That is the sense in
which my country interprets Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, which leads us to promote
efficient multilateralism capable of incorporating the
contributions of regional and subregional organizations,
in line with the purposes and principles of the United
Nations.

We believe that the active participation of regional
organizations and of the countries affected by conflict
is crucial to resolving the conflicts, because they have
a particular knowledge of the local reality, the contexts
and the conditions that generate those cycles of
instability and obstacles affecting peace and security.

Moreover, regional organizations can facilitate
ways of taking action in conflict situations, incorporate
the vision of local actors which provide differing views
on the analysis of the origin, form and resolution of
conflicts and promote local ownership on the part of
missions and in implementing solutions to the conflict.

We value agreements we have seen involving the
African Union and other regional and subregional
organizations to promote peace and security. We
encourage such possible interactions among those
organizations and the United Nations system. In that
respect, we encourage the establishment of regional
agreements with a primarily holistic approach and the
participation of local stakeholders in defining problems
with interaction between regional organizations or the
United Nations system, exchanging good practices and
lessons learned in comparable situations and where
there is economic independence for implementation.

We must stimulate predictability, sustainability
and flexibility in the funding of peacekeeping
operations carried out by the African Union under a
United Nations mandate to facilitate rapid and effective
responses to conflict. That is crucial for comprehensive
rehabilitation processes that allow a swift return to
political and institutional normalcy and the protection of
the population, particularly women and children. Such
deployment will require well-equipped contingents,
including procedures defined on the ground concerning
standardized training of the contingents, with a
particular emphasis on human rights.

Likewise, it is necessary to simplify and
standardize the forms of institutional collaboration
among the United Nations system and regional bodies.
The development of effective partnerships among
the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations is crucial, particularly in the relationship
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council. Coordinated efforts on the
ground are important in tackling the various challenges
when such efforts involve other multilateral and
bilateral actors on the ground.

The role of preventive diplomacy will be vital
during the so-called Madiba Nelson Mandela Decade
of Reconciliation in Africa, which can only be achieved
by way of truth, justice and inclusive development.

We believe that this issue requires ongoing attention
at different levels of the system, which should be based
on appropriate mechanisms to facilitate coordination
and complementarity between the regional and
universal spheres.

To conclude my statement, my country would like
to acknowledge the efforts and commitment on behalf of
the African Union in seeking solutions to the challenges
facing the continent and the important contributions to
peacekeeping operations on their own continent and
elsewhere in the world. As the international community,
we must value and support these efforts. We would like
to take advantage of this opportunity to pay tribute to
those who have sacrificed their lives in defence of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

