Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank
President Mbeki, Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Gambari and
Mr. Bassole for their insightful briefings. It is a rare
and valuable opportunity for the Council to be briefed
by the four main players collectively working for peace
in the Sudan. Today's briefings showed clearly that
each speaker, within his mandate and capacity, is
contributing greatly, and in a complementary manner,
to the achievement of peace and security in the Sudan
and the region as a whole. I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to their invaluable work, and
also to all United Nations personnel working there
under difficult conditions.
The Sudanese parties concerned have made a
strenuous effort to implement the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) since 2005, despite the many
difficulties they have encountered. Japan would like to
commend the efforts of all Sudanese parties and
international entities involved. The appointment of the
members of the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission is testimony to those efforts. The primary
mover bringing about peace in the Sudan must be the
Sudanese people themselves. The United Nations, the
African Union and the international community as a
whole fulfil a supporting role by assisting the national
efforts ofthe people of the Sudan.

The referendum to be held in January of next year
is the culmination of the implementation of the CPA,
and we should provide every possible support to make
it a success. We also support the agreement of the CPA
parties and encourage them to engage in discussion on
their own of post-referendum arrangements. If it is
requested and deemed necessary, we hope very much
that President Mbeki will play a role as mediator
between the parties. We put our trust in his wisdom and
guidance.

It is vitally important that the parties concerned
accept and respect the outcome of the referendum,
regardless of the result, and we urge the CPA parties
and the international community to maintain and
promote constructive relations. Based on this principle,
I wish to encourage Sudan's neighbouring countries,
and the African Union in particular, to support the
people of the Sudan for the stability of that country.

It is also important to start exploring the future
role of the United Nations, in close coordination with
the parties concerned. Trust and confidence between
North and South must be promoted to serve their
mutual interests. In so doing, it is of key importance to
examine the issues, outlined by the CPA parties, of
security along the North-South border, oil and
pipelines, citizenship and freedom of movement. A
framework must be established for populations near the
border to discuss common problems openly and to
promote regular dialogue. Japan attaches particular
priority to the development of human resources in the
North and South through training and the creation of
employment. We urge the international community to
accelerate its efforts to provide support in this area.

There is a consensus on the importance of
achieving comprehensive peace in Darfur. The
resumption of the Doha peace process is welcome,
thanks to efforts led by Mr. Bassole and Foreign
Minister Al-Mahmoud of Qatar. I wish to reiterate his

appeal to all parties - the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM), the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement and others - to engage actively in this

process. Dialogue should also continue with
Mr. Minnawi's group concerning the signing of a peace
agreement with the Government. I am confident that
Mr. Gambari will do his best to promote dialogue for
peace at the grass-roots level.

We are deeply concerned with the deteriorating
security situation in Darfur. The JEM. is increasing its
military offensive operations and expanding its area of
activity beyond Darfur. One of the causes is the
proliferation of small arms in Darfur and in the South.
We must act now to enforce the arms embargo and
other sanctions measures by promoting advocacy and
working with civil society organizations. The future
stability of the Sudan depends on achieving a lasting
peace in Darfur and constructive relations between the
North and the South. Every representative here today is
playing an important role in achieving the common
goal of realizing peace, security and development in
the Sudan. Their close coordination and cooperation
with each other is essential.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan's
strong commitment to sustainable peace and prosperity
in the Sudan.

