Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by thanking you very much, Madam, for presiding
over this important debate. This is a very important
contribution by Chile, especially following the very
rich Arria-formula meeting that we had last Thursday. I
would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Kalomoh for his contribution and Mr. Mark Malloch
Brown, Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), and Ms. Carolyn
McAskie for their respective contributions to our
debate. I trust that this meeting will contribute to a
better conceptual understanding of the issue we are
addressing today, particularly on the United Nations
role in fostering national reconciliation and assisting
countries emerging from conflict to establish the rule
of law and justice, the pillars of genuine reconciliation.

The lessons learned from peacekeeping
operations in various regions of the world point to the
need to further explore the linkages between peace,
security and justice on the one hand and economic and
social development on the other. The challenge ahead
is, therefore, to promote a coherent and integrated
approach involving early warning, conflict prevention,
crisis management, conflict resolution and post-conflict
national reconciliation and reconstruction.

Every society emerging from conflict faces the
issue of addressing the human rights violations
committed during the conflict. Accountability for those
crimes is not only a question of justice for the victims
and for those guilty of committing such crimes but also
of looking forward to a future of justice. The criminal
accountability for war crimes, genocide and crimes
against humanity is, therefore, a critical component of
the process of national reconciliation. The international
tribunals for Rwanda, Sierra Leone and the former
Yugoslavia, as well as the International Criminal Court
(ICC), are very important instruments in rebuilding the
foundations of a society governed by the rule of law
and fostering national reconciliation.

Lessons can be drawn from post-conflict national
reconciliation processes that stem from national
specificities. In fact, countries emerging from conflict
have employed a variety of accountability mechanisms
as alternatives to criminal prosecution. A national
apology, reparations to the victims, international public
pressure and shaming, truth and reconciliation
commissions and outright amnesties have been applied
as means to end conflicts and set in motion processes
of national reconciliation. Each method can be
effectively applied under the appropriate political
conditions as a price to pay for the attainment of peace.
These alternative mechanisms can be successful in
fostering peace and national reconciliation if the
societies are ready and prepared to engage in a
meaningful process of national reconciliation and if the
forces causing the divisions are effectively isolated.

Today's meeting takes place two years after the
signing of the Memorandum of Understanding at a
symbolic and highly meaningful ceremony, which put
an end to the long war in Angola. This is also,
therefore, an appropriate occasion to take stock of the
achievements and of the challenges that lie ahead,
especially in fostering national reconciliation. The
signing ceremony I am referring to not only signalled
the end of the war, a very difficult and painful period
indeed in the history of the nation; it also marked the
beginning of a process and of a period of rebirth for a
reconciled nation in which people, irrespective of their
past and free from war, can live together and face
together the challenge of building the pillars of
reconstruction to prevent a return to the past.

National reconciliation is an imperative, and an
expression of the people's will translated into practice
by the political determination of the Government of
Angola and of UNITA to live within a pluralistic
political framework under the rule of law. In this
context of national reconciliation, the competent
institutions granted an amnesty for crimes committed
during the conflict. The candidates elected in the
legislative elections on the list of UNITA and other
political parties assumed functions in the national
assembly, enjoying the rights, freedoms, guarantees,
immunities and privilege provided for by law. Social
welfare and social reintegration programmes are being
implemented throughout the national territory and, in
application of the relevant provisions of the general
principle of national reconciliation, members of
different political parties were invited to assume posts
in the national reconciliation Government and in local
administration. A political process was set in motion,
conducive to the holding of general elections, as a step
towards the consolidation of democratic institutions
and the rule of law. Basically, post-conflict
reconciliation in Angola is being pursued as a real
process of forgiveness and reintegration, in which
Angolans are called upon to forgive but not to forget
the divisions and the crimes committed during the
conflict, in order to build a peaceful society, aware of
past divisions - and of the dangers ahead if the
programme collapses.

Angola's experience and that of other countries
confirms that there is no preset approach to post-
conflict national reconciliation and that each situation
calls for specific solutions. Every process of national
reconciliation must, however, be participative, must
enjoy popular adherence and must be seen as a way for
the entire nation to reconcile itself with the past and to
build a better future.

The Security Council has, in recent years,
contributed to various aspects of post-conflict national
reconciliation. This is reflected in the measures and
norms instituted for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict; disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes in the context of peacekeeping operations;

and strengthening of international criminal justice.
Assistance and financing for reconstruction and
reconciliation processes are critical; much more needs
to be done in order to ensure the success of
reconciliation in countries emerging from conflict.

This goal can be advanced through greater
coordination within the United Nations system, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
especially, as well as the Secretariat, the agencies and
the Bretton Woods institutions, as has already been
noted. In that connection, we look forward to the
Secretary-General's report on this theme, which I trust
will help to fill a gap that seems to remain and has not
yet been satisfactorily addressed or covered, as was
hinted at again this morning by the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme.

Special attention should be given to the
appropriate organ for coordinating post-conflict
assistance, comprehensively assessing and meeting the
needs of countries emerging from conflict, and
coordinating the actions of all international actors
assisting in the reconciliation and reconstruction
processes, in order to ensure its efficiency and the
success of the whole enterprise.

This debate addresses an important area of the
agenda of our Council, which will deserve more
attention in the future. In order to be successful,
peacekeeping operations will have to be followed by
well-conceived and implemented post-conflict
programmes related to cross-cutting issues involving
the areas which are covered by the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, bringing about
cooperation between those two organs. The
consolidation of peace following a successful
peacekeeping operation stands as one of the main
challenges to be addressed by our Council. This is
therefore a timely debate.

Let me end by commending you, Madame, for
including this theme on your agenda.

