Archbishop Martino (Holy See): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to express
the Holy See's deep concern about the Iraqi issue in the
Security Council Chamber, where issues related to
international peace and security are debated in order to
save the world from the scourge of war. I am pleased to
recall on this occasion the successful meeting of
Secretary-General Kofi Annan with His Holiness Pope
John Paul II yesterday evening at the Vatican.

Since the very beginning, the Holy See has
always recognized the international community's
irreplaceable role in resolving the issue of Iraq's
compliance with the provisions of United Nations
resolutions.

In this regard, the Holy See realizes that the
international community is rightly worried and that it is
addressing a just and urgent cause: the disarmament of
arsenals of mass destruction - a threat surfacing not
just in a single region but, unfortunately in other parts
of our world. The Holy See is convinced that we must
make efforts to draw strength from the wealth of
peaceful tools provided by international law; to resort
to force would not be just. To the grave consequences
for a civilian population that has already been tested
long enough are being added the dark prospect of
tension and conflict between peoples and cultures and
the regrettable reintroduction of war as a way to
resolve untenable situations.
The Holy See is closely following developments
on the ground and expresses its support for the efforts
of the international community to resolve the crisis
within the sphere of international legality. For this
purpose and with this mind, His Holiness Pope John
Paul II recently sent to Baghdad a special envoy, who
met with President Saddam Hussain and delivered a
message from the Pope stressing, inter alia, the need
for concrete commitments in faithful adherence to the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations. A similar
message has also been conveyed to Mr. Tariq Aziz, the
Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister, who visited the Pope on
14 February. Moreover, in View of the devastating
aftermath of a possible military intervention, the
special envoy of the Pope made an appeal to the
conscience of all those who have a role to play in
determining the future of the crisis in the coming days
because, in the end, it is conscience that will have the
last word, as it is stronger than all strategies, all
ideologies and all religions.

The Holy See is convinced that even though the
process of inspections appears somewhat slow, it
remains an effective path that could lead to the
building of a consensus, which, if widely shared by
nations, would make it almost impossible for any
Government to act otherwise without risking
international isolation. The Holy See is therefore of the
view that it is also the proper path to an agreed and
honourable resolution of the problem, which, in turn,
could provide the basis for a real and lasting peace.

War is never just another means that one can
choose to employ for settling differences between
nations. As the Charter of the United Nations and
international law itself remind us, war cannot be
decided upon, even when it is a matter of ensuring the
common good, except as the very last option, in
accordance with very strict conditions and without
ignoring the consequences for the civilian population
both during and after military operations.

On the issue of Iraq, the vast majority of the
international community is calling for a diplomatic
resolution of the dispute and for exploring all avenues
towards a peaceful settlement. That call should not be
ignored. The Holy See encourages the parties
concerned to keep open the dialogue that could bring
about solutions in preventing a possible war, and urges
the international community to assume its
responsibility in dealing with any failings by Iraq.

Before I conclude my statement, allow me to
echo, in this Chamber of peace, the hope-inspiring
words of John Paul II's special envoy to Iraq: "Peace is
still possible in Iraq and for Iraq. The smallest step
over the next few days is worth a great leap towards
peace".

