Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2370 (2017), adopted
today, as a substantial step forward in the international
community's commitment to combat the scourge
of terrorism. It is a very good way, Sir, to start your
presidency, on which we congratulate you and wish
you all the best. We wish also to thank Ambassador
Liu Jieyi and his team for their remarkable presidency
in July. IfI may say so, it is good to have among us
so important a colleague and one with the name of
one of the main characters of Giacomo Puccini's
Turandot, which is one of the best operas ever written,
so I congratulate Ambassador Liu Jieyi. I also warmly
welcome Ambassador Nebenzia; we are ready to work
together as usual.

I should like also to take this opportunity to thank
our four briefers from New York and Vienna for their
important contributions to our discussion.

Illegal trafficking in weapons is a threat to peace
and security in every region of the world. Every day we
see the consequences of the ease with which individual
criminals and organized groups, including terrorist
groups, obtain and make use of such tools. The illicit
transfer and misuse of small arms and light weapons
contribute to instability and security and continue to
undermine the effectiveness of States' development
efforts. According to the World Bank, illicit trafficking
in weapons represents one of the most profitable
activities of organized criminal groups. The revenue
generated through this illegal market is equal to 20 per
cent of the legal arms trade.

Weapons may fall into the hands of terrorists because
of poor stockpile security and weak border control. The
activities of foreign terrorist fighters further increase
the probability that weapons and ammunition will cross
borders. In recent years the international community
has also been confronted with the threat posed by
the increasing use of improvised explosive devices
(IEDs), particularly by non-State armed groups and
rogue individuals. Such IED attacks deliberately target
concentrations of civilians so as to achieve maximum
lethality, terror and social disruption.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has used
IEDs since its inception. However, despite sustained
military pressure, the group has been able to develop a
capacity to assemble such devices on an industrial scale
and, as current Chair ofthe Mine Action Support Group,
we have seen the proliferation of these instruments and

the creativity shown in that respect. Terrorists' access to
small arms and light weapons has also been facilitated
by the spread of an online marketplace. The illegal sale
of arms on the dark Web presents challenges for law
enforcement agencies and national Governments. The
anonymity enabled by that platform makes preventing
illegal trade and linking it to specific individuals
extremely difficult.

Last May, the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate held an open briefing aimed at analysing and
discussing emerging threats, trends and developments
relating to preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons and to identifying gaps in Member States'
efforts to address those issues. During the briefings,
the experts underlined, inter alia, links between
organized crime and terrorism in illicit trafficking,
including trafficking in weapons, as well as the need
for an integrated approach.

In resolution 2322 (2016), the Security Council
stated that it counts on States to continue sharing
information on individuals and entities implicated in
terrorist activity, in particular their supply of weapons
and certain material support. INTERPOL highlighted
a tool that enables information exchange and enhanced
cooperation among law-enforcement agencies with
regard to the international movement of illicit firearms
and licit firearms that have been involved in committing
a crime.

Italy has actively participated with the European
Union in elaborating ways to curb the destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, and we will continue
to offer our cooperation to interested States, in
particular on the role of up-to-date technologies and
on best practices in physical security and stockpile
management, in addition to the marking and tracing
of weapons.

However, it is important to recall the need to
guarantee a clear-cut separation between the legal
manufacturing and marketing of arms as opposed to their
illegal versions, which hamper the authorities' control
and contribute, among other things, to financing and
participation in criminal and terrorist groups. In that
regard, the Arms Trade Treaty represents a balanced,
broad-based text, resulting from a comprehensive and
inclusive negotiation process in which the views of all
Member States have been reflected. That instrument has
the potential to significantly contribute to international

peace and security by regulating the international trade
in conventional arms, making it more responsible and
transparent and eradicating illicit trafficking.

In conclusion, Italy looks forward to working
together with partners and relevant stakeholders
towards a stronger outcome in the next 2018 Small
Arms and Light Weapons Review Conference, which
should present an opportunity to reinforce our common
action aimed at preventing terrorists from accessing
those types of weapons.

