Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
We thank the Indian presidency of the Council for
organizing today's open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council. We welcome that this debate
has become an annual tradition. I would like to take
this opportunity to commend the remarkable work done
by Portugal as Chair ofthe Council's Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions throughout 2012.

During the past few months, progress has been
made on the internal organization of the Council's
work, notably with the adoption of the presidential note
of5 June (S/2012/402), which recommends better use of
conference resources and greater interactivity during
consultations. With the aid of the Secretariat, efforts
have also been made to spread the mandate renewals
more evenly throughout the year.

Nevertheless, there is certainly still room for
improving the effectiveness of the Council's work, for
increasing its transparency and for strengthening the
interaction between the Council and non-members.
The concept note prepared by India and Portugal
(S/2012/853, annex) contains helpful suggestions in that
regard. Without intending an exhaustive list, I would
like to mention a few concrete proposals that would
merit further consideration in Luxembourg's View.

First, we should continue to improve the
transparency and interactivity of the Council's debates
by tailoring the format of meetings to our needs. Arria
Formula meetings facilitate exchanges with civil society
and non-governmental organizations, the insights and
field experience of which can have particular relevance
for the Concil's deliberations. Informal interactive
dialogues allow for increased interaction, inter alia with
non-members involved in a situation on the Council's
agenda.

The dialogue on peacebuilding that took place on
12 July (see S/PV.6805), in which Luxembourg was
invited to take part in its capacity as Chair ofthe Guinea
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
was a good example of such interaction. Such dialogues
are useful insofar as adequate follow-up is ensured. In
our opinion, it is to be hoped that non-members that are
in a position to bring added value, such as the Chairs
of the PBC country-specific configurations, will be
invited to join the Council's consultations.

Furthermore, developments in Africa and in the
Middle East strengthen our conviction that we should
continue to ensure the best possible interaction between
the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations concerned, such as the African Union
and the League of Arab States. While respecting
competencies and mandates, we believe that the
Security Council should strive to make good use of the
particular expertise that those organizations, as well as
other stakeholders such as the European Union, have
to offer.

Finally, we encourage the initiatives taken in
recent years to better prepare the Security Council to
anticipate threats to international peace and security.
A case in point is the practice initiated under the
presidency of the United Kingdom in November 2010
to invite the Department of Political Affairs to present
to the Council issues that, because of their destabilizing
potential, deserve its attention. In our view, that is a
good example of applying Article 99 of the Charter,
under which the Secretary-General may bring to the
attention of the Security Council any matter that may
in his opinion threaten the maintenance of international
peace and security. If that early-warning function
is used wisely, the Security Council will be better
equipped to fulfil the responsibilities conferred upon
it by the Charter.

In the context of improving the working methods of
the Security Council, the case has often been made that
adequate follow-up should be given to the Council's
thematic debates. To give but one example, the very rich
open debate that took place on 17 October under the
presidency of Guatemala on the topic of the interaction
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court (see S/PV.6849) clearly deserves such
follow-up.

The steps taken after the open debate of 30 November
2011 on working methods (see S/PV.6672) are, in our
view, a good example to follow in that regard. We hope
that today's debate will encourage further progress and
that the useful suggestions made by the many Member
States participating in this debate will not go unheeded.
As an elected member of the Security Council for the
term 2013-2014, I can guarantee that Luxembourg will
spare no effort to contribute to the process.

