Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): At the outset, let me thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary- General and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her regular briefing. Since 2013, the United Nations has continued to make great efforts to establish responsibility for the many cases of chemical-weapons use in Syria, which led to the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013). It is regrettable to note that those efforts did not succeed, in such a way acceptable to all, to assign responsibility for the atrocities committed. It is equally regrettable to note the lack of consensus on how to deal with the questions of how such weapons were used or by whom. This hampers accountability for those who are truly guilty and leaves victims with no recourse. The occurrence of a procedural vote this afternoon was a pathetic illustration of these disagreements. The use of chemical weapons, as of all other non-conventional weapons is unacceptable, and my delegation strongly condemns such acts. I therefore wish to make the following several remarks. First, regarding the ongoing politicization of the conflict, I would like to reiterate that any use of the experts' report and its conclusions for purposes other than to assist the Security Council in fully implementing resolution 2118 (2013) must be avoided. This document should serve as a basis for attributing responsibilities, thereby laying the groundwork for eventually trying those responsible in the appropriate jurisdiction. Differences of opinion among Council members must give way to acalm and technical analysis of the findings of the investigations, so as to guarantee the integrity of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) itself. Moreover, the composition of all teams investigating any of the incidents reported must be inclusive and participatory to ensure their conclusions are not contested. Secondly, cooperation between Syria and the OPCW Technical Secretariat must continue in good faith to resolve all outstanding questions concerning Syria's initial declaration, so as to ensure progress in the work of the Declaration Assessment Team. On this matter, too, doubts and disagreements must be overcome. All incidents of the use of chemical weapons in Syria must receive the same attention and be dealt with with the same diligence in order to reach an ultimate conclusion and assign responsibility. Thirdly, and finally, allegations that armed terrorist groups in Syria possess chemical substances and are threatening to use them during chemical-weapons attacks under a false flag must not be overlooked. My delegation reiterates, in that regard, its call on the United Nations and the OPCW Technical Secretariat to pay the greatest of attention to such allegations, which, if they turn out to be well-founded, will be extremely dangerous, not only for the region but for the entire world, as those weapons can be transferred to other non-State actors or other terrorist groups acting in other regions. My delegation believes that, whether with regard to humanitarian, political or chemical-weapon matters, respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria remains fundamental in the context of seeking any lasting resolution to the crisis in that country.
