Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg wishes to thank the Chinese presidency
for having convened today's open debate, which allows
States that are not members of the Council to express
their views on an issue that, unfortunately, remains very
topical: the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

While fully associating myself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union,
I would like to make some remarks in my national
capacity.

I would like to focus, as did many of the speakers
who preceded me, on the crisis in Syria. Innocent
civilians are, alas, its principal victims. Over the course
ofmore than 15 months, the crisis has claimed thousands
of lives among the Syrian civilian population.

What are the means at the disposal of the Council
to contribute to protecting civilians in the context of
that crisis? Some may argue that the conflict in Syria
is not an armed conflict in the strictly legal sense of
the term, which would rule out the application of the
Geneva Conventions. But let us not delude ourselves:
the violence in some regions of Syria has reached such
a level of intensity, and the use of heavy weapons,
artillery and tanks in urban areas and of explosive
devices of all types has reached so high a level that
there can no longer be any doubts about the situation.
As the international community and as defenders of
international humanitarian law, we cannot shy away
from the responsibility of finding ways and means of
contributing to the protection of civilians in Syria,
whose lives are threatened on a daily basis.

By adopting resolution 2042 (2012), on 14 April
2012, the Security Council endorsed the six-point
proposal put forward by Kofi Annan, Joint Special
Envoy for the United Nations and the League of Arab
States. The second point of his six-point plan calls on
all parties to

"commit to stop the fighting and achieve urgently
an effective United Nations-supervised cessation
of armed violence in all its forms by all parties
to protect civilians and stabilize the country"
(resolution 2042 (2012), annex).

As confirmed by the reports of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
(UNSMIS), which was created by resolution 2043
(2012), of 21 April 2012, the Syrian Government has
not yet fulfilled one of the main conditions for the
implementation of the Annan plan to begin: that is, to
"end the use of heavy weapons in population centres"
(ibid.).

Given the deterioration of the situation on the
ground and the non-implementation of the Annan
plan, a process of reflection is under way concerning
a modification of the mandate of UNSMIS. Some are
now calling for a reduction of the Mission or even its
withdrawal. But let us recall what happened after the
withdrawal of the observers of the League of Arab States
in January of this year: the crisis only intensified. The
international community and the Security Council in
particular must not shy away from their responsibilities.

Luxembourg supports the recommendations
put forward by the Secretary-General in his recent
report aimed at ensuring more effective protection
for civilians in armed conflict by responding to
the five core challenges: enhancing compliance by
parties to conflict with international law, enhancing
compliance by non-State armed groups, enhancing
protection by United Nations peacekeeping and other
relevant missions, enhancing humanitarian access and
enhancing accountability for violations of the law.

It is urgent to respond to the challenge posed by the
growing number of attacks and other acts specifically
aimed at health-care services. It is equally imperative
to continue to fight against impunity for those who
have violated international humanitarian law or the
fundamental rights of civilians in times of conflict.

In line with the recommendations of the workshop
co-organized last November by the Permanent Mission
of Portugal and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs on the contribution of the
Security Council to ensuring accountability, at which I
had the honour of presiding over one of the panels, we
remain convinced that the establishment ofinternational
commissions of inquiry or fact-finding missions and
referrals to the International Criminal Court have a
deterrent and preventive effect. The appropriate use of
those measures is an important element of the Security
Council's toolkit for the effective protection of civilians.

