Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
would like, first of all, to thank the delegation of
Germany for having proposed this subject for
discussion. Its importance for the work of the Security
Council is absolutely clear. I would also like to
welcome the President of the World Bank and the
President of Siemens and thank them for their
statements.

The Security Council's consideration of the role
of business in conflict-prevention, peacekeeping and
peace-building, on the day immediately following the
General Assembly's consideration of the final report of
the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, illustrates
the importance that our Organization and its major
bodies attach to this question.

The Kimberley Process is a significant
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security and represents a remarkable moral step
forward that we should welcome. Its essential elements
are the self-regulation to which the diamond industry
has committed itself and the spirit of partnership with
which that industry has welcomed the initiative of the
producer countries to combat the illicit trade in
diamonds - blood diamonds. The role of those
diamonds in fuelling several conflicts has been amply
demonstrated. My delegation wishes to hail the
embodiment, in the Kimberley Process, of the spirit of
the Global Compact that the Secretary-General has
proposed to the business community.

It is today widely recognized that in conflict
zones the practices of international corporations or
smaller corporations have often had a considerable
impact on respect for human rights and breaches of the
peace because of the corporations' links to
Governments or to social groups who oppose them.
This subject, however, has already been discussed.
Here, I would like to focus more on the present role of
business in peace-building in post-conflict situations.
In such situations, the root causes for the outbreak of
conflict generally remain and require economic and
social treatment as soon as possible, if a lasting peace
is to be established.

Observation of countries emerging from conflict
reveals that at the end of the emergency reconstruction
phase - which is generally limited to the most urgent
humanitarian needs and assistance in establishing
institutions and legislative bodies indispensable for
legal security and a climate favourable to
investment- the international community is faced
with a lack of any significant investment, which is the
only thing that can lead to sustained and lasting
growth, which is still the best guarantee of lasting
peace.

In brief, should companies remain on the
sidelines of economic rehabilitation efforts led by the
Governments concerned, with the assistance of the
United Nations and the multilateral financial
institutions, to create the conditions and rehabilitate the
infrastructure? Or should they participate in those
efforts, in accordance with the principle of social
responsibility to which they increasingly adhere?

Post-conflict developments in a good number of
situations on the Council's agenda, particularly in
Africa, clearly plead for the earlier involvement of
private companies. Indeed, the risks of a wait-and-see
attitude were particularly highlighted by the work of
the Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory
Group for African Countries emerging from conflict,
which recently submitted its report on Guinea-Bissau
and which could be confronted with similar obstacles
later, in the case of Burundi.

My delegation is of the view that the issue of the
link between peace and development as a factor for
overcoming the risks of armed conflict was
appropriately addressed by Africa's own initiative, the
New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD).
The NEPAD approach, founded on the idea of
partnership, gives greatest importance to creating the
conditions for investment and business, which are the
motors of development, by stressing the notions of
good political and economic governance - including
the management of business - the obligation of
accountability, the fight against corruption and respect
for human rights.

The favourable response to NEPAD by the United
Nations and the international financial community,
through the forum of the Group of Eight's Kananaskis
and Evian Summits, has now made it a cornerstone for
that approach, which should guide the private sector's
contribution to the international community's peace-
building efforts.
We believe that the success of that approach
depends on the accompanying implementation of
respect for commitments undertaken by the
Governments of countries emerging from conflicts -
which can often be verified - on the provision of the
necessary levels of official development assistance and
on the contribution of private sector investments. In
that regard, the contributions of multinational
companies are particularly anticipated, as they reduce
country risk through bold initiatives that give concrete
expression to the ideal of social responsibility.

