Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania,
the candidate countries Turkey and Croatia, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Serbia and
Montenegro and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia align themselves with this declaration.

The European Union is pleased to have the
opportunity today to make some observations on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). Four days before its mandate expires, the
European Union thanks Mr. Annabi for the report
which he has just introduced, above all because we
believe that the United Nations has achieved a great
deal in supporting the Timorese people in their quest
for peace, independence and development since the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) in 1999. Today's meeting is an
occasion to remember all those who lost their lives to
bring peace and freedom to others and to pay tribute to
the dedication and professionalism of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), as well as to the leadership of the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
late Sergio Vieira de Mello, in assisting the people of
Timor-Leste in their transition towards independence.

We also commend the entire personnel of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor for
its invaluable contribution over the last three years to
ensure a smooth transition from peacekeeping to a
sustainable development framework in Timor-Leste,
under the able leadership of the successive
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kamalesh Sharma and Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa.

In its previous statement on this issue in February
(see S/PV.5132), the European Union endorsed an
adequate continued United Nations presence in Timor-
Leste after the expiration of UNMISET's mandate. We
welcome the adoption of resolution 1599 (2005) which
established a one-year follow-on special political
mission mandated, inter alia, to support the
development of critical State institutions through
specialized training and technical advice and to
promote the rule of law, democratic governance and
human rights. Through implementation of that mandate
the mission will assist the Timorese in their continuing
journey towards self-sustainability. Nevertheless,
international assistance should complement the efforts
of the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL)
in supporting Timor Leste's public administration.

Today's meeting also allows for a review of the
overall political situation in Timor-Leste three years
after its independence. Of course, the European
Union's assessment has not changed substantially since
the end of February, when I last had the honour of
taking the floor in this Chamber on the question of
Timor-Leste. Our message largely remains the same:
tangible progress has been achieved in numerous areas,
but challenges remain in others, and further
international assistance is essential. In that context,
priority should be given to the implementation of
quick-impact projects.

The European Union welcomes the peaceful
holding of local elections in three further districts and
the progress achieved in reinforcing the legal
framework of Timor-Leste. Efforts to strengthen the
judicial system should be continued in order to ensure
real access to justice for all citizens and the respect of
due process. The recent visit of the President of
Indonesia to Timor-Leste demonstrates that relations
between the two neighbours continue to be
strengthened.

However, we remain concerned at the lack of
progress in the fight against impunity. Those
responsible for serious human rights violations
committed in Timor-Leste in 1999 must be held
accountable for their crimes, in conformity with
Security Council resolutions 1573 (2004) and 1599
(2005). In that context, the European Union urges all
parties to cooperate fully with the Commission of
Experts appointed by the Secretary-General to review
the judicial process in the two countries. We look
forward to the Commission's upcoming report and
recommendations proposing ways to address the issue,
including how examination of the question could assist
the Truth and Friendship Commission recently created
by Indonesia and Timor-Leste. We hope that the two
commissions can work together to ensure that justice is
done.

The European Union welcomes the fact that the
overall security situation in Timor-Leste has remained
generally calm and stable, while recognizing the need
for the international community to remain vigilant in
that regard.

Since 1999, the European Union and its member
States have provided vital assistance to Timor-Leste,
contributing nearly €700 million to its development.
That represents half of the foreign aid the country has
received. The support provided by the European Union
covers all sectors and, in the near future, as a new
member of the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP)
States, Timor-Leste will also benefit from the European
Development Fund, which supports the signatories of
the EU-ACP Cooperation Agreement.

I would like to conclude by expressing our
appreciation for the efforts of the Government of
Timor-Leste and the determination of the Timorese
people to build a viable, just and democratic State. The
European Union is committed to remaining a reliable
partner in assisting Timor-Leste to achieve long-term
stability and sustainable economic development, in
close coordination with other bilateral and multilateral
donors.

