Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
convening of this important thematic debate. I should
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
introducing his report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304).

Since the inception of the Agenda for Peace

17 years ago, post-conflict peacebuilding has evolved

into an integral part of the collective efforts of the

international community to eliminate the prolonged

effects of conflicts and to support a smooth transition
to lasting peace and sustainable development.

The immediate post-conflict period is critical to
addressing a host of opportunities and the challenges of
disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating
ex-combatants, strengthening the rule of law and
security sector reform, promoting inclusive dialogue
and reconciliation, supporting the return and
reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons, restoring Government functions and jump-
starting economic revitalization.

Over the longer term, substantive investments in
poverty reduction, hunger eradication, essential public
services, employment creation, social parity,
institutional capacity-building and the Millennium
Development Goals, inter alia, will serve as linchpins
in tackling the root causes of conflicts and laying the
foundations for nation-building efforts. If those
recurring priorities are addressed in a timely manner,
the post-conflict journey towards lasting peace,
stability and prosperity can be much smoother.

The fast-moving and uncertain post-conflict
environment requires dovetailed support and
cooperation from the plethora of multilateral agencies
and international stakeholders concerned. In recent
years, the United Nations has been working diligently
to enhance its efficiency and effectiveness through
reform efforts related to the pillars of peace and
security, development, human rights, humanitarian
affairs and international law.

Standing at the very heart of the international
peacebuilding architecture, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Peacebuilding Fund have played a central role as the
dedicated institutional mechanisms for focusing
attention, mobilizing resources and improving
coherence, while addressing critical gaps, needs and
priorities in countries emerging from conflict.

Given the fact that many conflicts have cross-
border dimensions, regional and subregional
organizations have established support frameworks to
bring their comparative advantage in terms of
knowledge of specific local conditions to bear on the
work of peacebuilding. At this time of global resource

constraints, international financial institutions have
also worked to align funding decisions behind
immediate and medium-term peacebuilding and
recovery assistance.

Provided with differing mandates, guiding
principles, governance structures and financing
arrangements, United Nations agencies and other
partners involved early in the recovery of countries that
have experienced "hot" periods of crisis are challenged
by the overriding need to move forward and to ensure
clarity on roles and responsibilities, the rational
prioritization and division of labour, shared planning
and analysis, stronger partnerships and greater
accountability. It is imperative that their efforts be
coordinated and integrated so that all available
resources can be fully utilized. Simultaneously, any
unnecessary overlap or competition must be reduced
and economies of scale maintained.

In that regard, we welcome and look forward to
further concrete results in the implementation of the
Secretary-General's agenda on strengthening and
supporting leadership teams in the field, promoting
earlier strategic coherence, reinforcing national
capacity from the outset, improving the ability to
provide rapid and predictable capacities, and enhancing
the speed, flexibility, amount and risk tolerance of
post-conflict financing.

Even with the best intentions, external assistance
to promote and strengthen war-to-peace stabilization
processes will likely be regarded as an imposition
unless the cardinal principles of respect for
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States are
strictly followed and unless beneficiary host countries
are given ample space to determine policy options and
decision-making in the pursuit of their goals and
objectives.

As the legitimate masters and the biggest
beneficiaries of peacebuilding, local populations must
be empowered and involved in every step of this long-
term endeavour. The entrance, implementation and exit
of international assistance should be tailored to and
driven by the specific needs and priorities of the
country in question, with the consent of local parties
and within the overall framework of maximally
drawing on and developing national ownership, self-
resilience and self-reliance.
In this regard, Viet Nam registers its steadfast
support for the cause of peacebuilding and stands ready
to share its related experience of capacity development
and international cooperation with all interested
stakeholders.

