Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for having
arranged today's meeting to consider the question of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. My delegation also wishes to
thank the High Representative, Mr. Petritsch, for his
report and for his very interesting briefing.

On behalf of the Chinese delegation, may I also
take this opportunity to warmly welcome the new
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the work of the
Council.

On the whole, my delegation is satisfied that the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is stable and that
the Peace Agreement is being implemented. Of course,
this should be attributed to the political good faith and
cooperation of the various parties and ethnic groups in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and is also closely related to
the help provided by the international community.

However, we should also note that progress in
implementing the Peace Agreement has been slow.
Arduous tasks still lie ahead. In areas such as
increasing the self-reliance of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the realization of reconciliation, harmony among the
various ethnic groups, post-war reconstruction and the
return of minority refugees, much work remains to be
done for the various parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We hope that the various international agencies in
Bosnia and Herzegovina will intensify their work and
continue their close coordination and cooperation. But
we must note that the participation of the international
community in the reconstruction of Bosnia and
Herzegovina must be based on the Bosnian people
being the major players. The focus of our work should
be on helping the local people develop self-reliance,
and gradually reducing their dependence on outside
assistance, so as to avoid a situation in which, when
international assistance is reduced, various social and
political problems resurface.

China believes that achieving ethnic
reconciliation is the fundamental basis for peaceful
coexistence among the various ethnic groups in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and for a peaceful and prosperous
life, but that the country is a long way from the
realization of this goal.

China notes that among various factions there are
still radical and extremist forces. In his report
Mr. Petritsch also pointed out that nationalist parties
still enjoy great support from their respective ethnic
groups. We are particularly concerned at the divisive
information propagated recently by the Croatian
Democratic Union (HDZ).

At present the situation in the West Balkans
continues to worsen. We are worried that such
extremist nationalist action will encourage nationalists
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Therefore, it is necessary
that the parties concerned remain highly vigilant and
take precautionary measures to prevent the occurrence
of any such incidents.

Finally, we would like to reiterate our support for
the work of the High Representative, and we wish him
and his team continued success in their future work.

