Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs for her briefing
and for all the work that she is doing on this issue with
her team. Through her, allow me to thank the staff ofthe
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) in The Hague.

Like other speakers, we remain deeply concerned
about the escalating military action by the Syrian
authorities and Russia in north-western Syria. This
puts millions of civilians at risk, and the Security
Council will discuss that tomorrow. But in that context,
we are here today because we are seriously concerned
by the potential for further illegal use of chemical
weapons in any Syrian regime offensive in Idlib. As
other speakers have done, we reiterate that the use of
chemical weapons is a breach of the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC) and that it constitutes a threat to
international peace and security.
I was very interested in what the High Representative
had to say about the review by the OPCW of the Syrian
chemical weapons disclosure. I think that she is right
to say that some important steps have been made in
implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions,
and that there are some very important outstanding
issues. As of March, the OPCW Fact-finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic had confirmed 13 cases
of likely chemical weapons use in Syria since it was
established in 2014. In terms of allegations, the Fact-
finding Mission has recorded at least 390. After more
than four years of work by the Declaration Assessment
Team, the OPCW is still unable to verify that the Syrian
declaration is accurate. We have heard many times that
there are "gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies"
in Syria's account of its declaration under the CWC.
Those are substantive points.

I do not think that the Council really understands
why it is so difficult to resolve this issue. If a State
Member of the United Nations were acting in good faith
under the Chemical Weapons Convention, these issues
would be capable of being resolved, but we still find
ourselves confronting them in this Chamber, meeting
after meeting. I would also like to state that the last
report (see S/2018/745) noted that the list of issues had
even increased rather than decreased, and I would like
to know why. I hope that the Syrian representative will
be able to give us an explanation for that today.

Turning to the risk of the use of chemical weapons
over Idlib, and taking into account what the Russian
representative said, Agatha Christie was a fiction writer.
What is fact is that the Syrian authorities have been
found to have used chemical weapons against their own
people. What we hear from the Russian Ambassador is
an inversion of the facts, an inversion of the concern for
the protection of civilians that the Council has mandated,
an inversion of what the rules-based international order
of multilateralism is all about, and fundamentally, an
inversion of what Governments are supposed to do as
their first duty to protect their people and to keep their
people safe. Ijust find it unconscionable, that after all
these years, in the hundredth anniversary year of the
end of the First World War, that any Government can
even think of using chemical weapons against its own
people or, indeed, against anyone else, whether they are
a small city in Britain or a country like Syria.

I reject everything that the Russian Ambassador
said about aggression on the part of three permament
members of the Security Council. What France, the
United Kingdom and the United States are aiming to do
is to uphold the rules-based international order. People
who worry about action by our three Governments
should take every possible step to ensure that chemical
weapons are not used, and then there will be no problem
at all. We have demonstrated that we will respond
swiftly and appropriately to any further use of chemical
weapons by the Syrian regime, which has already had
such devastating humanitarian consequences for the
Syrian population. Once again, I join others in urging
Russia to use its influence to ensure that chemical
weapons are not used against civilians in Syria. Either
Russia calls for restraint or Russia will be deemed
complicit in their use when these weapons are used.

I want to conclude, ifI may, by saying that I could
not agree more with the representative of Equatorial
Guinea about the primacy of the political process, and
I hope that those efforts can be redoubled over the
coming weeks.

