Mr. McIvor (New Zealand): We would first like
to thank the Council for providing this opportunity to
discuss a peace and security issue of major
international importance. New Zealand places a high
priority on contributing to efforts by the international
community to assist in the restoration of Afghanistan,
to establish security and to rebuild society. We see the
role of the United Nations, through the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as very
important in this process.

We received two briefings this morning, on the
overall situation in Afghanistan and on the challenges
posed by drug cultivation and trafficking. Mr. Costa's
excellent briefing was a stark reminder of the inter-
relationships among economic, political and security
factors contributing to ongoing instability. Addressing
the drug economy is a necessary first step in countering
a range of illegal activities. The links among drugs, the
authority of the central Government, its ability to
implement key milestones in the Bonn Agreement and
broader security continue to present major challenges.
We are very appreciative of the efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and those Member
States making significant contributions to drug
eradication efforts in Afghanistan.

Turning to the situation in Afghanistan as a
whole, it has been heartening to see the achievements
of the transitional Government since last year. The
establishment of a Constitutional Commission and the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, the
return to school of almost 6 million children and the
absorption of 1.7 million refugees back into
communities are all positive developments. We
encourage further progress on the key milestones
contained in the Bonn Agreement, particularly in the
lead-up to national elections scheduled for next year.

We have been concerned at the recent attacks on
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in
Kabul. They reinforce the importance of strengthening
national security institutions and providing support to
the ISAF and Operation Enduring Freedom.

In addition to providing personnel to ISAF and
supporting Operation Enduring Freedom since late
2001, the New Zealand Government recently
announced a further contribution to the reconstruction
of Afghanistan. New Zealand will contribute to one of
the provincial reconstruction teams that are working
with the Afghan provisional Government to expand its
influence outside Kabul, enhance the security
environment, promote the reconstruction effort, and
monitor and assess civil, political and military reform
efforts through community engagement. If it proves to
be within our capability, that contribution will extend
to leading a provincial reconstruction team. This will
be complemented by the deployment of New Zealand
Defence Force personnel to work with a British team
providing command and leadership training to the
Afghan national army in Kabul.

New Zealand is very aware of the need to achieve
tangible improvements in the quality of life of Afghan
people, while also making longer-term investments in
building capacity, through reconstruction and
development activities. These considerations have
informed our contribution to humanitarian assistance in
Afghanistan.

In conclusion, there remains a vital need for the
international community to reassure Afghanistan's
Government and people that we intend to remain
engaged in security and humanitarian assistance efforts
to restore their country.

