My delegation would like to welcome the Foreign Minister of Indonesia to the Security Council today and thank her country for making this debate possible. Today's meeting is timely, as it comes on the heels of several discussions on the pandemic within the Security Council and Peacebuilding Commission, and most recently following the informal interactive dialogue that Niger co-organized with Indonesia and Germany. But first, allow me to take a moment to acknowledge the Secretary-General, whose call for a global ceasefire and solidarity was a catalyst for the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020). I would also like to thank Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for their thorough and insightful briefings. Unfortunately, the Secretary-General's ceasefire appeal is mostly not being heeded by belligerent parties on the ground. As shown from the recent attacks by Boko Haram and the Islamic State West Africa Province in the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel, violent extremists are trying to take advantage of the pandemic to destabilize Governments by ramping up their attacks on civilian and military targets. That trend was corroborated by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mohamed Ibn Chambas, during his briefing in April on the impact of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) COVID-19 on the Peacebuilding Commission. Those attacks have resulted in the loss of innocent lives and major disruptions to the delivery of basic social services to the population. In addition to being both a public health and a humanitarian crisis, the pandemic is seriously affecting the economy of fragile countries, like those in the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). It is estimated that the gross domestic product in some G-5 Sahel countries could contract by 7 to 8 per cent in 2020. As of June, the economic negative impact in the Niger had already reached $339 million in lost tax customs and non-tax revenues, far more than my country's annual defence budget. In terms of impact on the ground, peace operations are being heavily affected by the freeze in rotations and the risk of the spread of the disease among the troops and the population they are protecting. I would like to take this moment to once again commend the United Nations, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel for putting in place strict and effective measures aimed at minimizing and mitigating the impact of the pandemic in the Sahel. Even though the operations of the United Nations peace, special and political missions are themselves heavily impacted, the current crisis offers opportunities to adapt, repurpose and even transform the responses of United Nations missions so that no one is left behind and the hard fought gains made in peace processes are duly maintained. That starts, first and foremost, by ensuring that adequate levels of funding and financing for peacekeeping missions are maintained at their current level and, if possible, boosted, as the pandemic will further exacerbate the crisis in some regions of the world. Doing so will allow for the adequate troop and personnel levels to be deployed and essential activities to be carried on. Financing also means providing adequate support at the multilateral level to those countries in order to preserve the gains made towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. Moreover, the extent to which the current pandemic has impacted the economies of countries will more likely than not lead to a world recession for the next year and beyond. It is therefore imperative that, besides the traditional funding mechanisms, we encourage innovative means by reducing fragmentation in peacebuilding activities and integrating new tools into current approaches. We should support funding approaches that put forth countries' own priorities and allow those countries to develop locally grown innovative financing mechanisms. When it comes to adaptation, this crisis has shown us that, going forward, a meaningful participation of communities - including women, youth, persons with disabilities and traditional, religious and civic leaders - is necessary. In times like this, they can be the relay for peacekeeping operations, as they have not only first- hand knowledge of the local customs and traditions, but also the necessary network and the trust of the local population. We should therefore strive to provide them with the necessary tools with regard to capacity-building, technology and mentoring so as to ensure that peacebuilding efforts continue in all situations. In conclusion, as we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, and given the non-traditional nature of this pandemic as a threat to peace and security, thinking outside the box and transforming our approach to peacekeeping might yield positive results. The drivers of conflicts today are different from what they were in 1945, and they involve socioeconomic, environmental, health, transnational and technological actors. The adaptation and transformation of peace operations to prevent and mitigate tomorrow's conflicts are therefore necessary.
