Mr. Helg (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the convening of this open
debate dedicated to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. It thanks the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2002/ 1300) and notes with satisfaction its concrete
and systematic nature.

The efforts of the Security Council on this issue
have produced a significant set of recommendations. It
is now necessary to ensure their implementation and, if
necessary, to supplement them. I would like at the
outset to say that my country fully associates itself with
the views of the Human Security Network on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict as they will be
stated later by Austria.

The report of the Secretary-General describes
efforts at the institutional level to ensure closer
cooperation within the Secretariat, in particular
between the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. Switzerland welcomes these
efforts to address different aspects of protection in a
more systematic and coordinated fashion. Over the past
decade civilian populations have been not only the
main victims of the consequences of armed conflict but
frequently the deliberate targets of acts of violence
committed by parties to conflicts.

That development, which has been exacerbated
by the upsurge of terrorist acts, which are
indiscriminate by definition, goes against the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
law and of human rights. Switzerland resolutely
condemns all recourse to terrorist violence. It also
emphasizes that the fight against terrorism, to which it
subscribes entirely, must itself be conducted with full
respect for international humanitarian law and human
rights. Strengthened international humanitarian law,
international justice and the principles of the rule of
law are key factors for enhancing the protection of
civilians.

Switzerland welcomes the entry into force on 1
July 2002 of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. In its capacity as High Contracting
Party to and the depositary State of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of
1977, Switzerland would like to take the opportunity of
this debate to invite all States that have not yet done so
to ratify the Additional Protocols as soon as possible.
In the light of serious violations of the Conventions
and of Additional Protocol I of 1977, Switzerland
considers that it is timely to remind the High
Contracting Parties that they are obligated, by virtue of
article 89 of that Protocol, to act jointly or individually,
in cooperation with the United Nations and in
conformity with its Charter. That article is
complementary to the obligation of the High
Contracting Parties to respect, and to ensure respect
for, international humanitarian law in all
circumstances.

The report of the Secretary-General accords
appropriate attention to the specific rights and needs of
vulnerable groups. Switzerland welcomes the agenda
for protection adopted at the last meeting of the
Executive Committee of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. The agenda should now
be implemented without delay to bring about positive
results on the ground, especially on behalf of refugees
and other vulnerable groups. Switzerland is also
convinced that the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement provide an adequate response to the
needs of internally displaced persons. We encourage
the speedy implementation of those principles.

The report of the Secretary-General underlines
the urgency of the issues of the security of
humanitarian personnel and of access to vulnerable
groups. I would like to pay tribute to the commitment
and dedication of humanitarian personnel who are
carrying out indispensable work in often precarious and
even dangerous situations. Humanitarian workers are
too often the victims of hostage-taking and attack.
Such acts or threats often render impossible access to
victims by humanitarian organizations. Safe, rapid and
unimpeded access for humanitarian personnel to
vulnerable persons is a basic condition for
strengthening the protection of civilians. States, which
are the main guarantors of the protection of civilians,
as well as armed groups, must ensure the necessary
access to vulnerable people. That is a primary
responsibility stemming from international
humanitarian law. Switzerland believes that a
structured dialogue between humanitarian players and
armed groups can facilitate access to vulnerable
persons. For that reason, Switzerland supports the
project that was launched by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs at the Inter-
Agency Standing Committee to prepare a manual on
the subject of the terms of engagement with armed
groups.

It is also necessary to remind both local and
expatriate humanitarian personnel that their conduct
towards the beneficiaries of humanitarian assistance
must be beyond reproach. In that regard, we welcome
the promulgation of guiding principles for all United
Nations civilian staff. We also call on humanitarian
agencies and non-governmental organizations active in
this field to adapt their codes of conduct to those
principles and to ensure that they are respected.

Finally, the report of the Secretary-General
reveals the criminalization of the economy of war. It
also indicates that the illicit exploitation of natural
resources continues to feed a number of conflicts
throughout the world. Measures must be taken in this
area, and the report of the Secretary-General provides
various approaches in that regard. I am therefore
pleased to note that the main countries involved in the
production of, or the trade in, diamonds agreed at
Interlaken, Switzerland, last November to launch an
international certification system. That system aims at
combating the illegal trade in diamonds, which is
financing numerous conflicts. The response of the
international community to this challenge must also
aim at raising the awareness of all actors, including
private actors and economic players, and to encourage
them to act responsibly with regard to the basic
principles of international humanitarian law and human
rights law. The first policy dialogue initiated in the
context of the Global Compact has produced
encouraging results. Switzerland will continue to
provide active support for that initiative, which we
believe is moving in the right direction.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
appreciation of the Swiss authorities for all the efforts
that have been undertaken to date, in particular by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. It
is now necessary to implement the recommendations
with determination and in a constructive spirit.
Switzerland would like to assure the international
community and the competent bodies of the United
Nations of its unreserved willingness to cooperate fully
to promote and bring about a culture of protection that
benefits civilian populations.

