Mr. Ouch (Cambodia): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening this open meeting, enabling us to
express our opinion in connection with the Council's
consideration of the East Timor issue. My thanks go as
well to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello; to Mr. Mari
Alkatiri, Chief Minister of the Second Transitional
Government of East Timor; and to the representatives
of the World Bank and the United Nations
Development Programme for their comprehensive
briefings.

I would also express my sincere thanks and
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his detailed
and comprehensive report on East Timor, in document
S/2001/983 of 18 October 2001.

Since the open debate of the Security Council on
the situation in East Timor in July, remarkable progress
has been made as regards the three crucial steps, as
mentioned in the report, towards the accession to
independence of East Timor. On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to take this opportunity to
express our high appreciation to Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his competent leadership and the United
Nations staff for their dedication in accelerating the
process of Timorization.

Mr. Vieira de Mello made his mark during the
peacekeeping operations of the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia, in which he
successfully led the repatriation of more than 360,000
refugees into Cambodia, thus enabling them to enjoy
national reconciliation and integration and to
participate in the elections of May 1993. Today, these
former refugees have been fully integrated into
Cambodian society and enjoy - together with their
brothers and sisters who stayed in Cambodia during the
forcible isolation of the country in the 1980s- the
return to peace and stability and the beginning of
sustainable development. As a country that experienced
war and conflict for many decades before stability
returned in 1998, Cambodia expresses its appreciation
to the people of East Timor, who are now moving
forwarded speedily to draft their own Constitution,
which is a giant step towards independence.

Although the process of Timorization seem to be
going smoothly, I would like to stress that several
conditions must be met to ensure a stable and
prosperous independent East Timor. In particular, good
relations with Indonesia are key to the future survival
of East Timor, as the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) cannot stay
on permanently. The new Government of Indonesia,
under the presidency of Megawati Soekarnoputri, is
democratic and open to reform, and she has
demonstrated its determination to solve the Timor
problem as soon as possible. In this connection, I
believe that the meeting on 12 September this year in
Jakarta between the President of Indonesia and the East
Timorese delegation made a significant step forward
in strengthening neighbourly relations and good
cooperation between the two countries.

In view of its tragic past and its recent
achievements in bringing about peace and stability,
Cambodia's unique experience is an important case
study for East Timor's future. A post-conflict country
like Cambodia or East Timor could be regarded as a
sick person who needs to be treated with drugs, and
sometimes with surgery. In order to prevent an eventual
relapse, regular exercise and a lifestyle conducive to
good health are essential for building up resistance to
illness. This means that with the granting of
independence to East Timor, the international
community should support capacity-building,
rehabilitation, reconstruction of the infrastructure and
reconciliation. Above all, economic and social
development should be given priority, so that stability
and peace prevail in the country.

In order for East Timor to achieve its objectives,
we strongly need to maintain, and expand into a new
era of, partnership with the international community,
which has provided extremely valuable support, both
financial and technical. During the UNTAET period,
East Timor has been fortunate in having the entire
United Nations family and international financial
institutions, including the World Bank, to help it in
achieving these goals. It is important for this
partnership to continue on equal terms after East
Timor's independence. In this connection, my
delegation strongly supports the observations and
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report.

East Timor should also be aware of the role of
civil society, which can contribute a great deal towards
the goals of post-conflict development and growth. An
important component of civil society is the private
sector. In the case of Cambodia, the country has placed
much emphasis on attracting private investment and
has instituted one of the most liberal foreign
investment laws of the region. Private investment is
coming mostly from neighbouring countries of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN),
which are more intrepid in entering post-conflict
countries like Cambodia and East Timor. We hope that
we will soon be able to count East Timor in our midst
as a new and vibrant member of ASEAN, which can
significantly accelerate its economic and social
development. I wish East Timor every success in its
valiant efforts to build a new and modern country.

