Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
wishes to congratulate Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for the high quality of the report
that has just been presented to us (S/2016/407). We also
welcome the presence among us of Mr. Ivica Dacic,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and that of Ms. Vlora
Citaku of Kosovo.

My delegation welcomes the fact that the situation
in Kosovo has remained stable overall despite the tense
atmosphere, as described by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in his report, that surrounded
the appointment of the new President, Mr. Hashim
Thaci. We would like to take this opportunity to
wish Mr. Thaci every success in his new office and
to pay tribute to his predecessor, Ms. Atifete Jahjaga,
for her leadership and her efforts to promote peace
and development.

Senegal welcomes the ongoing dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade, as demonstrated by the meeting
that has just taken place in Brussels between the
two countries. More specifically, my country would
like to welcome the restated commitment of the new
President and Prime Minister to the process of the
normalization of the relationship between Belgrade and
Pristina that has been undertaken under the auspices
of the European Union, and to the comprehensive
implementation of previously reached agreements,
particularly concerning the creation of the Association/
Community of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo.
In that respect, my delegation calls on both parties to
pursue dialogue at the highest level under the auspices
of the European Union and to encourage the relevant
partners and countries and partners to continue to use
their influence to support the negotiations.

We believe that now that the electoral process has
come to a conclusion, the time is ripe to breathe new
life into the discussions between Belgrade and Pristina
in order to definitively turn a page in the history of
both countries. That said, I am pleased to be able to
welcome the two agreements signed by the Government
of Kosovo in August 2015, one with Serbia, on the
establishment of the Association/Community of Serb
majority municipalities in Kosovo, and a second
agreement, with Montenegro, on the demarcation of the
border between the two countries.

The conclusion of a three-phase plan between the
chambers of commerce of Belgrade and Pristina aimed
at harmonizing veterinary certificates and resolving
the technical issues hampering cross-border commerce
also deserve our commendation, as does the signing
by representatives of the Serbian armed forces and the
Kosovo Force of an agreement on the complete lifting
of the air security zone.

We strongly encourage both parties to continue
along this path and to step up dialogue on the
joint management of crossing points, and we urge
stakeholders to make further advances towards
peace and development, including by promoting the
implementation ofthe agreements reached on 25 August
2015 in Northern Kosovo.

In terms ofpromoting the rule oflaw, my delegation
welcomes the announcement of the imminent rollout
of the work of the Specialist Chambers, a Kosovar
institution that will be headquartered in the Netherlands
and comprise international judges with the principal
mandate of trying those responsible for serious crimes
committed either during or immediately following the
conflict in Kosovo.

By the same token, we deem vital that efforts
continue in terms of cooperation and coordination
between the parties in order to facilitate, with the
support of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the return of displaced
persons or, failing that, to work to find lasting solutions
in that respect.

Senegal supports unreservedly the joint European
Union-United Nations programme aimed at enhancing
trust at the community level through the protection of
cultural heritage, and we would recommend the ramping
up of synergies, particularly in terms of cooperation in
the field of information exchange so as to help resolve
issues related to missing persons.

To conclude, my delegation would like once again to
pay tribute to Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his wise leadership of
UNMIK, and to welcome the achievements of the
Kosovo Force, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, and, of course, the European
Union, all of which are key stakeholders involved in
the process ofpromoting peace and progress in Kosovo.

