Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Government of Poland for convening
today's important open debate.

Current challenges to peace and security facing the
world call for a strengthening of the international legal
order and redoubled efforts at all levels to prevent and
resolve conflicts. Strict compliance with the generally
accepted norms and principles of international law
guiding inter-State relations is imperative to that
end. International law requires not just an outcome
that prevents or resolves conflicts; it requires that the
outcome be accompanied by a process that is consistent
with particular norms.

In that context, it is important that frameworks
and mechanisms for conflict prevention and conflict
settlement not be used as a tool to entrench situations
resulting from the unlawful use of force, war crimes,
crimes against humanity, acts of genocide or ethnic
cleansing. It is also critical that the international
community consistently and overwhelmingly oppose
and reject any attempts to cover up or consolidate
aggression and other illegal acts by misinterpreting
international legal norms and principles.

Serious breaches of obligations under general
international law give rise to special consequences,
among other things, the duty of States to cooperate
in order to end a serious breach by lawful means and
not to recognize as lawful a situation created by such
a breach nor render aid or assistance in maintaining
that situation.

Furthermore, apart from preventive efforts and the
peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts as early as
possible, an effective deterrent is undoubtedly to ensure
a speedy end to impunity for violations of international
law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law. Unfortunately, in some situations of
armed conflict, including those of a protracted nature,
wrongs left unpunished and unrecognized continue
to impede progress in achieving long-awaited peace
and reconciliation.

Special attention should be given to the
implementation of resolutions adopted by the principal
organs of the United Nations, in particular those
relating to the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflict prevention and resolution. It is unacceptable
and intolerable that the territories of Member States
remain under unlawful military occupation and that
deliberate actions aimed at changing their demographic
composition and cultural character along racial,
ethnic or religious lines continue, Security Council
resolutions notwithstanding. The established principle
of the inadmissibility of the use of force for the
acquisition of territory and the ensuing obligation of
non-recognition of situations resulting from serious
violations of international law must be applied and
enforced universally and unconditionally.

Azerbaijan's consistent position with regard to the
issue under consideration is well known and stems,
among other factors, from its experience from facing
armed aggression, ethnic cleansing and unlawful foreign
military occupation. In its resolutions 822 (1993), 853
(1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993), the Security Council
acknowledged the fact that acts of military force were
committed against Azerbaijan, that those acts were
incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations
and that they constituted violations of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of my country. In accordance
with international law and the resolutions I have just
mentioned, the political settlement of the conflict and
the achievement of durable peace, security and stability
must be based on the immediate, unconditional and
complete withdrawal of the occupying forces from the
Nagorno Karabakh region and other occupied territories
of Azerbaijan, the restoration of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of my country and the exercise by
internally displaced Azerbaij anis of their right of return
to their homes and properties in safety and dignity.

The duties under concrete policies and actions in
that connection can in no way be replaced with half-
measures introduced as a compromise or used as a
bargaining chip in the conflict-settlement process. The
fulfilment in good faith of the obligations assumed by
States, good-neighbourly relations based on full respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
and the inviolability of their international borders
are necessary prerequisites for the maintenance of
international and regional peace and security and are at
the core of economic cooperation.

