Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation has carefully studied
the report of the Security Council mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that visited the
region of this conflict from 4 to 8 May 2000. We join
in the positive assessment of the work by members of
the mission under the leadership of Ambassador
Holbrooke in pursuance of the Security Council
mandate.

The main outcome of the mission, in our view, is
the confirmation by all parties to the conflict of their
commitment to settling the conflict by peaceful means
on the basis of the Lusaka Agreement. It is
encouraging that the ceasefire agreement is being
respected by all parties so far.

Against that background, we are particularly
concerned over the clashes that occurred on 8 May in
Kisangani between the Ugandan and the Rwandan
forces. In our opinion, the argument that fighting using
that kind of artillery, as a result of which about 100
Congolese civilians were wounded, is not strictly
speaking a violation of the ceasefire in our opinion is
faint consolation, for such incidents at any point could
lead to the resumption of fighting on a broad scale
throughout the country. We attach priority importance
to swift implementation of the agreements between the
Ugandan leadership and the Rwandan leadership on the
demilitarization of Kisangani.

Respect for the ceasefire, the signing with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
of the status-of-forces agreement, and the desire -
seen in contacts with the Security Council mission -
of all those involved in the conflict for swift
deployment of phase II of MONUC must be
accomplished in practice.

We agree with the mission's view that
developments in Sierra Leone should not be allowed to
cloud the international community's responsibility to
assist in the settlement of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. At the same time, we fully support the
mission's recommendation that before the appropriate
decision is taken the Secretary-General should speak
once again to each of the Lusaka parties, at the highest
level, with regard to assisting deployment of
peacekeeping forces in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

At all stages of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Russia has believed that an
integral part of efforts to find a settlement must be the
settling of the problem of the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement of
members of armed groups, including the ex-Rwandan
Armed Forces and the Interahamwe militia. We have
always said that this question must be resolved
peacefully and voluntarily. Detailed discussion of this
matter, together with members of the Political
Committee in mid-June, as is being proposed by
Ambassador Levitte, could help us to move ahead in
finding a solution.

Another key condition for finding a settlement in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is the holding
- pursuant to the Lusaka Agreement - of the inter-
Congolese national dialogue. We regard the start of this
broad dialogue about the future of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as one of the most important
tasks. We understand the desire of most of the parties
to hold the dialogue in Congolese territory, whether it
be in the capital or elsewhere. We think this question
can be resolved by the Congolese parties themselves,
with the participation of the international facilitator of
the inter-Congolese national dialogue, the former
President of Botswana, Mr. Masire.

In conclusion, I would hope that our united
efforts will succeed in achieving the restoration of
peace to the long-suffering land of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and that the recommendations
of the mission will help to that end.

