Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Time and again, we have
warned the Security Council of the dangers of the
continued construction of Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories. Over and above their flagrant
violation of public international law, international
humanitarian law and numerous Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, such activities
have come to constitute the most serious obstacle to
any negotiated political settlement. In fact, with his
recent approval of the construction of 800 new housing
units in the occupied territories, how could anyone
take Mr. Netanyahu's statements that he is ready to
negotiate a political settlement with the Palestinians
more seriously than that of the man who pretends to
negotiate over the sharing of a pizza while he keeps
eating it?

With the ongoing acts of collective punishment,
best illustrated by the systematic campaign of house
demolitions in the West Bank, and the increasingly
inflammatory and provocative rhetoric of Israeli
officials, such as Mr. Naftali Bennett's call for the
kidnapping of Palestinians, the situation on the ground
remains very gloomy indeed. However, I welcome the
meeting convened in Paris at France's initiative on
3 June and the joint communique which reaffirmed
the need to end the Israeli occupation that began in
1967 and which highlighted the importance of the
implementation of the Arab Peace Initiative. We were
encouraged by the mention in the communique of "the
prospect of convening before the end of the year of an
international conference", and would like to stress in
that respect how critical to its success would be the
participation of all directly concerned parties and their
full engagement in the required preparatory works.

Allow me now to recall that on this very day of
12 July, 10 years ago, Israel launched a 33-day war
against my country that according, to a Human Rights
Watch report dated 5 September 2007, resulted in

"at least 1,109 Lebanese deaths, the vast majority

of whom were civilians, 4,399 injured, and an

estimated 1 million displaced".

An important feature of this war was Israel's massive
resort to one ofthe most vicious and disgusting weapons
of all times - cluster bombs. The estimated number
of cluster submunitions fired into my country during
the 2006 war was between 3.2 to 4.6 million, according
to another Human Rights Watch report of 16 February
2008, in which we also read:

"Research in more than 40 towns and villages
found that the IDF's use of cluster munitions
was both indiscriminate and disproportionate, in
Violation of international humanitarian law, and in
some locations possibly a war crime. In dozens of
towns and villages, Israel used cluster munitions
containing submunitions with known high-failure
rates. These left behind homes, gardens, fields and
public spaces - including a hospital - littered
with hundreds of thousands and possibly up to
1 million unexploded submunitions. By their
nature, these dangerous, volatile submunitions
cannot distinguish between combatants and
non-combatants, foreseeably endangering civilians
for months or years to come."

I would like to take this opportunity to also
recall my Government's firm commitment to the
full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), which
helped put an end to the Israeli aggression, and to stress
the need to move from the precarious situation of a
cessation of hostilities to a permanent ceasefire. While
Israel claims to abide by the terms of resolution 1701
(2006) - which first and foremost calls for respect for
Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity - over
the past 10 years it has committed no fewer than 11,856
violations of my country's sovereignty - 8,561 by air,
1,024 by sea, and 2,274 by land. All these violations
have been recorded and documented in tens of letters
addressed to the President of the Security Council and
issued as official documents of the United Nations.
We reiterate today our call on the Security Council to
strongly condemn all these violations and to compel
Israel to put an immediate end to them.

Moreover, Israel continues its occupation of the
northern part of Al-Ghajjar, in violation of Lebanon's
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and in a deliberate
dismissal of the two initiatives launched by the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in 2008 and 2010 to

ensure Israel's withdrawal from that area. We would
also wish to reiterate on this occasion our readiness to
work with the Secretary-General to close the chapter
of the Shab'a Farms and Kfarshouba hills occupation
by Israel and to recall that my Government welcomed
the territorial definition of these farms as published
in his report S/2007/641 of 2007 as a starting point to
address this issue, while Israel has not yet responded to
the Secretary-General on this matter.

In April, I informed the Security Council (see S/PV.7673 Resumption 1) that based on the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and on
paragraph 10 of resolution 1701 (2006), my Government
sought the good offices of the Secretary-General in
the matter of the delineation of the disputed maritime
border and exclusive economic zone between Lebanon
and Israel. Considering the Secretary-General's reply,
we now look forward to the role to be played in that
respect by his Special Coordinator in Lebanon.

Finally, need I recall that during its 2006 war on
Lebanon, in July Israel bombarded the Jiyyeh power
plant, causing an unprecedented oil spill on Lebanese
shores, with heavy environmental impact, especially
on fisheries and biodiversity? This is why, for 10
consecutive years, the General Assembly has adopted,
by an overwhelming majority of States from all regional
and cross-regional groups, a resolution requesting Israel
to offer prompt and adequate compensation to Lebanon
for the damage related to the oil spill it caused. Let me
clarify, in this regard, that the amount of $856 million
adopted by the General Assembly, and which Israel
has been requested to pay in compensation, is simply
drawn from a report of the Secretary-General, which
relied on independent studies, mainly conducted by the
World Bank, to quantify the said damage.

I am sure that Council members will agree that it
is almost impossible to maintain peace and security if
States are not held responsible for their internationally
wrongful acts. It is therefore our firm belief that it is
now the responsibility of the Council, as the main organ
entrusted under the Charter of the United Nations to
maintain peace and security, to act without delay to
ensure that Israel compensate Lebanon for the damage
related to the oil spill it caused.

