President Ondimba (spoke in French): In a
world that remains prey to conflict, preventive
diplomacy is a crucial issue that inspires hope and that
my country considers highly important. I therefore
wish, Mr. President, to commend the positive initiative
taken by your country, Lebanon, in organizing this
debate. I welcome the participation of a number of
eminent persons in the debate. I thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his report (S/2011/552) and
his informative contribution.

In the past two decades, the world has seen a
resurgence of armed conflict, which we thought had
disappeared at the end of the cold war. Those conflicts,
largely intra-ethnic and sometimes both ethnic and
religious in origin, caused thousands of deaths and
internally displaced persons. They also caused
significant material damage to the economic fabric and
jeopardized hope for development.

Faced with that situation, the United Nations has,
since publication in 1992 of the Agenda for Peace by
former Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, very
specifically defined its role and responsibilities in the
settlement of conflict situations. That role involves
both peacekeeping operations and preventive
diplomacy.

At the 2005 world summit, we solemnly renewed
our commitment to promote a culture of preventing
armed conflict, on order to effectively take on the
interdependent challenges of security and development.
For that, we deemed it necessary to strengthen United
Nations capacities in the prevention of armed conflict.

For its part, the Security Council, under the terms
of resolution 1625 (2005), emphasized the need to
adopt a comprehensive strategy on prevention of armed
conflict that would take into account their root causes.
From that perspective, we had to strengthen and
develop strategic partnerships, to ensure the
development of prevention mechanisms and allocation
of resources to preventive diplomacy. However, we
must do even more.

Our collective security requires a greater
mobilization of our common efforts. In that regard it is
more necessary than ever to bolster already existing
partnerships in the area of conflict prevention. It seems
encouraging to us that the United Nations has
considered this imperative in recent decades. Here we
welcome the increasingly frequent dispatch of
mediators, emissaries and joint United Nations-African
11-50916
Union peace missions, as was the case for the Sudan.
That type of partnership, as called for under Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter, merits further
development. In fact, a good understanding of
conditions on the ground where regional arrangements
operate is an indispensable asset for the success of
actions conducted in the framework of preventive
diplomacy.

We also believe that the United Nations and
regional organizations could widely exploit traditional
mechanisms for conflict prevention. We would also
benefit from greater involvement of civil society and
especially women's organizations in the prevention and
resolution of disputes.

With respect to support for regional preventative
mechanisms, we urge that the United Nations,
particularly through its Office to the African Union,
contribute to strengthening the African architecture for
the maintenance of peace, where preventative
mechanisms should have pride of place. In that regard,
regional organizations should be assisted in building up
their early-warning systems. Such systems are
important tools for conflict prevention, if only because
early detection means prompt action, as was the case in
the crises in Kenya and Madagascar.

To a large extent, the success of conflict
prevention will also depend on making use of all the
advantages that it offers and taking into consideration
the specificities of each conflict situation. We remain
convinced that investing in conflict prevention - such
as mediation, analysis and assessment of conflict
risk- will make a significant contribution to
preventing disputes from becoming armed
confrontations. The work of the Peacebuilding
Commission in countries emerging from conflict also
plays a role.

In Central Africa we have put in place not only
channels of cooperation through confidence-building
measures, but also a subregional mechanism for the
detection of preliminary signs of conflict, which we
call the Central African Early Warning Mechanism, the
headquarters of which is in my country. We will ensure
that that tool establishes a true partnership with the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
mostly by supporting capacity-building in conflict
prevention for countries of the subregion.

The performance of our systems of preventive
diplomacy must be based on enhanced human
11-50916
resources. Preventive diplomacy initiatives must also
enjoy predictable financing if we are to maximize our
chances for success. Such initiatives represent a
possible future solution that is more certain and less
costly than peacekeeping operations of the past.

We welcome the fact that economic and financial
institutions are now grasping the connection between
peace and development. It is important to strengthen
partnerships with those institutions, so that they
participate in a more significant way in diplomatic
efforts in conflict prevention. The publication of a
document by the World Bank on this issue is eloquent
proof of the interest our development partners take in
questions of peace and security.

To produce the desired results, our efforts at
preventive diplomacy will require of the parties to a
dispute a manifest will and a genuine commitment to a
political solution to the dispute. International judicial
arbitration is also a possibility, if the parties are willing
to submit to it and to abide by its rulings, as was the
case with Nigeria and Cameroon in the Bakassi case.

In conclusion, in spite of all the options we could
contemplate to detect potential conflicts, any success
risks being limited if particular focus is not put on the
need to attack the underlying causes of conflict.
Governments must, in developing their own national
preventive mechanisms, have the courage to maintain
an ongoing dialogue with all national stakeholders and
to respect the rules of good governance. The peace,
cohesion and stability of States also depend on that
dialogue and respect.

