Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to express Uruguay's gratitude to the Permanent
Mission of the United State of America for holding this
open debate on children and armed conflict. We would
also like to wish that delegation every success in its
presidency of the Security Council. Uruguay would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and to express
its gratitude for the work of his Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui.
We reiterate to her our country's full support for her
mission. Uruguay would also like to underscore the
role of the Executive Director of UNICEF, whose joint
efforts with Ms. Zerrougui is extremely important to
ending child recruitment by security forces or armed
groups by 2016.

During the Council's previous debate on 7 March
(see S/PV.7129), organized by the presidency of
Luxembourg, Uruguay stated its alarm and repulsion at
the impact of armed conflicts on children. Even more
shocking is the confirmed increase of serious violations
of the rights of children. In that regard, Uruguay would
like to thank Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report of 15 May (S/2014/339). We urge countries to
fulfil the recommendations set out in paragraph 4 of
the report, in particular the call to Member States that
have not done so to sign and ratify the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its three Optional Protocols.

Many children, whose number is both alarming
and increasing, are day after day the targets of killings,
sexual violence, rape and recruitment by armies or
armed groups. Added to that are the unacceptable
attacks on schools and the deliberate use of schools for
military purposes, which puts the life and security of
children and their right to education in danger. Even
worse is the confirmation that most children who take
part in armed conflicts are recruited by the very States
of which those children are nationals.

The topic that we are discussing is also on the
agenda of the General Assembly, where my country
tries to play an active role every year. Notwithstanding
that, Uruguay would like to underscore the role that the
Security Council has been playing through the adoption
of various resolutions with the goal of determining
and implementing concrete action to end the illegal
recruitment and exploitation of children in areas of
armed conflict.

It is important to remember, just as in the previous
open debate on this topic, that thanks to the action plans
that arose from the mandate of the Security Council
in this area, in the past 20 years or so thousands of
children have been released from exploitation that
tramples on the human dignity of each human being.
Uruguay would like to underscore once again the value
of resolution 2143 (2014), on the rights of children
during armed conflicts. In particular, we would like
to reiterate our deep concern at the lack of progress
in situations of armed conflict where parties continue
violating with impunity provisions of international law
that provide protection to children.

The Council emphasizes it grave concern in that
resolution, and it demands that the parties involved in
armed and armed groups to respect the norms set out in
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocols of 1977, as well as to refrain from using
schools for military purposes. My country considers
this aspect essential for respecting the rights of the
child enshrined in various instruments, in particular
in article 28 of the Convention on the Rights of Child,
which obliges States to respect their children's right to
education.

It is also important to once again acknowledge the
contribution of the International Criminal Court with
regard to various actions on this topic, in particular by
classifying as war crimes those activities that lead to
sexual violence against children, or the recruitment
or isolation of minors under 15 years, or their use in
hostilities or armed conflicts. Other international
tribunals that have assumed the responsibility to protect
children under their purview merit broader recognition.

Uruguay considers it essential that we support
efforts to fight impunity for all who are responsible
for serious violations against children and urges the
Security Council to refer cases of such violations to the
International Criminal Court. Uruguay also believes
that cooperation with national and international courts
is a basic and essential part of efforts to ensure that
such cases are tried effectively.

Another crucial aspect is ensuring that due
attention is given to the effective reintegration of
children who have been linked to armed groups. In
that regard, effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes are vital to enabling these
children to reintegrate sustainably and successfully
into society.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to repeat
what we said in the previous debate on this subject on
7 March (see S/PV.7129), which is that reintegrating
children into society also involves considering situations
where children have been accused of committing
crimes during their enforced association with armed
groups. Children in such situations should above all be
considered victims themselves, and should be treated
as such under international law in the framework
of a judicial system that makes their complete social
rehabilitation possible.

