Mr. Morales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Malaysia and his delegation for having organized
this open debate and for his concept note (S/2015/402, annex), which contains valuable guidance to focus our
discussions today on those who are most vulnerable, that
is, children. We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, the Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF and the representative
of civil society for their very powerful briefings.

In the past year we have seen a disproportionate
increase in suffering, mass abduction, violent attacks,
the use of children as human shields and in suicide
attacks. Such abuses are not only a violation of
international humanitarian law, refugee law and human
rights law, but also represent an affront to our humanity,
deprive our children of the hope of a better world and
have devastating consequences for victims and their
families, as well as the communities where they live.

There is room for improvement in the Security
Council's comprehensive strategy for protection,
prevention and response vis-a-vis children, who are
at greater risk in armed conflict because they are the
objects of abduction and recruitment by armed groups
and are victims of abuse, rape and sexual exploitation.
We must ensure their rehabilitation and reintegration
through educational and training programmes, in
keeping with the principle of the best interests of the
child and respecting the overriding status of the child
as a victim.

With respect to the release of child soldiers by
armed groups, this is only the first step in the process
of reintegration. We must also address the resulting
trauma so as to prevent any repetition of the cycle of
conflict. In this respect, we urge Governments and
the international community as a whole to ensure
that disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes receive the resources necessary to be able
to function effectively.

We welcome the fact that through the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign, eight Governments have committed
to putting an end to and preventing the recruitment
and use of children in national security forces by the
end of 2016. Accountability is crucial to preventing
such serious violations and must be at the very core of
national and international responses. We must ensure
that the necessary political and financial support is
made available so as to ensure the institutionalization
and sustainability of the progress made to date. We
urge those that have not yet done so to sign and endorse
a United Nations action plan.

We must put an end to the military use of schools by
armed groups. Initiatives such as the Lucens Guidelines
can help to prevent the military use of schools and
universities, as they call on both State and non-State
actors to immediately cease their attacks and threats
against schools and to refrain from actions that hinder
children's access to education. Along these lines, we
welcome the adoption of the Safe Schools Declaration,
on 29 May, in Oslo, Norway.

We firmly condemn the use of explosive weapons
in densely populated urban areas, because this increases
the vulnerability of children, resulting in an increased
number of deaths and incidents of mutilation, as well
as prolonged suffering, destruction and chaos. We
must incorporate provisions concerning the protection
of children in ceasefire negotiations as well as peace
agreements.

We also unreservedly condemn the appalling acts
committed by extremist groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and Boko Haram, as well
as the mass abductions of children carried out in recent
months in Nigeria, Syria and Iraq. We reiterate our call
for the immediate release of the boys and girls who are
still being held captive. In that context, we support the
addition of child abduction as one of the violations that
could trigger listing within the annexes to the Secretary-
General's report on children and armed conflict.

While Guatemala believes that in these reports the
emphasis should be placed on the victims rather than
on the countries involved, we deem regrettable the
inconsistencies contained in the most recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/409), because the serious
human rights violations perpetrated against children in
Gaza, the West Bank and Israel are not mentioned in
the annex to that document. We must be the voice of
the voiceless and ensure for them the protection and
justice that they deserve. In some cases, such as that of
Colombia, we have seen tangible progress in the quest
for peace that will benefit the most vulnerable and that
our region welcomes.

I wish to highlight the importance of Member
States improving their cooperation at every level
through the sharing of intelligence and information so
as to develop best practices to prevent, document and
address violations against children in armed conflict.

The fight against impunity must remain a pivotal
aspect of our efforts, not only in the context of
reacting to grave violations against children but also in
preventing them.

We must take advantage of and improve the tools
available to the Council and use them consistently so as
to ensure that those responsible are brought to justice,
by including them in sanctions regimes, redoubling our
efforts to enhance national capacities in the judicial
sector and strengthening the international justice
framework by, inter alia, referring perpetrators to the
International Criminal Court.

The sentencing of Thomas Lubanga Dyilo and the
referral to the Court of the Bosco Ntaganda case are
clear messages concerning the penal consequences of
child recruitment, which is considered a war crime. We
are in favour of strengthening our dialogue with the
Court and its mandate in this area.

We call on the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to ensure that the armed groups listed
in the annexes to his annual report are informed of such
listings and ensure that action plans are implemented
that are aimed at putting an end to such violations. We
also call upon all Member States that have not yet done
so to sign and ratify the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its three optional Protocols.

