Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
First, we wish to congratulate the newly elected
non-permanent members of the Security Council and
wish them success.

Today we are witnessing various firsts. This is the
first open debate of the Security Council in this first
month of 2017, with Sweden, a small State with the
first declared feminist Government, presiding. Our
thanks go to Minister Wallstrom for her introductory
words and for convening this meeting. This is also the
first meeting with Secretary-General Guterres, who
has been insisting on the importance of preventive
diplomacy. It is high time to hear fresh and innovative
arguments about what is already a long-standing topic
of debate.

When I have the opportunity to show the United
Nations to my guests, an obligatory stop is the
disarmament section of the displays on the third floor
behind the General Assembly, where a bubble chart is
displayed, which makes a graphic comparison between
the global budget for militarization, the regular budget
of the United Nations, the size of official development
aid and the budget for disarmament. There is nothing
more discouraging for the peace agenda than comparing
the sizes of the bubbles, which show that we have our
priorities inverted.

The efforts of the international community for
peacekeeping operations are mostly directed through
military agreements. Instead, resources should be
directed largely to actions for conflict prevention. As
Secretary-General Guterres said, development is the
best antidote to conflict. An increase in preventive
diplomacy would ensure linkages between the three
pillars of the United Nations and would focus on where
they intersect. There is no issue that has a more negative
impact on the United Nations reputation vis-a-vis the
public than its inability to prevent atrocities. How can
we therefore move from an eminently reactive Security
Council agenda to a proactive agenda? How can we
move from reacting to crises to preventing conflicts?

The Charter of the United Nations promises to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war. Fortunately, wars among States are becoming
increasingly fewer, but we are seeing a critical situation
around the world owing to the rise of complex and
violent conflicts, which extend beyond borders and
trigger massive displacements of people and have led
to large-scale human rights violations, with women,
children and girls as the main victims.

That situation, which is significantly different from
what the Organization faced 70 years ago, requires
effective preventive action by the Security Council as
the guarantor of peace. Article 33 of the Charter refers
to instruments designed to settle conflicts through
peaceful means, which, as the Security Council itself
acknowledged in resolution 2171 (2014), are not used
sufficiently. Among those instruments is the recognition
of the role that women play in peacekeeping. That role
should be substantially increased.

Similarly, we are at the threshold of new leadership
in the person of the Secretary-General. Now is the time,
therefore, to lay the groundwork for effective interaction
with the Security Council that prioritizes analysis
and early warnings, which could lead to preventive
political missions. To do that, we must strengthen
our relationship with the Human Rights Council and
make that tie constant and close. That body, through
its reports and resolutions, can facilitate the work of
the Security Council by providing early warnings of
human rights violations.

For complex problems, there are no linear
solutions, but rather multisectoral ones. There is no
horizontal or vertical approach, but a matrix-oriented
approach. Panama has been insisting on the need for a
change in the paradigm so that ethics can provide the
main criterion that the Organization uses in order to
humanize its agendas, promote solidarity and make
the action of all United Nations bodies transparent, in
particular the Security Council.

In order to effectively prevent conflicts and move
towards lasting peace, the Security Council needs to
have a stronger analytical capacity and be proactive
with regard to preventing potential risks. The Council
should involve the parties to conflicts or parties
potentially at risk in the elaboration of comprehensive
implementation, monitoring and resource-allotment
strategies. Involving parties bolsters trust and ultimately
provides stronger guarantees of peace. The Security
Council should have a more balanced power structure,
so that narrow interests do not prevail, which only
makes it more difficult to have an independent analysis
in the search for solutions. The Security Council should
also work hand in hand with other bodies of the United
Nations system.

Today we have an opportunity to establish new
standards and to create a vision in which the United
Nations maintains leadership in comprehensive
strategies to assist the parties to conflict or parties who
are potentially at risk, thereby ensuring international
peace and security, an essential ingredient for the
fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, with which we are striving to transform
the world.
