Mr. VotO-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome you, Sir, as you preside over this debate in
your capacity as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the State of Qatar. I thank
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his praiseworthy
efforts in offering the Council a broad and detailed
overview of the problems in the Middle East. That
overview is outlined in the report (S/2006/956) before
the Council today, which should lead us to promote a
resumption of the peace process in that region.

In that regard, and as has been reflected in the
discussions held regularly by the Council, the lack of a
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict continues to be a
source of frustration and instability in the region. In
that regard, a comprehensive approach is needed to
resolve the various crises and conflicts in the region.
First of all, the parties directly involved must take
constructive steps to ease tensions and generate an
appropriate climate for the restoration of peace. Efforts
of support by the international community will be
viable only if the regional players display the political
will to move the process forward.

The main objective should be to put an end to the
occupation of Palestinian territories by establishing
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace, in accordance with Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) and the Road
Map defined by the Quartet and endorsed by the
Council in resolution 1515 (2003).

The weakening of political institutions and the
lack of cohesion in the Palestinian Government since
the beginning of 2006 seriously jeopardize the peace
process. Extremist groups have taken advantage of the
situation to launch terrorist attacks against civilian
populations in Israel. Understandably and justifiably,
the Israeli authorities have been obliged to respond to
those acts of aggression. However, and to avoid a
repetition of events like those we saw again in
November, that right must be exercised responsibly,
avoiding causalities among the civilian population and
avoiding the destruction of civilian infrastructure.

The recent ceasefire in the Gaza Strip agreed to
between Israeli Prime Minister Olmert and Palestinian
President Abbas has led to new hope that the path of
negotiations will replace that of Violence. We hope that
this first step will be further consolidated and extended
to the West Bank, in order to promote the action and
leadership of those, in Israel and in Palestine, who
advocate a negotiated solution.

For its part, Lebanon, following the tragic armed
confrontation that occurred this year and that led to
enormous loss of human life and property, also holds a
new opportunity for resolving a number of pending
problems among the Lebanese themselves.

Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) renews
the possibility of addressing the root causes which
have kept that country from achieving stability and
sovereignty over its territory. That is also an
opportunity for promoting peaceful coexistence and
working towards a resolution to the conflict with
Israel.

In addition, the question of the occupation of the
Syrian Golan is still pending. The doors to negotiation
between those parties must also be opened if a solution
is to be achieved. The experience of this year's war has
only underscored the close interrelationship among the
various hotbeds of conflict. We need a comprehensive
approach that will enable us to make parallel progress
towards resolving the various conflicts.

We reiterate our conviction that the conflicts in
the Middle East can be resolved only through political
negotiation and on the basis of agreements reached by
the parties and recognized by the international
community. There are no lasting unilateral solutions. In
that regard, and as the Secretary-General notes in
paragraph 44 of his report, "The Quartet retains its
relevance because of its combination of legitimacy,
political strength and economic influence".

We appreciate the Secretary-General's appeal to
the Quartet to be open to new ideas and initiatives.
Similarly, the Road Map is the point of reference to be
used for any initiative aimed at resuming the peace
process between Israel and Palestine. Therefore, Peru
echoes the appeal of the Secretary-General for the
international community to engage with the parties
concerned in order to reach a final settlement of the
Middle East problem.

