Mr. Okamura (Japan): Let me first express
my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate. My gratitude also goes to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his last but, as
usual, comprehensive briefing today. Japan appreciates
Mr. Haysom's tireless efforts during the past two years
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and commends his achievements.

Today, I will start with a cultural aspect. Until
two days ago, a special exhibition, entitled "Hidden
Treasures from the National Museum in Kabul",
was on display in Tokyo. There on display were 231
ancient art works from Afghanistan, enjoyed by more
than 200,000 museum visitors in Fukuoka and Tokyo.
In front of the National Museum in Kabul, there is a
small board with a message: "Our nation stays alive
when its culture stays alive". I heard that many visitors
to the special exhibition in Tokyo were impressed
by that message, thinking about the long history of
Afghanistan and hoping for peace and stability in
that country. The preservation of the Afghan cultural
heritage has been one of the main areas of Japan's
assistance to Afghanistan. Since 2003, Japan has been
undertaking a project entitled "Safeguarding of the
Cultural Landscape and Archaeological Remains of
the Bamiyan Valley", through the UNESCO/Japanese
Funds-in-Trust Trust for the Preservation of World
Cultural Heritage.

Afghanistan is rich, not only in culture, but also in
agricultural and mineral resources. However, they are
not fully accessed or utilized due to such obstacles as
security concerns and underdeveloped infrastructure.
It is very regrettable that civilian casualties in the first
quarter of 2016 were the highest on record since 2009.
Our assistance programmes on the ground cannot be
implemented in their full scale because ofAfghanistan's
fragile security situation. Japan understands that
Afghanistan is under the threat of violent extremism.
At the same time, it is crucial for Afghanistan to realize
economic and social self-reliance and sustainable
growth so that it can overcome the root causes of
terrorism and violent extremism. All the commitments
made by the Government of Afghanistan must be
translated into action.

In March, at the debate on UNAMA, Mr. Haysom
said, "For 2016, survival will be an achievement
for the National Unity Government" (S/PV7645, p. 2). Indeed, 2016 is crucial for Afghanistan and the
international community. Japan intends to contribute
to achieving successful outcomes at the Brussels
conference in October, which will be an important
milestone for the development of Afghanistan. The
Afghan Government and the donors have been working
towards consolidating the Afghanistan National Peace
and Development Framework to help ensure the success
of the Brussels conference. Among the priorities listed
in the Framework, we highly value agriculture, energy
and improving economic connectivity. With a view
to ensuring the transparency and accountability of
assistance, it is our hope that the opinions of the donors
will be taken into account in the Framework.

Afghanistan has thrived at the crossroads of
civilizations since ancient times. Now we place
Afghanistan at the heart of Asia, which invites regional
cooperation for a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
Japan is determined, together with the international
community, to continue supporting the Afghan
Government's endeavour for peace and prosperity and
to contribute to promoting economic cooperation and
integration in the region.

In conclusion, I once again express my sincere
gratitude to Mr. Haysom for his efforts in extremely
difficult circumstances. In particular, Mr. Haysom
successfully established a communication channel
with the National Unity Government and has strongly
supported its reform endeavours in such areas as
humanitarian assistance, electoral reform, coordination
of development assistance and anti-corruption. I wish
Mr. Haysom all the best in his future career, and Japan
intends to continue supporting UNAMA's activities
under the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General as well.

