Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to welcome Judge
Carmel Agius and congratulate him on his appointment
as President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals on 19 January 2019, bearing in
mind that this is the first time that he has appeared to
briefthe Security Council. We also welcome Prosecutor
Serge Brammertz. We thank the both of them for their
extensive briefings on the work of the International
Residual Mechanism over the past six months.

Aware of the budgetary challenges facing the
International Residual Mechanism of Criminal Tribunals
as a result of the budgetary reductions approved by the
General Assembly in July 2018, we applaud the efforts
that the Mechanism continues to make in the timely
conclusion of the pending legal work and the fulfilment
of its mandate in the most efficient and effective way
possible, taking into account the need to ensure respect
for due process and the fundamental rights of accused
and convicted persons under its jurisdiction.

In that regard, we applaud the President's efforts to
improve the dynamics of interaction and cooperation
between the two branches that make up the Mechanism
by seeking to unify their criteria, as well as its records
system, both in Arusha and in The Hague. There is no
doubt that achieving a uniform management approach
will have a positive impact on the operations of
the Mechanism.

My country welcomes the will expressed in the
Mechanism's new approach, in which it will seek the
opinions of the States concerned, in particular those of
the former Yugoslavia, because the relevant provision
on evaluating the early release of convicted persons
was not included in the mandate of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Convicted persons could be considered for early release
on condition that they have served at least two thirds of
their sentences.

We welcome the momentum with which the
President has begun, with the numerous meetings
he has held with the staff of the Mechanism, thereby
encouraging a spirit of harmony among them, the
plenary sessions with thejudges and the large number of
orders issued - all of which are proof of his dedication
and great dynamism. With regard to the commitment
to take action on gender issues, we emphasize that we
do not disagree, but we hope that these actions will be
implemented in a way that ensures that the Mechanism
does not deviate from its initial mandate or require an
increase in the already reduced budget.

We also note that the reporting period was
characterized by an elevated number of judicial
activities that were carried out, even if much more
remains to be done, although we certainly commend
the programmatic efforts to see all the pending cases
concluded by the end of 2020 so as to fully take up the
residual cases in the year 2021.

Bearing in mind that the success of the work
of the Mechanism depends to a large extent on the
full cooperation of States, especially with regard to
operations relatedto tracking, arresting and surrendering
fugitives and to relocating released persons, we call
on those States Members of the United Nations to
step up their willingness to increase the much-needed
assistance to the Mechanism, as required by resolution
2422 (2018). We take this opportunity to join those who
have preceded us in applauding the commitment of all
those countries that continue to support and cooperate
consistently with the Mechanism, whether in the
enforcement of sentences or in other areas of interest.

In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
reaffirms its strong commitment to strengthening the
rule of law and promoting justice, by supporting the
Mechanism in all aspects of its work as an instrument
of the Security Council for administering justice and
putting an end to impunity, thereby achieving the
desired international peace and security. Finally, we
thank the Mission of Peru for continuing to chair the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals in
a transparent, efficient and dynamic manner.

