Mr. Reina Idiaquez (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for me to take part, for the
first time, in a Security Council meeting, one focusing
on small arms and light weapons and their negative
impact on economic and social development in many
developing countries, on a consideration of this
complex problem and on a review of our action to
make it possible to decide how to avert the destructive,
inhumane effects of these weapons and reduce the
violence to which they give rise in economically
disadvantaged countries and societies.

I congratulate you, Sir, on this important
initiative during your presidency of the Council during
the month of April.

It is a fact that small arms and light weapons have
the most devastating impact in the poorest and
economically most disadvantaged countries. Past
conflict in the Central American region has led to the
presence of incalculable quantities of weapons, both
commercial and military, that are neither controlled nor
registered. Their price is low, they are easy to
transport, store and trade illegally. Most such weapons
are disseminated through clandestine distribution
nodes, and they are used by criminal groups and
organizations seeking to undermine social order, which
use them, indiscriminately, against civilians.

Honduras has not been spared the negative effects
of such weapons, and our Government has had to adopt
national, regional and international measures to address
a long-standing problem that has compromised national
security in many countries. At the national level, over
the past approximately five years, our authorities have
focused on ensuring strict compliance with national
legislation to regulate the civilian possession of
weapons and to set up a reliable database on the
quantity of such weaponry in our country. At present,
more than 151,000 small arms and light weapons have
been registered at the national level. But, despite
Government commitment and joint efforts with civil
society, it has been impossible to exercise total control
of these weapons.

The question of arms trafficking is a complex one
to begin with, and it is made more so by regional
organized crime in Central America, which takes
advantage of the free movement of persons, goods and
capital to transport arms of various sizes, with criminal
intent. This clearly indicates that the problem goes
beyond the national framework and must therefore be
addressed at the regional and subregional levels.
Additionally, a matter of key importance from the
strategic point of View is that the strengthening of
democracy in Central America saw the demobilization
of portions of the regular armies. This demobilization
process was not carried out properly; it left thousands
of officers and tens of thousands of soldiers
unemployed and without resources. This had the
negative effect of abandoning what we might call
qualified labour; some such people ended up being
recruited into organized crime.

From this, we learn that, if not carried out
properly, the praiseworthy process of democratization
and army demobilization in Central America can have
negative impacts. Central America's experience shows
what should not be done.

At the regional level, in the framework of the
Organization of American States, Honduras has signed
the Inter-American Convention Against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials,
which entered into force in 1998 in the Latin American
region. Thus, in a regional context, we are seeking to
put in place substantive measures to facilitate
cooperation among States, including through, inter alia,
better exchanges of information and experience in the
areas of categorization of crimes; marking of weapons;
verification of licenses for arms imports; and technical
cooperation and assistance. My country, Honduras,
endorsed the Antigua Guatemala Declaration of the
Regional Preparatory Meeting of the Latin American
and Caribbean States for the United Nations
Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its
Aspects.

Within the United Nations system, we are party to
the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
We understand the scope of the Protocol and the
Convention and the commitments we have undertaken.

I wish in conclusion to emphasize that we are
taking part in this debate in a constructive spirit;
through the Council, we reaffirm our commitment to
and support for the Office for Disarmament Affairs and
its activities in this sphere. We also hail Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his spirit of renewal and his
vigorous action to promote the fulfilment of
international commitments on small arms and light
weapons.
