Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we wish to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of both International Tribunals for the
reports they have submitted to us.

It is important to recognize that, as we enter the
final stage of the lengthy work completed by the
Tribunals, the balance sheet certainly appears to be
positive. Both Tribunals have made progress on the
tasks entrusted to them of bringing peace, justice and
reconciliation to the Great Lakes and the Balkan
regions.

We congratulate all their personnel, and we thank
them for their efforts. And today we wish to offer very
special thanks to Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte for all her
work and to wish her every success in her future
endeavours.

We take note of the cooperation of the Serbian
authorities in the detention of Mr. Tolimir and
Mr. Djordjevic, both indicted by the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Serbia is to be
commended for that cooperation and must now attempt
to capture the individuals who remain at large,
including Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic. Our
delegation also recognizes the cooperation of the
German authorities in ensuring the detention of
Augustin Ngirabatware in September, who had been
sought by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda since 2001.

Although the Tribunals were not created as
permanent institutions, their work must be completed
in full. It is very important, therefore, that they have

the judicial and administrative staff and infrastructure
necessary to ensure that their residual functions can be
completed with the same degree of diligence we have
witnessed in their work to date. We note and are
grateful for the studies and proposals prepared by the
Tribunals with respect to residual matters. We agree
that the Council must give serious consideration to
those functions so as to provide jurisdictional
mechanisms to address the cases and judicial
processing of fugitives who are apprehended after
2010. We must also look carefully to such issues as the
protection of witnesses, without whom the cases under
way may be affected.

Finally, we consider it of great importance to pay
heed to the considerations and concerns expressed by
both Tribunals with regard to retaining experienced
staff. Undoubtedly, that issue can have a negative
impact on the Tribunals' work. We recognize and are
grateful for the measures taken this year by the
Secretariat in that respect, and urge it take any
additional steps necessary to ensure that the Tribunals
have adequate personnel for the timely completion of
their work.

