Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and Ambassadors
Sangqu and Wittig, for the respective briefings. I also
commend your leadership as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee.

During the latest reporting period, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) continued to work
towards fully implementing resolution 1373 (2001) and
undertook significant work to that end. With the help of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), the Committee is now considering how to
improve work related to the preliminary implementation
assessments and is soon to hold a special meeting on
preventing and suppressing terrorist financing. China
welcomes that development. We support the various
CTC initiatives, such as the organizing of regional
workshops and relevant activities in providing technical
assistance through CTED. We hope that the Committee
will continue to engage in dialogue with Member States
and to help them to strengthen their counter-terrorism
capacity.

China supports the sound and steady work of the
1540 Committee to achieve the goals of resolution
1540 (2004) in a comprehensive, balanced and
effective way and to help Member States to fulfil their
relevant obligations. We hope that the Committee
will successfully undertake its second annual review.
We are pleased about the establishment of the group
of experts and welcome those experts who have taken
office. China is ready to actively participate alongside
other parties in the Committee's work to promote the
international non-proliferation agenda.

The Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee has continued
to strengthen its relevant work on listing, delisting
and updating the sanctions list and has made
extensive efforts to comprehensively implement
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011). China views
positively the relevant efforts of the Committee to
periodically update the sanctions list, as provided for,
and to strengthen its dialogue with Member States.
China welcomes the support provided to the Committee
by the Monitoring Team and notes the work undertaken
by the Office of the Ombudsperson to safeguard the
impartiality and transparency of the sanctions regime.
We hope that Member States will actively cooperate
with the Committee in order to preserve the authority
and effectiveness of the sanctions regime.

Terrorism is a common scourge faced by the
international community. As a victim, China is opposed
to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and
opposes the practice of double standards with regard to
counter-terrorism. China supports the United Nations
and the Security Council in playing a leading role in
international counter-terrorism cooperation, including
enhanced cooperation among the various bodies.

We hope that the international community will
continue to cooperate in our joint efforts to prevent and
to combat terrorism.

