Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation is delighted to see you, Sir, presiding over
the Security Council, perhaps for the second time on
the same subject. This provides a certain continuity
that is a source of confidence and pleasure for us.

In taking up the consequences of Iraqi aggression
against the State of Kuwait, the Security Council
enacted resolution 687 (1991), which included
principal elements, such as eradicating weapons of
mass destruction, boycotting the regime, freeing
Kuwaiti and non-Kuwaiti prisoners, the return of
Kuwaiti property, as well as measures to ease the effect
of sanctions on the Iraqi people.

Eight years after the adoption of that resolution,
years characterized by varying levels of disagreement
and controversy on implementation between the United
Nations and Iraq, focusing essentially on the issue of
weapons of mass destruction and the humanitarian
aspects of the boycott, there has been a total neglect of
prisoners of war and Kuwaiti property. Following those
eight years, the Security Council enacted resolution
1284 (1999) which sought on the one hand to ease
implementation and on the other to again shed light on
the issues of prisoners and properties.

In resolution 1284 (1999) the Security Council
showed that it was prepared for further cooperation
with Iraq, in that it showed much flexibility on the four
main dossiers relating to weapons of mass destruction,
while it clearly showed an easing on the humanitarian
effects of the sanctions regime.

The Security Council had hoped that in meeting
Iraq halfway, the effects of its aggression on the State
of Kuwait would finally be overcome. Despite the fact
that there has been documented recognition of the State
of Kuwait from time to time, there are strange
references that cast doubt on the existence of such
recognition. The Security Council tried to create a
positive environment in dealing with Iraq by adopting
its second major resolution, resolution 1284 (1999), a
resolution inspired by the experience resulting from the
implementation of the first major resolution, resolution
687 (1999). So the resolution did not come out of a
vacuum. Its objective was to improve dealings between
the two parties in order to move forward with the issue
and finally resolve it.

What was the result? Regrettably, it was not
encouraging. The situation on the ground has not
shown any movement whatsoever. Iraq states that most,
if not all, the dossiers on weapons of mass destruction
are closed or nearly closed. If that is true, why can it
not be officially certified by the United Nations
following verification by the Commission created in
resolution 1284 (1999)? That commission, the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC), whose Chairman and other
members are said to be neutral and above all the
suspicions that were directed against the Chairman and
some of the members of the Commission's predecessor,
the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM).
Iraq states that it has no Kuwaiti prisoners. However, it
states in turn that there are Iraqi missing persons. It is
difficult for us to understand this statement that there
are no Kuwaiti prisoners. The case file on each of those
persons is fully documented and shows that they have
disappeared, and that they are in Iraq. In order to
resolve this issue, Iraq merely has to cooperate with the
coordinator of the Secretary-General, who was
appointed for that purpose, and has to participate in the
activities of the international committee created for that
purpose.

Finally, we have no need to take up the
humanitarian aspect of the sanctions. Many
improvements have been made to the regime in order
to satisfy the needs of the Iraqi people. So where is the
problem in trying to eliminate the remaining effects of
Iraq's occupation of the State Kuwait, although more
than nine years have passed since the end of the
occupation and the liberation of Kuwait? We, the States
of the region, believe that it is not natural for us to live
in a situation of see-sawing between peace and war. We
have major responsibilities towards our peoples,
responsibilities and obligations in the domains of
political, economic and social development. We also
have the responsibility of creating conditions ensuring
the success of these plans for development. We cannot
say with any degree of certainty that such conditions
currently exist.

Ultimately, we must call for constructive and
genuine cooperation between the Security Council and
Iraq. We must work to find a solid foundation for such
cooperation. That necessarily requires Iraq's
implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions. In return, the Security Council must be
prepared to lift the embargo against Iraq when the main
dossiers on weapons of mass destruction are closed and
when the issue of Kuwaiti prisoners of war, prisoners
of other nationalities and Kuwaiti properties are
resolved.

