Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Mr. President, our meeting
today takes on particular importance for several reasons,
and it does not require a major leap of the imagination to
understand why. First, we are honoured to see you, Sir,
preside over our deliberations, and my delegation would
like to express its most profound gratitude to your
delegation for all the contributions it continues to make in
the quest for a lasting solution to the complex problem of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The convening of this meeting
provides clear testimony to those efforts.

Secondly, we are greatly honoured by the gracious
presence of the three members of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Joint Presidency, and therefore my delegation
would like to join previous speakers in extending a warm
welcome to them and to thank them for finding time to
attend this meeting.

Thirdly, holding this meeting today - the eve of the
fourth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords - could
not be more timely.

Last but not least, the delegation of the Gambia also
acknowledges the presence of an impressive gathering of
United States Congresswomen and Congressmen. The
United Nations as a whole needs such interaction with the
United States Congress. It is a mutually beneficial
relationship, and we invite them to come again and to
attend more United Nations meetings, We thank
Ambassador Holbrooke for taking this laudable initiative.

Having heard from all the Members of the Joint
Presidency, we can say without any fear of contradiction
that we are all on the same wavelength. In other words,
there is no alternative to Dayton. Dayton shows the way
forward towards the ultimate goal of a multi-ethnic, multi-
cultural society in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We note with
great satisfaction that the Joint Presidency reaffirmed its
commitment to the Dayton Accords. The adoption of the
New York Declaration is ample demonstration of this
commitment.

We are nonetheless mindful of the fact that whilst
efforts are being made for the smooth implementation of
the Dayton Accords, the anti-Dayton forces are also
active. These forces of evil and darkness, as Ambassador
Holbrooke calls them, must be challenged and neutralized.
This is why it is important also to cooperate sincerely
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia to bring to justice those indictees who are still
at large. Unless and until they are pursued and brought to
justice, there can be no lasting peace. The process of
healing is incomplete without justice being done. This
will also guarantee the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in Europe, among other things. In this connection, we
welcome the establishment of a State border service as
part of the strategy in the fight against corruption. Thus,
the importance of the State border service cannot be over-
emphasized.

Similarly, the intention of the Joint Presidency to
create a permanent secretariat is also a step in the right
direction. Equally worthy of notice is the Joint
Presidency's reaffirmation of support for the adoption of
the permanent election law.

With the reduction of military spending by 15 per
cent, as agreed by all the parties, we hope that the
resulting savings will be spent in more productive areas,
such as making proper arrangements for the return of
refugees. This is one area where we need to redouble
efforts. But again, in the final analysis, a lot depends on
the attitude of the leadership as a whole. The concept of
ownership comes into play yet again. The rest of the
international community can only assist. The people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and their leaders have the final
say on how to shape their common destiny.

The Joint Presidency understands that the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is in Europe. But what does it
take for Bosnia and Herzegovina to play its rightful role
in Europe and, indeed, in the comity of nations? In our
view, there is only one answer: giving a sense of purpose
to their common institutions, as emphasized by
Ambassador Greenstock. There is no other way.

Finally, we join those who spoke before us in
mourning the victims of the recent air disaster in Kosovo,
and we extend our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved
families.

 

