Ms. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
presenting her nineteenth report in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005).

Argentina deplores the continued violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law in
Darfur. In resolution 2138 (2014), adopted in February,
the Security Council noted that it was imperative that
all parties refrain from any violence against civilians,
in particular vulnerable groups such as women and
children, and from committing violations and abuses
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law. In the same resolution, the Council deplored
the continuing obstacles to the work of the Panel of
Experts and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and called on the
Sudanese Government to lift the state of emergency in
Darfur and to ensure accountability for serious crimes.

Argentina once again commends the Office of the
Prosecutor's focus on monitoring the crimes currently
being committed, including aerial bombardments
affecting civilians, which are clearly referred to in
resolution 2138 (2014); ground attacks against civilians,
which have escalated since February; continuing
sexual and gender-based violence, which has become
a prominent element of the conflict in Darfur; attacks
on human rights and civil society activists; kidnappings
of and attacks on humanitarian workers and UNAMID
staff; obstacles to access for humanitarian assistance and
peacekeeping personnel; and the forced displacement
of civilians, who now include 250,000 newly displaced,
thus bringing the number of internally displaced persons
in Darfur to 2 million people. Argentina, as always,
encourages the Prosecutor to continue to investigate
such acts, which may qualify as crimes under the Rome
Statute, and takes this opportunity to recognize the
value of the policy paper on sexual and gender-based
crimes published by the Office of the Prosector.

Another crucial aspect that the Prosecutor usually
highlights in her reports on Darfur is, of course, that
of cooperation. The Sudanese Government is required,
under resolution 1593 (2005), to cooperate with the
Court and render all assistance necessary. The States
parties to the Rome Statute are obliged to cooperate
under that instrument. But the resolution also urges
all other United Nations Member States and members
of regional organizations to cooperate with the Court.
Implementing the arrest warrants is an essential element
of that cooperation. Currently, the arrest warrants
issued by the Court since 2007 on charges of genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity have still not
been implemented. Argentina regrets the position taken
by the Government of the Sudan vis-a-vis the Court,
since the Sudan's own citizens continue to be victims
of serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

It is also regrettable that other States, including
States parties to the Rome Statute, have disregarded their
obligation to cooperate with the Court. Consequently,
Argentina again urges all States to act as pursuant
to the Rome Statute, and also calls on regional and
subregional organizations, as presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/l2 notes, to cooperate with the Court in
order to prevent impunity from prevailing.

The issue of cooperation with the Court leads
directly to the follow-up by the Council of its referrals
to the ICC. The Prosecutor herself recalls in her
briefing the Court's eight communications to the
Council on cases of non-cooperation. It is of concern
that none of those has received an answer or has been
acted upon by the Council. In its presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/2, the Council committed to an effective
follow-up of referrals to the Court. To date, however,
despite the efforts of many Council members, it has
not been possible to reach an understanding on the
mechanism for that follow up. We again urge all Council
members to advocate for the responsible follow-up of
the referrals, since this body cannot ignore its referrals
to the Court.

Both General Assembly resolution 67/295 and
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/5 recognize the
issuance by the Secretary-General of guidelines on
non-essential contacts with officials ofthe Organization
by persons who are the subject of arrest warrants of
the International Criminal Court. That is due to the
recognition of the crucial role of cooperation with the
Court for the success of its mandate, including in cases
of referrals by the Security Council.

Argentina, not in its capacity as a State party to
the Statute but as a Member of the Organization, has
always maintained that the Secretary-General must
ensure the strict implementation of the guidelines. In
that regard, my country agrees with the Prosecutor
on the need for a rigorous assessment of the necessity
of every such contact in order to comply with United
Nations mandates. Furthermore, any contact that is
deemed essential following such an assessment must
be brought to the attention of the Court before it takes
place. We also encourage the Secretary-General to
inform Member States, which adopt such mandates.

Such measures are necessary because contacts with
United Nations officials, in particular senior officials
and field staff, including as part of a peacekeeping
operation, could not only affect the Court but also
fundamentally undermine the credibility of the United
Nations. We are also concerned about the Prosecutor's
statement with regard to the way in which UNAMID's
reporting of crimes committed against civilians and
peacekeeping forces may have been handled. We
believe that it is imperative that the Secretary-General
investigate such allegations.
As on every occasion that the Council talks about
the International Criminal Court, allow me recall that
there are two aspects of referrals to the Court, including
in the case of Darfur, with which Argentina does not
agree. One is the exception of the Court's jurisdiction
for nationals of States not party to the Rome Statute and
the other is the statement that the United Nations will
not bear the costs of the referral. Argentina's position in
that regard is well known. I will therefore not reiterate
it but will, however, repeat that both such matters are
not in compliance with the Rome Statute.

The Court is an institution that was founded on the
common understanding that serious crimes should not
go unpunished and that justice and the punishment of
perpetrators help to prevent such crimes. I therefore
wish to commend the work of the Prosecutor and of her
Office on the follow-up of this referral by the Security
Council. I thank her for her continuing readiness to
dialogue with the Council. Finally, I would like to once
again reaffirm Argentina's strong commitment to the
International Criminal Court.

