Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in South Sudan and the ongoing peace process
since the publication of the Secretary-General's 90-day
progress report (8/2018/831), on 11 September.

As the Council is aware, there have been several
developments, most important the signing, on
12 September, of a revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The revitalized peace Agreement is the result of
recent intensive engagement by leaders of the immediate
region, supported by the international community, to
bring about an inclusive and comprehensive resolution
to the crisis in the country.

I commend the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), supported by the African Union
(AU) and its international partners, for its sustained
efforts to restore peace in South Sudan. The unity
of purpose demonstrated by that collective group is
indeed what contributed to that progress, including
by impressing upon the parties that a military solution
will not deliver sustainable peace. While Special
Representative Haysom and Special Envoy Wais
will provide a detailed assessment of the revitalized
Agreement, let me just say that its signing is an
important milestone in a crisis that is now entering its
fifth year.

Much like the 2015 Agreement, the revitalized
Agreement, by and large, provides a road map for peace
through reform, political transformation, security, social
and economic development and national reconciliation.
All the ingredients for success are present. However,
there are legitimate questions and concerns about the
commitment of the parties, and many practical aspects
related to the implementation of the Agreement still
require clarification. Despite those concerns, the need
for peace in South Sudan is so urgent that we must
seize this opportunity and work together to make the
Agreement a basis for lasting peace.

Moving forward, the onus of ensuring the
implementation of the Agreement will, of course, be on
the parties. It will be crucial for the parties, notably
the Government of South Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition, to build
trust and muster the political will to work together to
ensure a more protective environment that will allow
all South Sudanese stakeholders, including women,
to meaningfully engage in the full implementation
of the Agreement. A full and immediate cessation of
hostilities is an imperative first step.

In that regard, it is of great concern that, within
days of the signing of the Agreement, there have been
reports offighting in Central Equatoria and Unity states.
In particular, on 16 September in Central Equatoria,
heavy clashes are said to have taken place in Jamula
Centre and Mbudu in Kopera county. Hostilities were
also reported in Kendiri and Mangalatore in Kajo-Kaji,
on 13 September. Reports indicate that those hostilities
are in response to alleged Government attempts to
install local authorities in opposition-controlled areas.
Both sides appear to have mobilized reinforcements to
support those operations to secure territory.

On 15 September, small-scale clashes were also
reported around Nying, in Guit county in Unity state,
between Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA)
in Opposition forces and Taban Deng Gai-aligned
forces. Those incidents are reportedly associated with
a push by Taban Deng to consolidate influence in his
stronghold of Guit county. We remain concerned about
the potential for further clashes where Government and
opposition forces are in close proximity, particularly
in parts of Central and Western Equatoria, Unity and
Western Bahr el-Ghazal. In advance of the integration
of Taban Deng's forces into the SPLA, we also
understand that there is a scramble to assemble fighters,
including children, while we have yet to confirm
any disengagement of forces, in accordance with the
timelines of the revised Agreement.

The continued fighting has worsened the already
dire humanitarian and human rights situation in the
country. Five years on, approximately 1.8 million
persons are displaced within South Sudan, another
2.5 million are living in neighbouring countries.
Extreme violence, including conflict-related sexual
violence, threats and harassment experienced by
civilians continues to be a key hallmark of the conflict.
We must therefore send a strong message to the parties
that, with the conclusion of the revitalized political
Agreement, there is no justification for the continuation
of violence, which continues to exact a heavy toll on
the civilian population. We must once more call upon
them to demonstrate leadership by taking the necessary
steps to silence the guns, disengage forces, facilitate the
free and unhindered movement of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and humanitarian
partners and reverse the massive humanitarian and
human toll of the conflict.

With regard to taking measures to address the
human rights and protection situation in the country, I
wish to note the recent finding of a military court that
10 soldiers were guilty of committing Violence against
civilians at the Terrain Hotel in Juba, in July 2016. That
verdict is a first step towards delivering justice to the
victims of this war and curbing the culture of impunity.

Let me end by reiterating that the signing of the
revitalized Agreement offers an opportunity for South
Sudan to turn a new page. Recognizing that the road
ahead will be difficult, I cannot emphasize enough the
critical role that IGAD must continue to play at this
critical juncture in the search for peace in South Sudan.
IGAD must continue to bring its influence to bear on
the parties to the conflict to meet their obligations
under the Agreement, including by ensuring that those
responsible for Violating the Agreement are promptly
identified and held to account.

For our part, the United Nations stands ready
to assist South Sudan to achieve the goals of the
Agreement. UNMISS will continue to perform the
tasks required by its current mandate, with the required
emphasis on the protection of civilians, which remains a
priority for the Mission. The Regional Protection Force,
an integral part of UNMISS, will also continue to play
its role, according to its existing mandate. Should the
Security Council deem it necessary and appropriate to
amend the terms of the UNMISS mandate, we stand
ready to support accordingly.

Several considerations of principle and practicality,
however, must continue to guide these deliberations,
including: first, the need for the protection of civilians
to remain a key priority within the broader framework
of the four pillars of the UNMISS mandate; secondly,
the requirement to preserve a single, unified force,
including a unified command and control structure, to
ensure the continued effectiveness of the peacekeeping
operation; and, finally, while UNMISS can contribute
to a secure environment conducive to progress in
implementing the Agreement, any further role in
support of the envisioned security arrangements must
be consistent with the principles of United Nations
peacekeeping, as well as the standards to which we hold
all troop- and police-contributing countries. At the same
time, we must ensure that any further tasks are subject
to the clear and detailed agreement of the parties to the
conflict, as well as the United Nations. That will ensure
that each task can be effectively carried out.

Finally, we look forward to working with the
Council, IGAD, the AU Peace and Security Council, the
parties and all stakeholders to support the Agreement.

