Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank Robert Serry for his briefing this
morning and the Permanent Representatives of
Palestine and Israel for their important contributions.

As we speak, momentous events continue to
unfold across the Middle East. The determined struggle
of people in the region to secure their universal rights
against, in some cases, brutal Government repression
offers hope for the future. The only credible answer to
legitimate popular demands is sustainable reform.
Nowhere is the fight for basic rights and the brutality
of an autocratic regime unwilling to give its people
what they want and what they are entitled to more
apparent than in Syria.
We condemn the continuing heavy violence in
Syria, the murder of peaceful protesters and the attacks
on the United States and French embassies in
Damascus. The Syrian regime has killed more then
1,500 civilians, and the death toll is rising on a daily
basis. President Al-Assad claims that he is holding
Syria's different factions together, but his regime's
brutality risks inflaming sectarian tension. President
Al-Assad must swiftly and meaningfully implement
reforms that he himself has promised, ensuring that
they mark the start of a sustainable transition to a new
political system that meets the aspirations of the Syrian
people.

In our view, Security Council action demanding
an end to the violence and calling for a peaceful
Syrian-led political process is long overdue. We will
continue to push for action, challenging those on the
Council who stand in the way to meet their
responsibilities.

Events in the wider Middle East are inextricably
linked to efforts to find a long-term solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. At a time when populations
in the region are striving for and realizing their rights,
the Palestinians, too, must realize their goal of an
independent and viable State of Palestine.

As we have said before, it would be a great
shame and a source of continued insecurity if the hopes
of the Palestinian people were left unfulfilled, while
the region is transformed around them. Therefore, it is
critical that progress in the peace process be made.
September - the time frame set out by President
Obama and the Quartet to welcome Palestine as a full
Member of the United Nations and the month that will
mark the completion of the Palestinian Authority's
State-building programme - is fast approaching.

There is a danger that, in September, all
stakeholders in the peace process give up hope and
look simply to manage the situation, but, in our view,
that would be premature. The parties should redouble
their efforts to break the impasse and should resume
direct negotiations on the basis of clearly articulated
parameters - two States based on the 1967 borders,
with mutually agreed land swaps; security
arrangements that protect Palestinian sovereignty,
while also providing sufficient reassurance to Israel;
Jerusalem as the capital of both States; and a just
solution for refugees. We encourage the Quartet to set
out those simple parameters and to urge the parties
back into talks.

Neither Israel nor the Palestinians can afford to
let the current stalemate become the long-term status
quo. They must act now to keep alive the prospect and
hope for a sustainable peace. I would highlight three
areas where they must work harder to avoid further
deterioration of trust.
First, settlement activity must stop. Continued
settlement construction in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem is not only illegal, but is increasingly
destroying the viability of a contiguous Palestinian
State, sharing Jerusalem as its capital with Israel. As
well as construction, associated actions, such as the
destruction of freshwater infrastructure by the Israeli
authorities, undermine the very survival of entire
Palestinian communities in the West Bank. Halting
settlement activity and associated activities is not
elective surgery. It is a life-saving operation.

Secondly, Israel has legitimate security concerns
that must continue to be safeguarded. Maintaining
security cooperation and ensuring that there is a
complete and sustained cessation of rocket attacks
from Gaza are key to reassuring the Israeli Government
and public that there exists a genuine partner for peace.

Thirdly, more must be done to improve access to
Gaza. Restrictions that stifle Gaza's economy breed
hatred, radicalism and violence. An improved Gazan
economy and the resurgence of Gaza's pragmatic
business fraternity are not only essential to the people
of Gaza, but also firmly in Israel's own security
interests.

There is no time to waste in making progress
towards peace. We know from history that standing
still is never an option in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. There is either progress towards a negotiated
agreement or backsliding into violence. It is up to the
leaders on both sides to take the bold steps necessary to
ensure the former and to avoid the latter.

