Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate the Kingdom of Jordan on its
accession to the Security Council and on its assumption
of the presidency in the first month of its tenure. I would
also like to congratulate Chad, Nigeria, Lithuania and
Chile on theirjoining the Council. I would like to thank
His Excellency the Secretary-General for his briefing
this morning and to reiterate Egypt's support for the
statements to be made by the representatives of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of Djibouti
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

The Palestinian question remains unresolved,
despite the many efforts by the international community,
including the Security Council, since the establishment
of the Organization, with serious repercussions for the
Palestinians and all countries of the region, as well as
international peace and security. That is most clearly
reflected in the recent atrocities at the Yarmouk refugee
camp in Syria, where Palestinian refugees are dying
of starvation in the second decade of the twenty-first
century. That also applies to Gaza, where the population
still suffers from an illegal blockade. It also applies to
Israel, which continues to feel threatened despite its
sophisticated arsenal of weapons of mass destruction
and its superiority in traditional weapons and their
means of delivery.

The past quarter has seen a number of important
developments that reflect how critical the situation in
Palestine has become.

The first development is the relentless commitment
of the United States to help both sides to reach agreement,
including consecutive high-level visits by the Secretary
of State to the region to secure that goal. We strongly
support those efforts and look forward the achievement
of ajust solution that guarantees the establishment ofa
fully independent and sovereign Palestinian State on all
the territories occupied in 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living in peace and security side by side with
the State of Israel.

Secondly, statements were issued by senior Israeli
officials that questioned the two-State solution and
the availability of a real partner for peace. The same
officials raised new and controversial issues that could
complicate the prospects for reaching an agreement.
The Prime Minister informed his party's Cabinet
members that he would not accept any reference to
Jerusalem in the framework agreement, and insisted on
the acknowledgement of Israel as a Jewish State and
on keeping additional illegal settlement blocks under
Israeli sovereignty. The Minister for Foreign Affairs
proposed a plan to exchange and transfer populations,
in addition to the exchange of land. The Minister of
Defence criticized the security plan proposed by the
United States, and insisted on keeping Israeli troops
in the Jordan Valley for security reasons. The former
chief of the Mossad recently reaffirmed that the Jordan
Valley was not essential to Israel's security.

Thirdly, the third batch of Palestinian prisoners
have been released. That is a welcome development.
However, it was followed by a call for bids to construct
thousands of new units in settlements in occupied
East Jerusalem and the West Bank. France, the United
Kingdom, Spain and Italy conveyed to the Israeli
Ambassadors in their respective capitals messages that
such steps did not help the peace process. The Israeli
Government ignored those messages and summoned
its Ambassadors from those countries in protest to
the messages, which were aimed at implementing
international law and Council resolutions. Egypt looks
forward to action by the Security Council aimed at
halting all subversive attempts to undermine the peace
process, and to further measures by the European
Union. We welcome the suspension of the Dutch water
company's cooperation with its Israeli counterpart
because of Israel's illegal settlement activity, and its
suspension of further investments in Israeli banks that
finance settlements.

Fourthly, Palestinians remain subject to attacks
by settlers and Israeli security forces in the occupied
territories. Israel's continued retaliatory air raids and
shelling of Gaza have resulted in a number of injuries
and casualties. A number of short-range missiles
were fired into Israel as well. However, there were no
reported injuries or casualties.

Pressure was also exerted on the Palestinians to
give up their rights, which have been recognized under
international law and endorsed by both the General
Assembly and the Security Council, in exchange for
promises to slow down Israel's abuse of those rights.

The events of the past three months prove that
the security of Palestine cannot be achieved without
guaranteeing the security of Israel, and vice versa.
Security is indivisible and can be achieved only through
a peace that respects the right of others to exist and
provides a fair opportunity to live a normal life. We
hope that all efforts will lead to the establishment of
a peace based on mutual interests, not on a balance of
power.

I now turn to the situation in Syria, which has
become extremely urgent. Egypt reaffirms the need
to reach a political solution through dialogue. Egypt
supports the efforts of the Secretary-General and the
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, in coordination with Russia and the United
States, to convene the second Geneva Conference on
Syria. We also commend the brave decision of the
opposition to participate in the Conference. We urge
opposition members not to change their minds.

We call upon both the Government and the
opposition to participate seriously in developing the
necessary arrangements for a transitional period that
secures the territorial integrity and social cohesion of
Syria, in accordance with the Geneva communique
(S/2012/523, annex), which was endorsed by the
Security Council. We also reaffirm that the events in
Syria should not divert the attention of the Security
Council from implementing its resolutions on the
illegality of the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan,
and on the withdrawal of Israel from the Golan and
other Arab-occupied territories.

Before concluding, I would like to commend the
efforts of Ms. Angela Kane, Under-Secretary-General
and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
and Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Special Coordinator of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Mission on eliminating Syria's
chemical weapons programme. The Council has only
partially implemented resolution 687 (1991) on Iraqi
weapons of mass destruction. It has not followed up on
the implementation of paragraph 14, which noted that
such actions would represent steps towards the goal
of establishing in the Middle East a zone freee from
weapons of mass destruction.

Chemical weapons were used in Syria last August.
Should we wait for another tragedy to occur before
the international community seriously and impartially
deals with the real sources of danger in the Middle
East? Egypt has reiterated its commitment to ridding
the Middle East of all weapons ofmass destruction, and
launched an initiative in that regard on 28 September.
We call on all States ofthe region and the five permanent
members of the Security Council to respond positively
to our initiative. We also call on the Secretary-General
and the parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons to redouble their efforts to convene
the long-awaited conference on declaring the Middle
East a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction, so as to ensure that the region is
free from all sources of danger for future generations.

