Mr. Messone (Gabon) (Spoke in French): We
wish to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo for his
initial report pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution
1970 (2011). My delegation read the report with great
interest and appreciates its concision, the quality of its
analyses and the clear conclusions it reaches on the
three main criteria for determining the Court's
competence to investigate and prosecute the
perpetrators of the crimes committed in Libya since
15 February.
We note the difficulties involved in any
investigation in a conflict situation. We reaffirm
Gabon's commitment to combating all forms of

impunity. That is a position of principle to which we
remain devoted and is the basis of our accession to the
Rome Statute. We are also attached to the fundamental
principles of the protection of civilians, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

We recall our serious concern over the situation
prevailing in Libya. We support all Security Council
decisions to put an end to the violence in the country.
We therefore call on all parties to the conflict to cease
fire immediately. We urge once again that all means be
deployed to reach a political solution to the conflict.

That said, Gabon believes that the spirit and letter
of all resolutions adopted by the Security Council must
be observed. Their implementation must fully cover
criminal acts by whomsoever committed in this crisis.
The political efforts under way must not affect the
requirements of justice regarding crimes committed
against humanity. We therefore urge the Libyan
Government to cooperate and refrain from hampering
the investigations under way.

We affirm the need for the Security Council to
support all efforts to shed light on the crimes
committed throughout Libya, including against foreign
migrant workers, including those from sub-Saharan
Africa. We deplore the attacks on civilians who are
peacefully protesting to express their desires for a free
and democratic Libya.

We also stress the need for the Prosecutor to have
all the means necessary to carry out an impartial
investigation. My delegation therefore welcomes the
close cooperation between the Prosecutor and the
International Commission of Inquiry set up by the
Human Rights Council at its special session of
25 February.

Gabon assures the Prosecutor of its full
willingness to cooperate with him in his efforts to fully
achieve his objective. We encourage and urge all
parties to the conflict in Libya to cooperate
unconditionally with the International Criminal Court
in this process in order to shed light on the nature of
crimes so that perpetrators can be brought to justice.

In conclusion, we wish to emphasize that the way
in which this matter is addressed and the conclusions
reached will, in our view, contribute to bolstering
efforts to put an end to impunity and to reasserting the
authority and impartiality of the Court in this crisis.

