Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I wish to
express my deep appreciation for the words of
condolence and support expressed by the members of
the Council for the people of my country, Japan,
following the devastating earthquake and tsunami. The
Japanese Government is making its utmost efforts to
address the challenges we are now facing. Japan has
overcome many challenges in the past. I am confident
that we will once again do so this time.

I thank Special Representative de Mistura for his
very comprehensive and informative briefing. At this
juncture, I would also like to express my profound
gratitude to all the men and women of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
who have demonstrated a deep commitment to this
difficult mission. I also thank my dear friend
Ambassador Tanin for his presence.

The reconstruction and development of
Afghanistan is one of the most important issues facing
the international community. While respecting Afghan
ownership and in full cooperation with UNAMA, the
international community must continue its support for
the country of Afghanistan.

An important step for the Afghan Government
took place when NATO allies and partners confirmed,
at the NATO Summit in Lisbon last November, their
commitment to create conditions to enable Afghan
forces to take the lead for ensuring security in all
provinces of the country by the end of 2014. The
expected announcement of the first group of provinces
for transition, on 21 March, will be an important step
in this effort. These achievements signify the Afghan
Government's determination to take full responsibility
for its own development.

In that context, we welcome the tireless efforts
made by the Afghan Government since the Kabul
Conference. We expect further progress in improving
security capacity and governance. Strengthening the
capacity of Afghan security forces and promoting
capacity-building of the central and local
administrative institutions are indispensable. The
international community, in support of the Afghan-
owned process, must continue its engagement with the
country in that regard. Japan has been providing, and is
determined to continue, assistance for improving the
quality of the Afghan National Police by funding
police salaries and training of the police.

11-2662]
We welcomed the initiative taken by the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to host the
International Contact Group meeting in Jeddah. The
Bonn Conference scheduled for December will be an
important occasion to review progress and provide
impetus for the efforts of Afghanistan and the
international community in this undertaking.

Following the certification of the final results of
the election of new members of the Lower House of
Afghanistan, Japan welcomes the commencement of
the new session and the election of the president of the
Lower House. At the same time, we have to carefully
follow the progress of the Special Court's activities.
Japan fervently hopes that deliberations in the Lower
House will proceed smoothly and that the remaining
issues will be resolved as early as possible.

In order to ensure the sustainable development of
Afghanistan, it is necessary to establish a system that
enables the country to express its own will, built upon
democratic processes. We hope that the Afghan
Government will make its utmost effort for electoral
reform, with the strong support of UNAMA and the
international community, to achieve a free and
transparent electoral system.

The Afghan-led political process, namely,
involving reconciliation and reintegration, will be
especially crucial in stabilizing Afghanistan this year.
As the recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/120*) indicates, the transition process can be
made sustainable only if it is accompanied by an
inclusive political process. The inauguration of the
High Peace Council and the creation of the Afghanistan
Peace and Reintegration Programme - together with
the Peace and Reintegration Trust Fund - demonstrate
the significant progress made by the Afghan
Government.

Needless to say, this process must be led by the
Afghan Government, with support from the
international community, including my country, Japan.
We provided funding for the Trust Fund in October and
will play an active role in the conference on
reintegration to be hosted by the Afghan Government
this spring. We are ready to continue making our
contribution in this area.

In order to consolidate the aforementioned gains
and to improve the well-being of the Afghan people,
keeping in mind a medium-to-long-term perspective
beyond 2015, the international community must
respond to the country's development needs and
promote the stabilization of livelihoods and the
construction of basic economic infrastructure. Both the
Afghan Government and the international community
are required to make unremitting efforts towards this
goal. Japan continues to provide assistance in human
resource development and infrastructure, and for
developing and rebuilding the agricultural sector and
rural communities.

Having entered a new phase in the transition to
Afghan responsibility, Afghanistan still faces various
challenges. However, the country is steadily moving
forward on the road towards development and
reconstruction. Japan will continue to cooperate with
the Afghan Government, UNAMA and other
international partners to achieve real progress for the
future of Afghanistan.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
sincere appreciation for Special Representative De
Mistura's dedication and reaffirm our commitment to
supporting UNAMA's efforts.

