The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Brazil.
It is a great pleasure for me to again welcome
Baroness Ashton to the Security Council. Brazil fully
appreciates the valuable contributions that regional
organizations can and do make to an enhanced
multilateral system with the United Nations as its
centre. The High Representative has addressed the
many and varied manifestations of a very active and
ongoing partnership with the United Nations in areas
and activities of common interest. Those range from
conflict prevention, conflict resolution, crisis
management and humanitarian assistance to
peacebuilding and long-term stabilization and
development.

Brazil appreciates the role that the European
Union plays in bringing about a solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian issue, which is long overdue. We hope that
the peace process can soon resume and move forward
quickly so that the international community will
swiftly achieve our common goal of two States living
side by side in peace and stability. Brazil also
recognizes the concrete contributions of the European
Union to peacebuilding around the world, from the
Sudan to Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Haiti.

A situation of special interest to Brazil is that of
Haiti. We hope that the electoral process can soon be
concluded with credibility and full respect for the will
of the people, so that Haitians can focus again on the
much-needed activities of reconstruction and
promoting sustainable development.

Another situation of specific interest to Brazil is
that of Guinea-Bissau. We welcome the continued
engagement of the African Union in our common
efforts to bring sustainable peace to Guinea-Bissau. We
believe that the country needs such engagement to
build democratic governance and to effectively address
its key challenges of stability, reconciliation, fighting
impunity and combating drug trafficking. In the same
vein, we encourage the European Union to continue
investing in local capacity-building and social and
economic development in fragile and conflict-affected
countries.
18

Brazil strongly believes that the interlinkages
between peace, security and development must be
properly acknowledged as the Security Council
discharges its responsibilities. We welcome the EU's
participation in and support for the high-level debate
that Brazil has proposed on that very important issue,
which will be held this Friday.

As we have been able to note at this meeting,
cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union is strong and effective. It is our hope
that the changes brought about by the Treaty of Lisbon
will help to further strengthen that important
partnership.

In our own region, through the Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR), we are consolidating a
genuine zone of peace and prosperity. By promoting
dialogue and understanding among South American
countries, UNASUR is making its own contribution to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Baroness Ashton to make some
concluding remarks.

