Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to extend my thanks to you, Madam
President, for presiding over this open debate on
international cooperation to counter terrorism. My
delegation notes with satisfaction the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23, drafted by
Australia, which enhances our collective efforts to
counter terrorism. I thank also the Secretary-General
for his statement and the Chairs of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities and the Counter-Terrorism Committee for their
briefings. My delegation has listened to those briefings
and considered them carefully.

Al-Qaida and affiliated and splinter groups,
including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), are a major threat to international peace and
security. The risk those groups pose to the Middle East
in particular is an imminent threat, as they spread,
gain strength and form alliances. They also control
lands that are fertile and rich in resources. The ongoing
conflicts in the region continue provide fertile grounds
for terrorist organizations to gain strength. The lack of
a comprehensive political solution in Syria has made
that situation even worse. It will not be possible to put
an end the threat of ISIL and others in Syria without a
political transition in Syria.

Jordan exerts tremendous efforts to control its
borders and to counter the expansion of such groups.
Those terrorist organizations attempt to infiltrate our
borders and send terrorism elements to perpetrate
acts of sabotage in neighbouring countries. We should
therefore be vigilant regarding the ideological threat of
such organizations and others within and beyond their
areas of their operation, as they spread their values and
violent rhetoric. By exploiting all media outlets, they
attract and recruit youth. Therefore, we should all face
this threat through efforts to spread awareness, culture
and education within local communities and, most
importantly, among youth, and look into why they fall
into the trap ofjoining terrorist organizations.

Jordan reiterates its call on other countries,
international partners and other relevant United
Nations entities concerned with countering terrorism to
provide all possible assistance to support the capacity of
countries at the forefront of the fight against terrorism,
so that they are able to face the threat and shoulder their
responsibility.

Jordan is concerned by such organizations perpetrating
heinous crimes against innocent civilians in Iraq and
Syria. We affirm the need to face such barbaric acts,
which are waged primarily against Muslims, without
discrimination. The crimes of humiliation and the mass
summary executions perpetrated mercilessly by ISIL
against hundreds of Bunimer tribespeople, which were
recently condemned by the Council, are evidence of
that, as if they are telling those who oppose them, "if
you oppose us, we are entitled to spill your blood".

Jordan is aware of the increasing global challenge
of the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters,
compounding that of violent extremism and requiring
pre-emptive and preventive security measures at the
international and national levels. The relevant United
Nations entities concerned with combating terrorism
should act immediately and comprehensively. They
should redouble their efforts and form in-depth
partnerships with Member States in order to move
towards providing tangible support to those States in
capacity-building so that they would be able to meet
their obligations. Jordan affirms the need to enhance
regional and international cooperation to face this
phenomenon. It is important to share information
among the relevant entities in the region. Countries in
the region should also undertake their responsibilities
in terms of border control.

Resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) are
important in the framework of the international
response to terrorism and foreign terrorist fighters.
Even before the adoption of resolutions 2170 (2014)
and 2178 (2014), Jordan had adopted a comprehensive
national approach, organized around three main pillars,
to dealing with such phenomena.

First, we have taken a number of pre-emptive and
preventive measures to address the violent extremism
that fuels terrorism. Those measures include security
awareness and social measures that tackle issues in the
political, economic and social dimensions, with the
participation of all relevant national institutions and
leaders. The role of Jordan is not limited to national
perspectives, but goes beyond that to the international
and regional levels. His Majesty King Abdullah II
ibn Al Hussein has launched a number of initiatives,
including the Message of Amman, the Message of
Common Ground, and International Reconciliation
Week, all of which call for moderation, tolerance and
giving priority to the language of dialogue.

Secondly, we have adopted a number of laws and
national legislation that deal firmly with terrorism. We
addressed the phenomenon of terrorist recruitment in
the 2006 law against terrorism. We enhanced that law
through efforts to deal with the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters in a 2014 amendment. We also included the
risk of the use of information and communications
technology in terrorist recruitment and the spread of
terrorist ideology.

Thirdly, we have implemented a number of measures,
including on border control, given the growing threat
of terrorist organizations in neighbouring countries and
a lack of regular uniformed army personnel along the
northern borders of the Kingdom.

With regard to our national and regional roles,
we intend to launch a regional initiative that will
include the participation of international experts and
representatives of local communities and all the relevant
entities and organizations, focused on the growing use
of information and communications technologies by
terrorist organizations and their affiliates, including
social media and other media outlets, with the aim
of spreading extremist terrorist ideology. One of the
most important outcomes of the initiative would be the
drafting of a comprehensive media plan to confront
the misleading messages of terrorist organizations, as
well as to raise awareness in local communities about
terrorism. We call on the relevant United Nations
agencies, including the Counter-Terrorism Centre, to
support this initiative, which would be in the interests
of us all.

Our war against terrorism will take a long time.
It is a war at the levels both of security and ideology.
All of us must therefore be persistent and make every
effort to defeat this scourge, which disrupts the safety
and security of all of us.

