Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Like our German
colleague, I shall try to be brief because I think that
there have been a lot of common themes across the
Council today. While I share people's dismay that so
many of these issues come back to us repeatedly, I think
that if there is any unity in the Council, it has been on
the condemnation of violence from both sides and the
need for both to make progress.

Mr. Mladenov asked us to be very clear about
the condemnation of the recent rocket attacks. Dual
British-Israeli citizens were injured in the latest rocket
attacks, so we have no hesitation in joining him and
others in condemning unreservedly what has happened
and such acts of terrorism and violence wherever they
occur. I note that there was another attack near the
Ariel settlement on 17 March.

Along with others, we support the Egyptian and
United Nations efforts to broker a ceasefire and restore
the situation to calm. Violence not only creates fear and
a cycle of violence among the Israeli and Palestinian
populations; it also undermines the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. We have been concerned by the
number of Palestinian deaths in the West Bank over the
past few weeks.

A number of colleagues mentioned the heightened
tensions at Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount. We
urge all parties to work together to restore calm and to
support the status quo under the custodianship of the
King of Jordan.

The protests at the Gaza perimeter fence continue,
and we remain concerned about the volume of live fire
that has been used and is resulting in horrific injuries
and in fatalities. That is not to take away one iota from
Israel's right to self-defence and it is not to undermine
or gainsay the fact that Hamas operatives cynically
exploit these protests, but it is worth repeating that this
perpetual cycle of violence serves no one's interests.
As the German ambassador said, the emphasis ought to
be on what can be done to implement resolution 2334
(2016) and reduce the violence that we see every day in
the territories and in Israel.

Ijust want to join others who referred to the March
of Return. That anniversary will be with us shortly.
We urge all parties to demonstrate restraint and avoid
future violence. We continue to support the need for
an independent and transparent investigation into last
year's events in Gaza, and we welcome the recent
decision by the Israeli Military Advocate General
to order five criminal investigations relating to 11
separate instances of Palestinian fatalities during the
Gaza protests.

It is customary to turn to the issue of settlements.
Our views on settlements remain well known. Suffice
it to say that we share the Secretary-General's views on
the expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. We also remain gravely
concerned by the threat of evictions of Palestinians
from their homes in East Jerusalem and across the
West Bank. My Foreign Secretary wrote to the Israeli
Government to condemn the planned demolition of the
Palestinian village of Khan Al-Ahmar and we continue
to press Israel to abandon these plans entirely.

A number of Council members have referred to
the issue of the Golan Heights. The United Kingdom
views the Golan Heights as territory occupied by
Israel. Annexation of territory by force is prohibited
under international law, and that includes the Charter
of the United Nations. The United Kingdom does not
recognize Israel's annexation in 1981 and we have no
plans to change that position.

