Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada has
the pleasure of co-sponsoring the draft resolution that will
establish the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET). In order to prepare for the
transition to independence - the path that was chosen
during the popular consultation of 30 August 1999 - the
sorely tested people of East Timor needs a robust United
Nations presence, which would be ensured through the
adoption of the draft resolution before us today.

(spoke in English)

Three aspects of this draft resolution are of particular
importance to Canada. Firstly, the fourteenth preambular
paragraph calls on all parties to cooperate with
investigations into reports of systematic, widespread and
flagrant violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law committed in East Timor. One of these
investigations is to be carried out by the international
commission of inquiry established by the Secretary-
General, as requested by a resolution of 27 September of
the United Nations Commission on Human Rights.

 

Canada co-sponsored that resolution, and we urge all
parties, including the Government of Indonesia, to
cooperate with the commission of inquiry. Justice is an
integral part of reconciliation. Those who have committed
crimes must be brought to justice.
Secondly, we wish to reaffirm that the International
Force, East Timor (INTERFET), should be replaced by the
peacekeeping component of UNTAET as soon as possible,
as set forth in operative paragraph 9. Canada's firm view,
based on our experience with multinational forces in
Rwanda, Somalia, Haiti and eastern Zaire, is that this
Council could, and should, have authorized, in its resolution
1264 (1999) a classic United Nations-commanded
peacekeeping operation for East Timor. Such a mission,
with blue berets, funded through the standard peacekeeping
assessment mechanism and multinational in character, could
have been deployed as quickly as a multinational force. The
essential factor delaying the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation was not operational but
political.

(spoke in French)

Finally, I would like to emphasize the need to finance
the essential elements of UNTAET through regular
contributions. The piecemeal financing through voluntary
contributions to special funds cannot provide the necessary
financial security for the United Nations for missions such
as the one we are authorizing today. The people of East
Timor need that security.

The role of UNTAET is not to administer East Timor
on its own. The people of East Timor must play an integral
part in the work of UNTAET. The people of East Timor
finally has the opportunity to organize its own society as it
wishes, and the United Nations has the duty to help it in
strengthening its capacity to do so.

