Today is a good day for the Security Council. We have collectively answered the call of the Sudan to support its political transition from an authoritarian regime to an inclusive and representative Government. But, more importantly, we hope that this day marks the beginning of even stronger and more coherent support by the United Nations for the Sudan's transition - support that delivers concrete benefits and that helps to fulfil the aspirations of the Sudanese people to a peaceful, stable, democratic and prosperous future. The new United Nations Mission that the Security Council has established today offers a broad support package, based on the requests of the Government of the Sudan. The United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) will work on four strategic objectives: first, political transition, democratic governance and the protection and promotion of human rights; secondly, peace processes and the implementation of future peace agreements; thirdly, peacebuilding, civilian protection and the rule of law, in particular in Darfur and the Two Areas; and, fourthly, the mobilization of economic and development assistance and the coordination of humanitarian assistance. Let us be realistic - all of those tasks are enormous, and the United Nations Mission cannot deliver on those objectives alone. This is an assistance Mission. The Sudanese Government and all Sudanese stakeholders need to work together, and the United Nations will and should be there to support, advise and assist. There are some areas in which we need a broader international support package. That is true in the area of economic recovery and development, and that is why Germany is partnering with the Sudan, the European Union and the United Nations to host a virtual high-level partnership conference on 25 June from Berlin. With this conference we want to send a strong signal of joint support to a successful democratic transition. In addition, we aim to mobilize financial resources from international partners to assist the urgently required reform process in the Sudan. And let us also be frank about another area in which the Mission has to work in close coordination and complementarity with others: that is the area of peacebuilding, strengthening accountability and rule-of-law institutions and protecting human rights, especially in the conflict-affected regions of the Sudan. UNITAMS has a clear mandate for those tasks. But it is not a peacekeeping operation. And as much as Germany supports a transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, there are still concerns about the protection of civilians in Darfur that merit a peacekeeping response. That is why it is important that the Council has also extended the mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until the end of the year and has asked the United Nations and the African Union to provide the Council with an analysis of the situation on the ground before any decision on the future of UNAMID is made. Today is also a good day because it ushers in a new era of partnership - a partnership between the new Sudan and the Security Council that should be built on trust and not on confrontation, as was sometimes the case with the former regime. We value the open and frank discussion with our partners in the Sudan about this new mandate. Partnership is also relevant when it comes to the role of the African Union. Germany very much welcomes the intention of the African Union to continue to accompany the Sudan on its path of political transition. We would like to thank all partners in the Council for their support during these negotiations, which have led to the unanimous adoption of resolutions 2524 (2020) and 2525 (2020). It would be remiss of me not to thank our British co-penholders for their really outstanding collaboration throughout the long months of preparing this mandate, with special thanks to the United Kingdom team here in New York.
