Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): We commend
Minister Ivica Dacie, in his capacity as Chairperson-in-
Office, for his efforts to strengthen the range ofactivities
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) in promoting regional stability and
security. We acknowledge that it is a challenging role.

As a regional organization, the OSCE has
important functions across the full spectrum of the
Security Council's mandate - from early warning to
conflict prevention, conflict management and conflict
resolution and tackling root causes. We strongly
support cooperation between the Security Council and
the OSCE, not only in immediate crises but in the full
range of peace and security issues dealt with by the
OSCE.

In particular, we commend and support strongly
the OSCE's engagement in the situation in Ukraine
and its efforts towards finding a peaceful solution. We
members of the Council must continue to play our role
and our part, including by continuing to apply pressure
on the parties to adhere to the commitments made in
Minsk, most immediately to observe the ceasefire and
withdraw heavy weaponry.

By unanimously adopting resolution 2202 (2015),
the Security Council sent a strong message that it
stands behind the OSCE as it carries out its activities
in Ukraine, particularly the monitoring and verification
of the ceasefire. It is unacceptable that the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission has not been guaranteed
safe, secure passage to certain areas by the separatists,
including Debaltseve. Without safety guarantees, it
cannot do its job.

We call for all parties to the conflict to ensure safe
and unfettered access by the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission, as provided for under the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minks agreements. Those
provisions must be respected. We reiterate our call on
Russia to use its influence with the separatist groups to
comply with what has been agreed.

Furthermore, in the absence of mandated reporting
from the ground by the Secretary-General, the Special
Monitoring Mission is best placed to provide accurate
reporting on the implementation of the ceasefire and
is an important source of information to enable the
Council to remain properly seized of the situation.
