We are grateful to the Estonian presidency of the Security Council for organizing today's open video-teleconference meeting on ensuring transparency, efficiency and effectiveness in the work of the Security Council. This is an issue of interest and importance for the entire membership of the United Nations, particularly under the current extraordinary circumstances, when the world looks to the Security Council for solutions and leadership. We would also like to place on record our appreciation for the efforts of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines undertaken in its capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions. We also wish to thank the representative of Security Council Report for her useful briefing and for the Report's important work in providing regular reporting and analysis of the Councils' proceedings. As the threats to the world evolve, so must the Council. New and emerging challenges to international peace and security demand that the Council be better organized, not only to keep up with the changing times but also to be effective and responsive in carrying out its responsibilities. The format of today's meeting itself is an outcome of the innovation and flexibility shown by the Council in adapting to challenging circumstances. The consolidated presidential note S/2017/507, on the Council's working methods, not only reflects best practices built up over the years but also signals our collective ambition for a more inclusive, transparent and effective Council, one that is better able to tackle the challenges of the modern world. Among the important improvements introduced to the working methods of the Security Council in recent years are the greater channels of communication between the Council and non- member States and between the Council and other United Nations organs, including the General Assembly; the better flow of information from and to the Council; and the improvements in distribution of Council documents to non-member States. Note 507 also contains some substantial elements that are significant for newly elected members. Newly elected members of the Council are invited to observe all meetings of the Council and its subsidiary bodies and informal consultations of the whole for a period of three months immediately preceding their term of membership. Pursuant to presidential note S/2019/993, of December 2019, the Secretariat will also provide all relevant Council communications to the newly elected members for a period of five months immediately preceding their term of membership. The meetings held at the beginning of the month by the Council President to present the Council's monthly programme of work to all Member States and the wrap-up sessions at the end of the month are also welcome innovations. While these improvements are important in ensuring greater transparency of the Council, they remain insufficient. It is important to implement these practices in a consistent manner and not to backslide from previous decisions and commitments. We hope that the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions will continue to assess gaps in the implementation of note 507 and ensure the full implementation of the practices recommended therein. In that regard, we would like to highlight some specific areas. The most authoritative rules on which the global order is based are precisely those agreed between States to have legally binding status. However, we have a Security Council that still works on the basis of provisional rules. While some argue that provisional rules enable the Council to have greater flexibility and adopt new practices when the situation demands, this approach specifically limits the role of the elected members, which are left to deal with procedural uncertainties akin to the one illustrated by the parable of the blind men and the elephant. Secondly, the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council have grown in number and importance in recent years. Given the numerous consequential decisions being made by these subsidiary bodies, one would assume that the rules governing their working methods should be transparent and consistent. Sadly, this is far from the case. Not only do these subsidiary bodies have varied working methods, but they also follow obscure practices that do not have any legal basis in the Charter of the United Nations or in resolutions of the Security Council. For instance, there is no uniformity in the decision-making procedures of the various sanctions committees. There is a sense that too much of the work in the committees is being carried out without the full knowledge of all Council members, even though the committees mirror the composition of the Council and are nominally chaired by elected members. Nor is there any fixed practice across these committees in terms of their reporting cycles, with similarly constituted bodies handling similar work having different time periods and methodologies for reporting. Another worrisome aspect relates to the lack of transparency and consistency in making public the decisions of these bodies. For instance, in many cases, decisions on delisting requests made to some of these bodies by sanctioned individuals and entities are not made public at all. Some subsidiary bodies do not even mention that any such request from known and listed terrorist entities or individuals was received and declined. In effect, the failed efforts of terrorists to get themselves delisted are shrouded in secrecy. Thirdly, as mandated by Article 24 of the United Nations Charter, the Council acts on behalf of the wider membership. One of the measures fostering the Council's engagement with the wider membership is the discussion on the Security Council's annual report to the General Assembly. We support calls for the annual report to be more substantive and analytical, rather than a mere summary of the number and dates of the Council's meetings. The manner of submitting the annual report also leads to delays, thereby limiting an important opportunity for engagement of the wider membership with the Council. This engagement between the two bodies needs to be restored and strengthened. Finally, today's debate takes place at a time when the Security Council, responding to an unprecedented global crisis, has made the transition to remote meetings and negotiations. Council members and the Secretariat have shown commendable agility and ingenuity in adapting their working methods. However, in making these adjustments, we have been confronted with the limitations of current technological platforms, particularly in terms of capacity, accessibility and security. We are also faced with the reality that while the three aspects mentioned in the theme for today's meeting - transparency, efficiency and effectiveness - are interlinked and feed into each other, they can also force a trade-off. Looking ahead, as we adjust to the new normal and deal with the downstream implications of the current working realities, we will have to be mindful of these considerations when it comes to converting temporary innovations into established precedents. India has long maintained that, in order to be credible and effective, both the Security Council's composition and its working methods must be updated to reflect contemporary global realities. We stand ready to support the efforts of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions in making real progress towards a Security Council that is fit for purpose.
