Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
supports the statement made by the observer of the
European Union, as well as the statement made by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict.

I would like to address more specifically the
implementation of resolution 2286 (2016), on the
protection of health services in armed conflict.
First, on behalf of my country, I would like to
express my indignation at the number and intensity of
attacks on health services around the world. We are all
familiar with the situation in Syria, where, according
to various United Nations and non-governmental
organization (NGO) reports, there is a sustained and
targeted campaign against medical facilities and
personnel. But that intolerable practice of targeting
those who put themselves at risk to come to the aid of
victims is not limited to that country; on the contrary,
the phenomenon is much more widespread.

We welcome the project undertaken by
the International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement - Health Care in Danger - to combat the
problem of violence against patients, health workers,
medical facilities and vehicles, and to make access to
health care and the provision of health care in armed
conflict and other emergency situations safer. The
Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition - a group
comprising of more than 30 NGOs - has published
a report on the subject, which was recently presented
to the Permanent Mission of Belgium to the United
Nations at a seminar on Syria and Yemen. The Coalition
has compiled a list of attacks perpetrated on health care
personnel and facilities in no fewer than 23 countries.
We must all support this vital effort to list and document
such incidents.

Attacks on health services are not just an ethical or
moral issue; their scope is much broader. We must not
forget the doubly devastating effect of such attacks on
already fragile health-care systems and, by extension,
their effect on vulnerable people such as the elderly, the
sick, the pregnant women and the children who depend

on those systems. There is also an adverse effect on
international law, which we have all pledged to uphold.
International humanitarian law is slowly being eroded
because of serious repeated and often unpunished
violations of the obligations it imposes on all parties to
armed conflict. It is our shared responsibility to reverse
that trend, by making tangible commitments and by
taking concrete action.

I would like to make the following three points on
resolution 2286 (2016).

First, although the adoption ofresolution 2286 (2016)
is a good starting point, it is by no means the end result.
More must be done, starting with the implementation of
the resolution itself. We call on the States Members of
the United Nations to work individually and collectively
to implement the Secretary-General's recommendations
in a consensual manner.
Secondly, we must make better use of existing
instruments to monitor, document and investigate
serious violations of international humanitarian law. In
that regard, Belgium fully supports the initiative of the
International, Impartial, and Independent Mechanism
for Syria, both politically and financially. We
encourage Member States to do the same. Investigating,
prosecuting and punishing serious violations of
international humanitarian law - in short, combating
impunity - is crucial to deterrence and to preventing
the commission of new crimes, which is essential to
sustaining peace. States have a central role to play in
that regard.

Thirdly, I would like to recall the plight of children
and young people and on the devastating impact
of conflict on their education. It is estimated that
246 million children live in conflict zones. Like attacks
on health services and personnel, attacks on schools are
on the rise in many conflict situations. But attacks on
schools not only claim the lives ofinnocent children and
young people, they also jeopardize the education and
the future of those who survive. Therefore, Belgium has
endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration and invites other
Member States to do the same. In that regard, we would
like to call on the members of the Security Council to
consider the possibility of drafting and adopting, along
the lines of resolution 2286 (2016), a resolution with a
specific focus on attacks on the education sector.

In conclusion, I would like to commend Human
Rights Watch, as well as the International Committee
of the Red Cross, on their professionalism, courage
and the tireless efforts of their staff, and all local
health-care workers who undertake remarkable work,
despite the risks and challenges they face. It is essential
for all parties to a conflict to respect at all times the
impartiality and neutrality of such actors.

