Mr. Bozize (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): On taking the floor at this meeting of the
Security Council, I would like to start by conveying to
the President, to his delegation and to all members of
the Council the warmest greetings of the authorities of
my country and assurances of their commitment to the
implementation of a programme for post-conflict
recovery in the Central African Republic.

More than 10 years after the crises in my country,
the political and security situation remains an issue of
real concern, despite the stability and peace it now
enjoys. Today, the authorities face numerous
challenges arising from the disruption of the economy,
displaced populations and the destruction of
infrastructure, which have resulted in impoverishment
and suffering.

The restoration of relative calm shortly after the
inclusive political dialogue was immediately followed
by a wave of violence with the occupation of the
eastern prefecture of Vakaga by rebels of the Union de
Forces Democratiques pour le Rassemblement. The
reconquest of this region by Government forces was
not enough to put a stop to the irredentist dreams of
those who were nostalgic for the time of armed
uprisings. We thus have seen the re-emergence of
armed groups whose real motivation was none other
than to satisfy their own thirst for power.

The wounds inflicted by the bloody conflicts on
the country remain, for the means of production have
collapsed, the social fabric is torn and infrastructures
have been destroyed. The fragility of the economy, the
precarious state of institutions and political instability
make it difficult to implement classic development
programmes with any rapidity. At the same time,
humanitarian aid is falling off for lack of resources due
to the international financial crisis, and the tools at its
disposal are not adequate to respond to the country's
needs for economic and social recovery.

Thousands of people have been displaced towards
more peaceful areas, including outside the country
itself. Around 300,000 displaced persons have been
counted at several places on the Chadian border, living
in a highly precarious situation and lacking drinking
water and the barest of necessities.
The Government, after an effort to engage in
dialogue with armed groups so as to lessen the
population's suffering, has undertaken security sector
reform aimed at enhancing the capacity of the defence
and security forces within the context of democracy
and good governance. The conclusions of this political
dialogue provide for an immediate ceasefire, a
demobilization of former combatants and their
reintegration into civilian life or into the regular army
in order to provide a sustainable solution to the
problem of lack of security.

The transition from armed conflict to peace is a
complex process that involves making the country
secure, protecting the people, reintegrating displaced
persons and refugees, rebuilding infrastructure,
relaunching the economy, promoting good governance
and political dialogue, and restoring the social capital
of the country.

Conflicts pose a greater challenge to
rehabilitation programmes and make it very difficult to
find coherent links between emergency aid,
rehabilitation and development, as crises most often
follow a pattern of deterioration, escalation, disorder,
calm and hope to a reversal of the situation. In spite of
the actions of armed persons in the regions I have just
mentioned, we look forward to the return of calm.

We need to consolidate what has been achieved
through that calm. After the peace agreements with the
Government, and although some armed groups may
still be reluctant to join the peace process, in a State as
fragile as the Central African Republic, the post-
conflict rehabilitation programme needs to be launched
as soon as possible. It is particularly important to
respond both to the urgent humanitarian needs
resulting from the conflict and to support a social,
political and economic development process that aims
at achieving peace and stability. We also need to
integrate post-conflict rehabilitation into an overall
global strategy.

It is essential that the improved prospects for
peace and economic recovery be exploited to
encourage all actors to speed up the demobilization of
their combatants. The World Bank and the United
Nations Development Programme have joined that
process, and the initial resources have allowed us to
demobilize and reintegrate 7,665 ex-combatants who
returned to their communities in 2007.
I would also like to share with the Council a
major concern of the Central African Republic
authorities. Over the past 10 years, the phenomenon of
child soldiers took hold in the Central African
Republic, where several hundred children under the
age of 18 fought with the armed groups. Children are
vulnerable, and perpetual conflict interrupts their
education and destroys their future. Rehabilitation in
this context consists of restoring their childhood to
these young soldiers, porters, messengers, cooks or, in
the case of girls, sex slaves. I therefore welcome the
fact that post-conflict rehabilitation programmes take
the situation of child soldiers and girls into account.

We are confident that several factors may still
undermine the post-conflict rehabilitation operations,
whose success depends on the relative stability on the
ground, a minimum level of security, the soundness of
the peace agreements, and the political will of the
parties to resolve the conflict. Our willingness to
engage in dialogue is clear, however, and we offer as
proof of that the many peace agreements signed with
various armed groups, the amnesty offered to the
leaders, and the holding of the inclusive political
dialogue.

The Government insists on an in-depth analysis
of the structural causes of the conflict in the Central
African Republic, and on the establishment of a
general framework for advancing priority sectors and
measures. Balanced stabilization measures are required
in the political, economic, legal, social, environmental
and military spheres in order to harmonize the
interdependent objectives of peace and development.

There is obviously the question of the availability
of financial resources, which depend in particular on
the genuine commitment of the international
community to supporting us in the transition from
conflict to peace.

I personally am confident that, after this meeting,
the foundations will be laid for a post-conflict
rehabilitation programme in the Central African
Republic. I therefore support the text of the draft
presidential statement that has been presented by the
delegation of Uganda. I base my hope and optimism on
the commitment of the Security Council to contributing
to the definitive return and consolidation of peace in
my country.

