Mr. Wetangula (Kenya): It is my privilege and
honour to speak to the Council this morning on a
country that has for a long time remained a source of
collective shame for the international community, a
country that is a source of insecurity and many
difficulties in the East African and Horn of Africa
region.

The situation in Somalia can be described as dire,
as Mr. Mahiga put it, because we have armed groups
that operate at will and are overrunning virtually the
5
whole country. As we all know, Somalia has not had a
government for 20 years now. It is plagued by war,
Violence and instability. Through regional initiatives,
particularly through the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), supported by the African
Union (AU) and the United Nations, negotiations were
conducted in Kenya leading to the signing of the
Transitional Federal Charter. The Charter gave birth to
several institutions, including a parliament, a
Government and other functioning institutions, albeit
very weak ones.

The Transitional Federal Charter comes to an end
in August next year. As we face the sunset of the
Charter, there is heightened fighting, a lack of effective
central government and a rapid growth in the number
of incidents of terrorism and piracy. A group called
Al-Shabaab has virtually overrun the Government, and
were it not for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which continues to hold the fort around
Villa Somalia, Al-Shabaab would perhaps have overrun
the whole Government by now. Indeed, we know that
they have carried out several successful attacks on
Villa Somalia.

The situation in Somalia is now overflowing into
its neighbours. On the day of the finals of the World
Cup in South Africa, very devastating, cowardly and
wicked attacks were carried out in our neighbouring
country, Uganda, where a large number of lives was
lost, lives of both Ugandan nationals and Kenyan
nationals. It has turned out, as claimed by the group
itself, that this attack was mounted by Al-Shabaab
using collaborators and agents from within the region.
In fact, some of the arrested suspects are young people,
of both Somali and non-Somali ethnic backgrounds,
from Kenya.

This fact brings very close to home - to my
country - the real possibility of the chaos in Somalia
spilling over to Kenya. Indeed, the Al-Shabaab
leadership has repeatedly proclaimed that the next
target of attack will be Nairobi, Kenya, Bujumbura,
Burundi and other neighbouring capitals, such as Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia.

As I have said, the story of Somalia is not new.
There has been no lack of initiatives. I think that what
has been lacking is the commitment to see those
initiatives through.

I want to emphasize the need to recognize the
centrality of IGAD in trying to resolve the problems of

Somalia. IGAD, as an organization, has been acting as
the representative of the AU, and to some degree in
collaboration with the United Nations. Through IGAD,
a negotiated Charter was signed. Through IGAD, the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) was formed,
and in collaboration with the United Nations the
Djibouti process that put in place the current
Government was undertaken.

Sometimes, as a region, we feel a little nervous to
see a proliferation of initiatives and meetings and
conferences in several capitals. These are helpful, but
sometimes nonetheless born out of inadequate
consultative processes.

I want to laud the meeting we had in Istanbul,
chaired by the Secretary-General and supported by the
AU, where among the many things agreed upon was
that IGAD was going to remain central to the process
of pushing Somali issues forward. Indeed, the
Secretary-General stated then that initiatives that will
come thereafter will be called IGAD-plus initiatives,
for us to be able to chaperone the Somali problems.

After the Istanbul conference, we had a meeting
of IGAD at the summit level in Addis Ababa where
several positive and proactive pronouncements were
made. First, it was acknowledged that the Government
in Somalia was extremely weak and was in a state that
required very urgent intervention.

Secondly, it was agreed that IGAD, the AU and
the international community, including the United
Nations, should shift gears from business-as-usual
engagement on Somalia and take a more proactive and
better defined trajectory towards seeing how to help
this unfortunate neighbouring country.

Thirdly, it was agreed, that while AMISOM. had
an authorized required force of 8,100, even if that
optimal number were achieved, it would remain
inadequate. The region set a figure of a 20,000- to
22,000-strong force, but also agreed and acknowledged
that the problem for Somalia was not and is not the
lack of troops; it is the lack of will of the international
community to bring troops together.

It was noted that there are troops that have been
trained by countries of the region - Ethiopia,
Djibouti, Kenya and Uganda. There are also offers
from Tanzania and some other southern African
countries to train more troops. It was equally noted
that, through the AU peace and security architecture

10-5364]
and the birth of the Eastern Africa Standby Force, we
have a 15,000-strong troop contingent available that
can be effectively put to use in Somalia.

It was also agreed that the region, particularly
IGAD and the AU, will want to see a joint approach in
which we have a coordinated joint command but with
AMISOM. at the apex of the Eastern African Standby
Force, troops trained by neighbours at the request of
the TFG and the international community, and then
other troops that may be available so that the approach
to bringing normalcy to Somalia is not disjointed. This
approach, in Kenya's view, is predicated on the fact
that it is seeking not a military solution to the problems
of Somalia but a process of securing the integrity of the
territory of Somalia and giving capacity and strength to
the Government of Somalia, because a Government is
no Government if it is not able to provide for the peace
and security of its people and secure the territorial
integrity of its country.

We did this knowing that we have constantly
encouraged the Transitional Federal Government to
reach out to its opponents to discuss and find a lasting
solution to the problems of their country. This was
reiterated in Kampala at the African Union summit
where, apart from the pronouncement by the AU, there
was a mini-IGAD summit, also attended by the
Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs of the
United States, Johnnie Carson, and IGAD partners,
which include several European countries and the
United States. This point was overwhelmingly
endorsed and immediately achievable goals were set in
place. Raising 2,000 troops within 20 days has not
been done. We are closing in on the goal of raising an
additional 2,000 troops within 60 days, but we have not
met the first benchmark. There was also an undertaking
by the United States to call upon our richer friends -
particularly from Europe, though Japan and others
were mentioned - to put some money in the basket to
enable the troops we are putting together, which will
not be within the framework of AMISOM. but under a
coordinated command with AMISOM, to be paid their
monthly stipends and rations so that they will be able
to carry out their duties. I hope that together we will be
able to see this happen.

Since Kampala, no meeting has been called. We
hope that after the General Assembly gathering of
heads of State, we can return to Africa and have a
meeting to be coordinated, we hope, by the United
States, which co-chaired the Kampala meeting, and the

10-5364]
United Nations. As the Council can see, it is not lack of
initiatives that is the problem in Somalia. It is the
failure to fulfil our promises and the lack of a
coordinated approach in our engagement with Somalia.

We fully welcome the appointment of
Ambassador Mahiga. As he is a son of the region, I
have no doubt that he will be able to understand even
better the problems of Somalia. In our meetings, we
have clearly indicated to him that it does not matter
how many warships we may deploy to fight piracy; as
long as Somalia remains chaotic, piracy will be born
on land and manifested at sea. And if the TFG were to
collapse - and god forbid that should occur - and the
group called Al-Shabaab were to pursue an agenda and
ideology whose foundation is the destruction of all
non-Muslim people in region, as a country and as a
neighbour we would be uncomfortable with a situation
like that. We have no problem with Islam as a religion,
and let nobody make any mistake about that because in
my country we have a very large Muslim population.
We have Muslim ministers, but we are a secular State
and a secular State we want to remain.

I would want to urge the Security Council to
enforce some of the decisions that we have made in the
region. For instance, IGAD recommended the
imposition of targeted sanctions on certain aspects of
Somalia, including airfields in the hands of Al-Shabaab
and other negative elements and the blockade of the
port of Kismaayo, which is the main supply line for
Al-Shabaab. The AU endorsed that, and through this
process the United Nations imposed some targeted
sanctions on the State of Eritrea, which to us in the
region remains one of the principal collaborators and
suppliers of Al-Shabaab. We want to see this process
enforced.

I can assure you, Mr. President, and Ambassador
Mahiga will bear witness for me on this, that if the port
of Kismaayo were blockaded, 70 per cent of the
strength of Al-Shabaab would be dealt a blow because
it is the principal supply line and only about 70
kilometres from the international boundary with
Kenya. The Council can see what type of situation that
puts my country's peace in.

As I come to an end, I also want to urge the
United Nations to support the region in formulating -
perhaps through Mr. Mahiga's Office - a very robust
and clear communication strategy to counter the
propaganda from Al-Shabaab. It runs powerful radio

stations and powerful communications tools that
overshadow or overrun any Government initiative in
Somalia.

The most important point is to now address the
sunset days of the Transitional Federal Charter, which
will expire in August 2011. It has given birth to
legitimate institutions that have helped run Somalia
and to legitimate engagement between nations and the
Government of Somalia. IGAD has already pronounced
itself on this, and we have looked at the Charter and at
the clauses that might allow the extension the life of
the Charter. But we do not want to extend the life of
the Charter only to sustain the status quo. We would
want to extend the life of the Charter on the basis of
reason and thinking that will make a difference and
achieve that which we probably will not have achieved
during the first life of the Charter. That can be done,
and the region will be able to midwife those efforts.

We hope to see the international community come
together in a more coherent, proactive and sincere
manner to assist the region to help Somalia.

