Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me, on behalf of the people of Panama, to
express our solidarity with the peoples and the
Governments of China and Myanmar in view of the
tragedies that they both have suffered following the
recent natural disasters.

This is a timely occasion to extend to you,
Mr. President, my country's most sincere gratitude for
convening this meeting and for your Government's
dedicated support for the consideration of the issue of
post-conflict peacebuilding.

The subject that we are addressing today is how
to attain lasting and sustainable peace in a country that
has been affected by armed conflict, and which United
Nations entities should participate in that process, the
details of their involvement and, finally, their exit.

It is undeniable that the Security Council is
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and, as such, is the key protagonist in the peaceful
resolution of conflicts. In turn, it is universally
acknowledged that, while the deployment of measures
to promote and maintain peace is a prerequisite for
ending conflict, it is not in itself sufficient to attain
lasting peace and to prevent countries that lack the
appropriate State machinery from quickly relapsing
into violence.

In order to strengthen the peacebuilding process,
at the 2005 World Summit, heads of State established
the Peacebuilding Commission as an advisory body of
the General Assembly, Economic and Social Council
and Security Council. However, the resolutions
establishing the Commission - resolution 1645 (2005)
and do not clearly stipulate when the Security Council
should end its involvement - or when the
Peacebuilding Commission should take up its duties.
Panama is of the view that this should not be seen as an
event, but rather as a process in which the Security
Council commits itself to gradually reducing its
participation and influence in the peacebuilding
process as the Peacebuilding Commission takes up its
responsibility for the process and takes the necessary
medium- and long-term measures.

To that end, it is crucial that the Security Council,
from the outset, establish clear, convincing and viable
mandates for the future establishment of integrated
missions, which would include, from early on,
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants; security sector
reform; conflict resolution and reconciliation
techniques; the provision of technical assistance for
democratic development; the promotion and protection
of human rights; assistance for victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse; and stabilization and recovery
efforts to be carried out by the United Nations country
teams.

Our aim should be to support communities
emerging from conflict with coordinated, coherent and
integrated strategies and mechanisms throughout the
process. Addressing the most visible symptoms also
involves addressing the root causes of the conflict from
the outset, immediately following the signing of a
peace agreement and until the relevant communities
have attained sustainable and socially responsible
development.

I would like to state that Panama fully shares the
View expressed earlier by the representative of Costa
Rica that every United Nations peacekeeping effort
should be undertaken in parallel with a peacebuilding
effort. It almost goes without saying that those peace
processes should be led by the country concerned, that
they should include regional and subregional
organizations and that they should be able to draw on
the financial resources and capacities necessary for
their success. In turn, leadership and communication
on the ground are paramount in order to make those
efforts work.

To that end, particular attention should be paid to
the selection and strengthening of the coordination role
of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General. Channels for communication should be
ensured with the country's Resident Coordinator in
order to ensure the effectiveness of those initiatives in
the long term.

We would like to underscore that, for Panama,
human beings with all their complexity, needs, fears
and aspirations, should be placed at the heart of
peacebuilding. That exercise is thus both integral and
multidimensional in nature. It is the duty of the United
Nations and of this Council to assist States in the
responsibility to protect the human rights of post-
conflict populations.

Finally, I would like to express Panama's support
for the draft presidential statement that has been
submitted by the Government of the United Kingdom.
