Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank Ms. Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa, and Ambassador Vieira
for their valuable briefings. We also thank Mr. Jose
Viegas Filho, former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, for his efforts
during his term as Head ofthe United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
We also congratulate Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly on her
appointment as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Guinea-Bissau. We wish her every success
in the upcoming period, especially during the electoral
process and the drawdown of UNIOGBIS in 2020.

We are two months away from the presidential
elections, due to be held in Guinea-Bissau at the end
of November. This is seen as an important stage in
achieving long-term stability in the country. We look
forward to fair, transparent and credible elections
being held within the time frame set for them.
The successful legislative elections held in March
have demonstrated that the national authorities can
conduct elections successfully, with the support of the
international community.

There are many positive aspects to be mentioned
when discussing developments in Guinea-Bissau as
compared to the previous period, which was complicated
in terms of achieving the basic requirements of the
Conakry Agreement, which to date is clearly the best
option to achieve stability. We have seen the successful
conclusion of a full presidential term for the first time
in the history of Guinea-Bissau in the past 25 years.
Moreover, we have witnessed the successful completion
of the legislative elections and the formation of a new
Government, as well as intensive efforts to overcome
the various challenges facing the country.

There are important steps for Guinea-Bissau to take
in the upcoming period, particularly ahead ofthe closure
of UNIOGBIS. The first such step is the presidential
elections, followed by the necessary reforms, especially
constitutional reforms. We call on the authorities in
the country to take advantage in the upcoming period
of the support provided by UNIOGBIS with a view
to ensuring the necessary reforms and building the
State's capabilities in preparation for the drawdown of
the Office.

Despite the stable security situation, challenges
continue, especially with regard to transnational crime
and drug trafficking in the country. The whole region
suffers from those threats, which have been discussed
in the Security Council on many occasions, the most
important of which was the briefing held in December
2018, when we discussed the impact of such challenges
on security in West Africa (see S/PV.8433).

We commend the Government's commitment
to overcoming such challenges and the support of
UNIOGBIS as well as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime for their tireless efforts, which have
led to the seizure and confiscation of huge amounts of
drugs on more than one occasion.

We appreciate the pivotal role of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
in Guinea-Bissau through its ongoing support for
advancing the political process in the country and the
role of its military mission there. We fully support
its efforts and those of the African Union, the United
Nations, the European Union and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.

In conclusion, we welcome the steps taken by
UNIOGBIS to prepare for its closure by the end of2020.
We commend its decision to establish an integrated
task force to organize the drawdown of the Office. We
believe that the United Nations should continue to play
a role after the closure of the Office, particularly since
Guinea-Bissau currently faces a difficult economic
situation. The United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel must continue to provide support after
2020 in many of the areas within its mandate. Moreover,
the Peacebuilding Commission has an important role to
play in that regard. We welcome the projects that it is
financing, as the role ofthe Commission will strengthen
the efforts to maintain the current stability in the
country, especially after the closure of UNIOGBIS.

