Mr. Heumann (Israel): I will also be very brief, but
I would like to respond to some of the allegations we
have heard made against my country today.

I think it is truly absurd to hear the representative
of the dictatorship of Saudi Arabia criticize the Middle
East's only democracy. Under the guise of combating
terrorism, Saudi Arabia has aggressively repressed
the rights and freedoms of its own people. It even
proclaimed atheism to be a terrorist offence andjailed a
poet named Hamza Kashgari, whose only offence was
posting harmless tweets. Saudi Arabia may have given
$100 million to the United Nations counter-terrorism
programme but it is worth remembering that the Saudi
regime has made far larger and more generous donations
to extremist terror groups that promote radicalization
and terror attacks around the world.

I will not respond to the ridiculous allegations
made by the Syrian representative against my country.
The Syrian delegation represents a Government with
zero credibility that cares nothing about the needs of its
own people. Its remarks are another cheap attempt to
divert attention from the massacre of the Syrian people.

Lastly, I am pleased to see that the Iranian

representative is taking full advantage of the freedom
of expression in this Chamber. I suppose it is fitting,
given that the Iranian people do not enjoy that right at
home. It seems to me that he got a little carried away
with the novelty and has used this forum to spread tall
tales at Israel's expense.

But the truth is that Iran is today the main sponsor
of terrorism around the globe. For decades, Iran has
funded hundreds of terror campaigns that have taken
thousands of innocent lives in Africa, Europe, Latin
America and the Middle East. In Syria, Iran has sent
its Revolutionary Guards to fight alongside Al-Assad's
force and spent billions sustaining the bloody civil war
that has taken almost 200,000 lives.

In Lebanon, Iranian-backed Hizbullah terrorist
groups have built a militia larger and stronger than
many armies. The international community has
realized the need for a robust strategy that will contain
the threat posed by terrorist groups like Daesh. The
same thinking is needed with regard to sponsors of
terror like Iran.

