Mr. Mendonca e Moura (Portugal): I would
like to thank the Malaysian presidency for convening
this open debate and thank today's briefers for their
presentations.
I would like to offer a special word of thanks to
Ms. Leila Zerrougui for the work she has been doing to
protect children.

Back in 1998, the first ever debate held in the
Security Council on the issue of children in armed
conflict was promoted by Portugal. We were then
fully convinced, as we remain today, that this issue
has serious implications for international peace and
security.

It is appalling that the minimum standards in respect
for human right in times of war are systematically
ignored and violated by both Government forces and
non-State actors. When children, the most vulnerable
of the vulnerable, continue to be victims of armed
violence and are killed, injured, abused, abducted
and, in some cases, used as soldiers, that represents
the collapse of the collective value system of the
international community.

The international community must ensure the
application and observance of normative international
instruments such as the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocols, in particular the one
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, as
well as the Geneva Conventions.

The political and ethical role of the Security
Council is to send a clear message that abuse against
children is unacceptable and, through its action, to
combat the sense ofimpunity on the part ofbelligerents
responsible for the atrocities and abuses committed
against children.

As stated in the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2015/409), 2014 was one of the worst years with
respect to the effects of armed conflict on children.
Children have been disproportionately affected and are
often direct targets of extreme violence. Abduction in
particular has become a tactic of war used by extremist
non-State actors to terrorize and control communities,
and it is a first sign of alert for further human rights
abuses. Portugal condemns in the most vehement terms
the abduction of children and calls on all parties to
release all abducted children immediately. Portugal
welcomes today's adoption of resolution 2225 (2015)
and the expansion of the list of triggers for listing
perpetrators in the Secretary-General's annual report
to include abduction. The resolution represents a
further step in holding perpetrators accountable and
in investigating and prosecuting those responsible for
committing atrocities against children.

It is of the utmost importance to recognize the
importance of action to promote the physical and
psychological recovery and social reintegration of
child victims of conflict. Efforts should include
demobilization and the return of displaced and refugee
children. The international community must ensure that
adequate resources are devoted to child-rehabilitation
programmes and educational training as an integral part
of planning for post-conflict situations. In addition, any
plans for post-conflict peacebuilding should make the
needs of children a central focus. In that regard, Portugal
supports the inclusion of child-protection provisions
in the mandates of peace operations and mandatory
pre-deployment training on child protection for all
United Nations troop and police contingents. However,
before attempting to address the difficult challenge of
reintegration in society, it is fundamental that children
deprived of their liberty for their alleged association
with extremist groups should be recognized, in the first
instance, as victims of forcible recruitment who have
been exposed to extreme brutality.

The inadequate provision of education to children
in situations of armed conflict is also a serious problem
that will have consequences in the long term for the
countries concerned. Millions of children are denied
their right to education because of armed conflict.
In his latest report, the Secretary-General notes the
increasing trend towards the use of schools for military
purposes, as well as attacks on education. We are
gravely concerned about widespread and deliberate
attacks against schools, teachers and students as an
instrument of warfare. That is a totally unacceptable
situation that needs to be urgently redressed. My
country has regularly introduced a resolution on the
realization of the right to education in the Human
Rights Council that was at the origin of the mandate
of the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Education.
That resolution, which my delegation will again present
atthe current session of the Human Rights Council,
as well as related initiatives in the General Assembly,
such as the resolution on education in situations of
emergency, which my country also sponsored, are steps
in the right direction in order to guarantee what is not
only, in itself, a fundamental human right, but also an
important tool in the fulfilment of other basic rights.

Against that backdrop, Portugal also endorsed the
Safe Schools Declaration made public at the recent
Oslo conference and calls on the parties to adopt
concrete measures to deter the use of schools during
conflict, including though the use oftools ofthe Lucens
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict.

We cannot remain indifferent to the gross
violations of children's rights that we are witnessing
everywhere. We thank the leadership of Malaysia for
its efforts to consolidate the mechanisms at the disposal
of the Council for addressing one of the most appalling
scourges of our time.

