Mr. Wetland (Norway): Let me join others in
thanking the Libyan presidency for organizing this
open debate and in welcoming to the United Nations
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of South Africa; Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security; and Mr. Romano Prodi.

Norway welcomes the report of the African
Union-United Nations panel on African Union
peacekeeping operations (S/2008/813). The report
points to a number of critical issues for United Nations
peacekeeping operations in general, and underlines the
challenges in managing conflicts and maintaining
peace and security on the African continent in
particular.

The AU has a commendable record on mediation,
crisis management and peacekeeping. But we know it
is challenging to sustain such work over time. That is
why the international community needs to assist in this
effort, be it with funding, logistics, equipment or by
other means. Norway supports the idea of establishing
a multi-donor trust fund to finance long-term capacity-
building of the African Union. We also favour a
mutually agreed and standardized system of reporting
for the fund. Such a fund could encourage greater
support and better coordination of donor contributions.
However, one key issue here is the need to differentiate
between projects that qualify as official development
assistance (ODA) and projects that do not. This could
be done by creating a separate window in the trust fund
for ODA funding for non-military and civilian
purposes.

Norway has also taken note of the panel's
recommendations on the use of assessed contributions
in support of United Nations-authorized AU peace
operations. We believe that such support should be
given on a case-by-case basis. The go-ahead given by
the Security Council to use assessed contributions to
finance a logistics support package for the African
Union Mission in Somalia could be an interesting test
case.

When further developing funding mechanisms,
we must also address the need to develop the AU's
institutional structures for financial management. This
is important to ensure AU ownership and
accountability to donors.

Norway supports the idea of establishing a joint
United Nations-AU team to examine the detailed
modalities to support the recommendations made by
the panel. One of the first tasks of that team could be to
define the strategic relationship between the two
organizations. The role of other partners is also
important here. Regional organizations, such as the
European Union and NATO, as well as individual
countries all have roles to play in augmenting African
peacekeeping capacity and the emerging African Peace
and Security Architecture.

We believe it is important that regional
organizations take greater responsibility for
international peace and security, but the primary
responsibility for responding to threats to international
peace and security remains with this Council. When
regional organizations act in crises situations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter, they should always be
mandated and coordinated by the Security Council.
Norway agrees with the panel on the need for a clearer
strategic vision for the relationship and collaboration
between the Security Council and the African Union on
issues concerning peace and security.

We also fully support the efforts undertaken by
the African Union to develop a new African Peace and
Security Architecture, including the establishment of
an African Standby Force, and to enhance its capacity
for conflict prevention and mediation and for
addressing post-conflict situations. Norway remains
committed to supporting the African Union in all these
fields.

Military capability must be supplemented by
non-military means to build a lasting peace. Civilian
and police components are increasingly important in
peacekeeping operations, not least with regard to the
protection of civilians. Appropriate training is key
here, and for the past 14 years, Norway and African
partners have run the successful Training for Peace
programme capacity-building to enhance civilian and
police capacity for African peacekeeping. Norway is
also planning to support civilian capacity in the AU
Peace Support Operations Division.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Norway's strong
commitment to supporting the AU in its peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. We appreciate the panel's
important contribution to the discussion on how to
proceed from here, and hope that today's debate will
open the path to new and better ways to help the large
number of people in Africa who are in urgent need of a
more robust peacekeeping effort.
