Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): Iwish to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Jan Kubis for his briefing. I also welcome Ambassador
Tanin of Afghanistan and thank him for his statement.

China has always and unequivocally supported
peace and reconstruction in Afghanistan, as well as
the early achievement of the goal of Afghanistan being
governed by its own people. Efforts to promote national
reconciliation should continue to abide by the principle
of Afghan leadership and ownership, and strike an
appropriate balance in such areas as the political
process, economic development, security, stability
and national reconciliation. China appreciates the
achievements of the Afghan Government and people in
various nation-building endeavours.

Recent international conferences on this question
have reaffirmed the international community's
commitment to Afghanistan. In that regard, I wish to
emphasize the following four points.

First, the 2014 elections will be a critical element of
the political process. Afghanistan is actively preparing
for the elections. China welcomes the fact that the
Afghan Government has already defined an electoral
time frame. The international community should
respect Afghan sovereignty and political independence
in the elections. The United Nations has rich electoral
experience, and China welcomes the electoral
assistance of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), at the request of the Afghan
Government.

Secondly, efforts to achieve lasting security and
stability in Afghanistan still face challenges. The
security situation in some provinces is not stable,
and there has been an increase in civilian casualties.
China welcomes Afghanistan's efforts to build the
capacities of its security forces and to gradually assume
responsibility for maintaining State stability and
security. In the prevailing circumstances, the handover
of security responsibilities should be progressive and
orderly so as to maintain overall stability.

Thirdly, national reconciliation is an important
component of peace and reconstruction processes
in Afghanistan. China supports the ongoing
implementation of the Kabul communique and the
promotion of an Afghan-led reconciliation process.
Mr. Rabbani, Chair ofthe High Peace Council, recently
visited Pakistan. The two sides achieved an important
consensus, which China welcomes. The Security
Council recently adopted resolution 2082 (2012),
adjusting relevent sanctions measures. We hope that this
step will contribute to the promotion of reconciliation.

Fourthly, it is only by ensuring the prosperity
and development of Afghanistan that the foundation
for lasting security and stability can be laid. China
supports the efforts of the Afghan Government to build
the economy, increase employment and improve living
standards. We hope that the international community
will honour its aid commitments to Afghanistan and
support the development priorities independently
identified by the Government. It is criticial to alleviate
food shortages in some parts of the country.

The promotion of peace and reconstruction in
Afghanistan requires the joint efforts of that country
and the international community. China supports the
United Nations lead role in coordinating international
efforts to address that matter. We hope that UNAMA will
continue to strengthen its coordination and cooperation
with the Afghan Government. China supports the
positive role played by the countries of the region
and regional organizations in Afghanistan's peace
and reconstruction processes. Regional cooperative
initiatives should respect Afghan sovereignty, prioritize
the legitimate concerns of the countries of the region,
and advance steadily through full consultations.

