Mr. Menon (Singapore): I am making this
statement of the 10 Members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Let me add that we
are extremely pleased to see a fellow ASEAN member
presiding over the Security Council.

The end of the cold war marked the end of an era
where global conflicts were seen through the prism of
only two lenses. Today, we live in a more complex and
interconnected world, where there are many new actors
on the international stage and more variables and
alignments to consider. While the threat of global war
has receded, smaller conflicts that are often
asymmetric, low-intensity and diffuse have
proliferated. It has become a messier world.

This situation presents new challenges to global
peace and security. Obviously, the United Nations and
the major Powers have a crucial role to play. But in a
globalized world, regional cooperation can also play a
key role. Indeed, even the Charter of the United
Nations recognizes the role that regional arrangements
can play in helping the United Nations to achieve its
objectives.

All over the world today, regional initiatives are
proliferating. Some are modest in their objectives,
providing forums to meet and consult. Others are more
ambitious. They discuss security or create free trade
areas. They foster joint efforts against problems like
drug trafficking and terrorism. Many of these regional
initiatives are open and inclusive and should be
encouraged to remain that way. Those which are
superfluous will gradually wither away. International
organizations like the United Nations, the World Trade
Organization, the World Health Organization, the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the United
Nations Environment Programme should work with
those that remain, strengthening their capabilities and
encouraging mutual learning. At their best, these
regional initiatives create a habit of cooperation and
reduce misunderstanding.

ASEAN has played this role. The year 2007 is
special because it marks 40 years of unity. ASEAN has
come a long way since it was established by the
Bangkok Declaration of 1967. Against the backdrop of
the cold war, and with regional disputes still fresh in
memory, ASEAN began with the modest aim of
keeping the peace in South-East Asia. It was a
mechanism for member countries to manage common
threats, while balancing internal sensitivities and
conflicts. In short, ASEAN was born out of the
strategic imperatives of its times. With the end of the
cold war, peace returned to Indochina and ASEAN
gradually expanded to include the newer member
States of Viet Nam, Laos, Myanmar and Cambodia, to
become a community of ten.

ASEAN has been working to establish a norm of
cooperation and dialogue among its members.
Economic cooperation was always a key point. In
1992, ASEAN decided to establish a free trade area in
stages. We have largely achieved that goal with respect
to trade in goods. For investments and services, we still
have some way to go. But there is the will to press on
and transform ASEAN into one economic space.

Four years ago, when the leaders of ASEAN met
in Indonesia, they took a major decision to establish an
ASEAN community by 2020 with three main areas as
its pillars - security, economic and socio-cultural.
Earlier this year, the leaders further agreed to
accelerate the establishment of the ASEAN community
by 2015. To create such a community, an ASEAN
charter will be signed later this month in Singapore to
provide a legal framework document for the further
strengthening of ASEAN. It will help remake ASEAN
into a more effective, cohesive and rules-based
organization, through, for instance, establishing
provisions for dispute settlement by independent
panels. Blueprints for each of the three pillars of the
ASEAN community will also map out concrete
initiatives, targets and timelines to achieve this goal.
The first such blueprint - for the economic pillar-
will be adopted later this month.

ASEAN has also been active in engaging the
external environment. For ASEAN to prosper, we have
always recognized the importance of maintaining good
relations with all the major Powers in the region.
ASEAN has dialogue partnerships with the United
States, the European Union, Russia, China, Japan,
Korea, India, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
ASEAN has been playing a bridging role of sorts. It is
the driving force behind the creation of such key
regional groupings as the ASEAN Regional Forum
(ARF), ASEAN+3 and the East Asia Summit. The ARF
is the main security forum in the Asia-Pacific region,
bringing together 27 participating countries and entities
including ASEAN, the United States, the European
Union, Russia, China and India.

Through its many confidence-building measures
and preventive diplomacy activities, the ARF has
contributed to the stability and security in the region.
Economically, ASEAN has negotiated, or is in the
process of negotiating, free trade agreements with
China, India, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Australia
and New Zealand and with the EU, and a closer
economic partnership with the Unites States. We have a
simple strategy, which is to give all of them a strong
stake in our regional stability, unity and development.
Strategically, some of the most important sea lanes
pass through ASEAN waters. About a third of global
trade, half of the global oil trade and 80 per cent of the
oil bound for China and Japan pass through the Straits
of Malacca and Singapore.

Through the ASEAN-plus groupings and the East
Asia Summit, which includes Australia, China, India,
Japan, the Republic of Korea and New Zealand, we are
creating a new architecture of peaceful cooperative
development in the larger East Asia. The East Asia
Summit process is maturing into an important regional
forum that is progressing beyond dialogue into
concrete cooperation. Let me stress that, while ASEAN
is not big enough to be a major global player, it plays a
significant role in holding Asia together and keeping it
open to the rest of the world. ASEAN is outward-
looking and inclusive, and through its various external
linkages seeks to engage all who have a stake in the
region's future.

ASEAN is a work in process. Like other regions
in the world, we face many problems: economic
development, terrorism, drug trafficking, environmental
degradation, maritime security, ethnic and religious
divisions and avian flu, among others. However, what
each of us in ASEAN has come to appreciate is that,
without ASEAN, each of these problems would be
much harder to solve. And ASEAN alone cannot solve
any of them. We have to work with other countries and
with international organizations like the United
Nations. We are grateful for their assistance, their
partnership and their cooperation.

