Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I should like
to join others in welcoming the High Representative,
Mr. Schwarz-Schilling, and the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Adnan Terzic, to the Council. I thank both of them
for their interesting statements, which have given us
impressive and detailed accounts of the notable
advances that have been achieved on the ground in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I should like to associate myself with the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union (EU).

I will limit myself to three points.

First, we have been particularly encouraged by
the recent political agreement on constitutional reform.
The reform is a significant step towards improving the
efficiency of Bosnia and Herzegovina's State
institutions. As such, it will also have an important
impact on Bosnia and Herzegovina's desired path
towards Euro-Atlantic integration. We therefore urge
Bosnia and Herzegovina's parliament to adopt the
proposed amendments in time for the October 2006
general elections. Closer relationships with the EU and
NATO will require further reform by our partners in
Sarajevo.

We welcome the progress made in the
negotiations on the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the EU. We encourage the relevant
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue
along this path in order to cement a formal and
comprehensive relationship between the EU and
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The pace will depend on the
implementation of the police reform, the adoption and
implementation of legislation on public broadcasting
and full cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Bosnia and
Herzegovina - indeed, all countries in the western
Balkans - needs to take decisive action and bring
remaining persons indicted for war crimes to justice,
most notably Ratko Mladic' and Radovan Karadzic.
Only then will the remaining legacy of the war in the
western Balkans be buried - a precondition for lasting
reconciliation in the region.

Secondly, we support the intention of the High
Representative to restrict the use of the Bonn powers to
the extent possible, thus allowing the local authorities
the greatest degree of ownership. We appreciate that
there is a fine balance between, on the one hand, using
the Bonn powers proactively and, on the other hand,
ensuring an appropriate gradual transfer of
responsibility and political ownership to the political
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We support the gradual downsizing of the Office
of the High Representative, but the job is not yet
finished, and we need to ensure that that is done in a
measured way and with due attention to the challenges
still ahead in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Finally, with regard to the issue of police
certification, we support the ongoing dialogue between
the High Representative and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. At this stage it is important
not to exclude any of the options before us. We agree
that the issue needs to be resolved as soon as possible.

Denmark remains committed to assisting as best
it can as Bosnia and Herzegovina and, indeed, the
whole western Balkans region continue their journey
towards stability and democracy. In this regard, we
give our full support to the High Representative,
Mr. Schwarz-Schilling, and the approach that he has
outlined.

I think that we all sense the strong commitment
of the Government and the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take charge in forming a better, more
prosperous and democratic future together. We
welcome and strongly support that.

