Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2371 (2017). We would like to
express our appreciation to the United States for taking
the lead on it. We would also like to thank all other
members of the Council for their support and hard work
to make today's adoption possible.

The need for the Security Council to strongly
condemn North Korea's nuclear tests and ballistic-
missile launches has considerably grown in the past
year and a half. Since January 2016, North Korea has
conducted two nuclear tests and launched approximately
40 ballistic missiles. The sheer number and frequency
show how unprecedented and unacceptable these
provocations are.

Not only is the quantity outrageous, the qualitative
advancements are also deeply alarming. Just last
month, we saw two ballistic-missile launches with
intercontinental range. The second launch was already
more technologically advanced than the first. The
footage broadcast on Japanese television of the most
recent launch showed that it was visible with the
naked eye in Hokkaido as it fell into the sea off the
coast of Japan. If the launch had been less lofted, the
missile's range could have covered half the globe. It is
abundantly clear that this is an imminent global threat
to all Member States, not merely a regional one.

North Korea seems determined to continue
its nuclear build-up. In March 2016, the Security
Council responded to its fourth nuclear test by
adopting resolution 2270 (2016), at the time the most
comprehensive to date, sending a clear message to
North Korea that it must halt its nuclear development.
After a fifth test occurred, in September 2016, the
Security Council sent an even stronger message via
resolution 2321 (2016). Nevertheless, North Korea has
continued to ignore the international community's
calls by obstinately forging ahead with its nuclear and
missile development programmes. That has resulted in
the Council's adoption of resolution 2371 (2017) today.
The resolution is robust and will reduce the North
Korean regime's revenues by approximately $1 billion.
It represents an urgent call to North Korea to change
its behaviour.

At this point, it is clear to everyone that North
Korea is nowhere near resuming a meaningful dialogue.
If we are to change its behaviour, we have no choice
but to continue to increase the pressure. All Members
of the United Nations must demonstrate a renewed
commitment to implementing the existing Security
Council resolutions, including the one we have just
adopted, rigorously and thoroughly. Japan will continue
to work closely with Council members and all Member
States in order to reach a comprehensive solution to the
problems related to North Korea.

