Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from Chinese): First of all, I wish to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for her important introduction.

In late May last year the Security Council conducted
an open debate on the protection of humanitarian
assistance and subsequently issued a presidential
statement requesting that the countries concerned,
especially the parties to conflicts, comply with the
relevant rules of international law, guarantee that
international humanitarian assistance operations could
continue to be carried out without interference, and
guarantee that the safety and security of relief workers be
protected.

In the various conflicts that have occurred in recent
years, innocent civilians, especially women and children,
have suffered the most and been the most affected. Many
people have been forced to leave their homes and become
refugees, with no guarantee of their basic livelihood.
Under such circumstances, the international community
has the obligation to provide necessary humanitarian
assistance to meet the urgent needs of the refugees and
displaced peoples so as to mitigate the difficulties facing
them. However, as is stated in the report of the Secretary-
General, owing to various factors, attacks against

 

international humanitarian assistance operations and their
personnel have been going on unabated.

The question of the safety and security of international
humanitarian relief operations and relief workers is a matter
of concern. Therefore, it is necessary for the Security
Council to once again hold an open debate to draw the
attention of all parties to this question and push for the
adoption of necessary measures so as to guarantee fully the
safety and security of humanitarian assistance operations
and their personnel.

China appreciates the report of the Secretary-General
to the Security Council and basically agrees with the
analysis contained therein. We are seriously concerned
about the constant attacks against and kidnapping of
humanitarian relief workers. We believe that the key to the
resolution of this problem lies in strict compliance with and
implementation of international law by the parties to the
conflicts and in the renunciation of the practice of pursuing
political goals by attacking humanitarian relief workers or
by kidnapping such workers.

At the same time, the relief operations and the
personnel should strictly abide by the principles of
humanity, neutrality and impartiality. During their work
they should be careful to respect the local history, culture,
religious practices, customs and traditions.

China is in favour of the Secretary-General's
recommendation regarding strengthening coordination
between the Security Council and other institutions like the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
We support the further strengthening of information
exchange between the Security Council and other organs
such as the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Children's
Fund and the International Committee of the Red Cross so
that there is a clear division of labour and each can carry
out its functions, coordinate with the others and guarantee
the safety of humanitarian assistance personnel.

We also believe it would be appropriate for the
Security Council in the authorization of future peacekeeping
operations to consider the inclusion of protection for
humanitarian assistance where there is a practical need for
it.

Finally, China supports the Security Council's issuing
of a presidential statement and will further study the
specific recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General.

