Mr. Barros (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
the Nigerian delegation for having convened this open
debate. We also express our gratitude for the briefing
by Mr. Robert Serry on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

Chile's position on this issue is well known. My
country, which recognized the State of Palestine
in January 2011, supports the two-State solution in
accordance with the principles set out in relevant
United Nations resolutions, including General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) and Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 337 (1973). We do so in the
aim of seeing the establishment of an independent and
sovereign Palestinian State, living side by side in peace
and security with the State ofIsrael, within secure and
internationally recognized borders are established.

Today, with the conclusion of the nine-month
period set for negotiations between Israel and Palestine,
we see once again the fading hopes of reaching an
agreement in the Middle East. We regret that the parties
did not seize this opportunity to strengthen dialogue
and mutual trust. In particular, we are concerned by
unilateral actions and a number of measures that
threaten peace. For example, increased settlement
building on Palestinian territory, which is illegal under
international law, or visits by senior Israeli official to
the Temple Mount could incite sectarian extremism.
Our country deeply regrets such incidents.
For Chile, it is imperative that the Old City of
Jerusalem be shared under the principles of harmony
and mutual respect, in recognition of its profound
significance for several of the major religions.
Moreover, we are concerned by omissions, such as
the lack of condemnation of rocket fire from the Gaza
Strip. Terrorism has no place in this world. In that vein,
I would like to say that Chile supports the process of
Palestinian reconciliation between Fatah and Hamas,
agreed in 2012 and ratified on Wednesday, 23 April. We
believe that the Palestinian question must be addressed
comprehensively and without neglecting the fate of
the population living in the Gaza Strip. However, we
reiterate our conviction that the Islamic Resistance
Movement, Hamas, must renounce armed struggle and
recognize Israel's right to exist.

Chile will continue encouraging Israel and Palestine
to resume negotiations with a view to achieving just
and lasting peace under international law. We cherish
the hope that this will be possible.

My country remains concerned about the conflict
in the Syrian Arab Republic. We regret to note that the
humanitarian situation has sharply deteriorated and that
humanitarian access has not improved. We reiterate our
call on all parties to implement resolution 2139 (2014),
comply with international humanitarian law and
human rights law, ensure the protection of civilians,
and establish concrete measures on the ground to allow
rapid, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to the
affected population.

Regarding the programme removing Syrian
chemical weapons, we regret that, despite the progress
made, the 27 April deadline for the removal and
destruction of chemical material from the territory of
Syria was not met. We hope that the goal of the total
elimination of the arsenal will be met for 30 June. The
international community has made immense efforts to
support the process, and now it is for the parties to fully
implement resolution 2118 (2013) and the standards of
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). Nevertheless, it
is important to reiterate that the majority of the victims
have been cause by the use of conventional weapons.
We reiterate our concern at the reports of possible
chlorine gas attacks in Syria, in contravention of the
provisions of the CWC and of resolution 2118 (2013). In
this regard, we welcome the decision of the Executive
Council of the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons to establish a mission to investigate
the alleged attacks.

It is our belief that a political solution is the only
possible one. We believe it is quite urgent for the third
round of negotiations to be relaunched and for the
parties come to them in good faith and in a constructive
spirit in order to bridge the gaps between them and move
towards the implementation of the Geneva communique
of the Action Group for Syria (S/2012/522, annex), in
line with the elements agreed upon by the parties and
the process proposed by the Special Envoy, whom my
country supports.

We remain concerned about the impact of the
Syrian conflict on Lebanon's stability, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We believe it is indispensable that
the Lebanese political class renew their coexistence pact
and allow themselves to be guided by the dissociation
policy established in the Baabda Declaration.
Chile welcomes the parliamentary agreement on the
ministerial statement by the Cabinet of Prime Minister
Tammam Salam. We appreciate that the agreement was
adopted by a broad majority, although we regret that
once again the concept of"resistance", which Hezbollah
defends, was legitimized. We support the initiatives to
strengthen Lebanese institutions so that the State can
assume all its functions, such as a monopoly on the use
of force and territorial defence. Moreover, we want to
publicly recognize the open door policy with which
Lebanon has welcomed Syrian refugees. We hope that
in this difficult financial climate, donor countries step
up to the plate.

Finally, I note that Chile has deep ties with the
communities of the Middle East, and we will thus
always be willing to join our efforts with those of the
international community to establish avenues for peace
and progress for the people of that region.

