Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Once again I thank
the Special Representative for his briefing and for the
continued determination of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya to help de-escalate the situation in
Libya and facilitate a return to the United Nations-
1ed process.

This morning we heard a grave and alarming
analysis of a descent into violent chaos and the risk
of the disintegration of a country, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General alluded to. I
think that we all recognize that the coming weeks will
be vital for Libya. For our part, we stand steadfast in
support of United Nations leadership and Mr. Salame's
efforts to bring about a transition from violence to a
renewed political process.

I will keep my remarks brief because we have
consultations after this meeting. Ijust wanted to draw
attention to a few areas before getting on to what the
Special Representative said about a truce.

We again call on all United Nations Member
States to fully respect their obligations to contribute
to Libya's peace and stability, to prevent destabilizing
arms shipments and to safeguard Libya's oil resources,
all in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. As was said, it is obvious that the parties
continue to receive external support and arms
shipments, which further fuels the conflict. Once more
the United Kingdom calls on all Member States to
respect international law and on the Security Council
to take reports of violations very seriously. I thank
the German Ambassador for his report as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.

The humanitarian cost continues to be of
enormous concern. I will not repeat what the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said, but
I think that we really need to find a way to protect
migrants and refugees travelling along the central
Mediterranean route. We need to find a way to protect
those in detention centres within Libya itself. We have
discussed before in the Council the 2-3 July attack on
the Tajoura detention centre.

I want to reiterate what the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said about
the parties disassociating themselves from violent
extremist elements and about hatred and invective
fuelling violence.

Turning to his three-part proposal for an Eid
al-Adha truce, accompanied by confidence-building
measures, and for a high-level meeting of concerned
countries, to be followed by an internal Libya meeting.
Those are obviously very important elements that come
at a very critical time. I think that the Council will want
to discuss them in some detail and work out how best
the Council can enhance the United Nations efforts. So
I will leave it there but look forward to picking up these
important points in consultations.

