Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
too join in thanking Mr. Egeland for his insightful
briefing this morning. We also wish to commend the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for
the great work it is doing in Africa.

Millions of Africans live in countries where there
is ongoing armed conflict or the imminent risk of such
a conflict breaking out. This is a legitimate concern for
all of us. On the other hand, many encouraging peace
processes are currently in progress with respect to all
major conflicts in Africa, despite continued instability.
Increased commitment to peace and security on the
part of African organizations is an example of this, as
is the cooperation between the United Nations and our
organizations in Africa.

Mr. Egeland has just informed us that no amount
of humanitarian relief can provide what those who are
threatened by conflict have wanted most from Day
One, namely, effective protection against violence of
the most vicious kind, and the ability to return to their
homes. We agree. Indeed, strengthening Africans'
capacity in conflict prevention in crisis situations and
in crisis management must remain our main objective.
Reactive military interventions and humanitarian
measures are necessary to prevent further loss of life in
emergencies, but even at their best, such efforts can
only control a situation, not resolve it. Investment in
tools that focus on development, capacity-building for
mediation and peacebuilding is needed to ensure that
existing conflicts are resolved, as well as future ones
prevented. Without such investment, the demand for
reactive measures can only increase.

Mr. Egeland illustrated how expensive such
investment can be. It is noteworthy that Africa received
around $7 billion in humanitarian aid between 1995
and 2001. The cost of United Nations peacekeeping is
estimated at $2.8 billion for the period from July 2004
to June 2005 .

Africa has demonstrated its willingness to deal
with conflicts in the region. The Under-Secretary-
General has also observed that we have not done
enough in relation to Uganda. We have not done
enough to create the "pull factor" that could draw the
Lord's Resistance Army to disarmament and
reintegration programmes.

Among the African Union's principles is respect
for the sanctity of human life. It is in this regard that
we reiterate the New Partnership for Africa's
Development view on how best to assist Africa to build
its capacity to manage conflicts. This focuses on four
key areas: the prevention and resolution of conflicts;
peacekeeping and peace enforcement; post-conflict
reconciliation; and combating the illicit proliferation of
small arms, light weapons and landmines.

There are many complex and interconnected
causes of humanitarian crisis in Africa. While we
accept that policy choices can play a role, natural
phenomena such as drought and the HIV/AIDS
pandemic are factors as well. All these factors
compound one another. It is on this totality of factors
that we must focus.

