Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my country's profound
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to your fraternal
country for presiding over this meeting of the Security
Council.

I would also like to welcome, thank and pay tribute to
Mr. Olara Otunnu for his tireless efforts and his valuable
contributions to strengthening the rights of children in
armed conflicts.

I would also like to reaffirm my country's full
commitment to support all the efforts made in this area.

The physical, intellectual, spiritual and mental
development of children must receive attention as a social
and economic need for all of the countries of the world and
for their cultures and civilizations, whatever the state of
their economic and scientific development.

The successful outcome of the World Summit for
Children in 1990 set ambitious goals for children and their
development. To date, 181 States have ratified the 1989
Convention on the Rights of the Child. This is the best
proof of the international community's commitment to
protecting the rights of the child, as well as of its capacity
and willingness to work seriously to promote and protect
those rights and children's dignity.

However, despite the major achievements made in the
course of this decade, a number of factors have had a
negative impact on children in many regions of the world.
These include the economic crisis, the growing debt burden,
illnesses and epidemics. Perhaps among the most dangerous
factors has been the spread in the last few years of armed
conflicts, which have undergone radical changes that have
altered their very nature. The flouting and rejection of
international law, particularly international humanitarian
law, have opened up the way to all kinds of suffering being
inflicted upon civilian populations, and have also worsened
the problems of children in regions of armed conflict
despite international efforts aimed at preventing the
recruitment of children into armed forces and calling for
child soldiers to be demobilized, reunited with their
families, protected against organized violence, and
rehabilitated and reintegrated fully into society.

Before going further into the issue before us, I
should first like to reaffirm Egypt's firm position, which
we set out before the Council in February, regarding the
need to consider the protection of children in armed
conflicts in a broader context, namely, that of the
protection of all civilians. Pending the report of the
Secretary-General on the question of the protection of
civilian populations in armed conflicts, which he was
requested to prepare following the meeting of the Council
on that subject, we would like to stress the points we
believe should be taken into account when the Council
considers humanitarian questions.

First, the Council must consider these questions in
the context of complete respect for the delicate balance
between the principal organs established by the Charter of
the United Nations, in particular the essential role of the
General Assembly and the other bodies both within and
outside the United Nations, whether governmental or non-
governmental, for which the protection of civilian
populations is the first priority.

Secondly, it is important for the Council to assume
its role in finding solutions to conflicts threatening
international peace and security. It must resolve such
conflicts comprehensively by addressing their root causes
in order to avoid the intensification of aggression between
parties or disastrous humanitarian situations, such as the
displacement or expulsion of citizens who then must seek
refuge in neighbouring countries, thereby undermining the
security of civilians, including children, and leading to an
endless vicious circle.

Thirdly, the implementation of international
humanitarian law should not be in contradiction with the
need to respect the implementation of the provisions of
the Charter. We welcome and support the fact that the
Council is ready to respond in cases where civilians are
used as targets, or when humanitarian assistance is
deliberately hindered, but solely within the context of
Chapter VII, Article 39, of the Charter. However, if the
Council is unable to exercise its responsibilities, resort
should be made to the General Assembly's "Uniting for
Peace" resolution.

We the peoples of the world, as stated in the
Charter, are determined to protect future generations from
the scourge of war. Unfortunately, we have failed
catastrophically. As stressed in Mr. Otunnu's report to the
fifty-third session of the General Assembly, wars are still
killing millions of children worldwide. They are either the
targets of or tools for these wars. They are suffering in

 

more than 50 countries from conflicts and the aftermaths of
those conflicts. Despite the large number of children killed,
abducted, taken hostage or mutilated by anti-personnel
landmines, the number of those who have been deprived of
their physical, mental and emotional needs in societies
controlled by war is much greater. Indeed, millions have
lost their families and homes, not to mention their school
years and youth. Many children have suffered permanent
psychological damage due to the experiences they have
suffered.

While human rights instruments, such as the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and other
conventions on international humanitarian law -
particularly the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their two
Additional Protocols of 1977 - already represent important
milestones along the road to the protection of children in
armed conflicts, the gap between these norms and their
implementation and practice is vast and growing at an
unprecedented rate. Despite our conviction that the main
responsibility for bridging this gap and implementing
international norms to protect children during war falls first
of all to government, we are also convinced that
international society has an important role to play in
providing the material and technical assistance necessary to
protect and rehabilitate children. We appeal to the
international community to make every effort to ensure the
commitment of all parties to conflicts to protect the rights
of children against exploitation, abuse, violence, rape,
displacement and death.

We must put an end to the impunity of those who use
children as targets. The Statute of the International Criminal
Court, adopted in Rome last year, could be an important
development in the area of the protection of children in
armed conflicts since the Statute describes the recruitment
of children and their use in these conflicts, be they internal
or international, as a war crime.

Every effort must be made to adopt the optional
protocol relating to the involvement of children in armed
conflicts. Reaching an agreement on a mandatory age for
recruitment will be a major achievement benefiting
succeeding generations in all the States of the world.

We must also undertake to impose conditions on the
transfer of weapons, particularly of small arms, to regions
of conflict. We must also coordinate and mobilize
humanitarian assistance and meet all children's needs -
inter alia, for health care, education, social services -
throughout the post-conflict period, so as to replace the
culture of violence in which these children have grown up
with a culture of peace and development.

Children are the future of civilization and the future
of all societies. Their development, their protection and
their rights are a common responsibility for us all.
Fulfilling this responsibility will yield fruits for future
generations. The choice is war and Violence or peace and
development.

