Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing and Mr. Ivica
Dacic', Prime Minister of Serbia, and Mr, Hashim
Thaci, Prime Minsiter of Kosovo, for their statements.

The Security Council is meeting for the third
time since the historic agreement of 19 April between
Serbia and Kosovo, concluded under the auspices of the
European Union. The hopes that arose in the spring as
a result of this historic compromise have been fulfilled
by subsequent developments. Indeed, the momentum
created in April was followed by regular meetings
between the authorities of Serbia and Kosovo, while the
foundations laid by the implementation plan of 22 May
allowed for substantial progress to be made in the
relations between the two countries.

We also welcome the agreement reached between
the parties on 8 September in Brussels on issues of
energy and telecommunications. Furthermore, the
dismantling of Serb parallel structures in northern
Kosovo continues. Finally, we note with satisfaction
that laws ratifying the agreement of 19 April were
adopted in early September by the Parliament of Kosovo
following a review by the Constitutional Court. All of
this, we believe, reflects the commitment of the parties
to respecting and quickly implementing the pledges
they gave in the spring.

Over the past few weeks, municipal elections
were also organized and held throughout Kosovo, with
the essential help of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We commend
the parties for their work with local communities
throughout the countryside with a view to ensuring
high participation rates. The first round of municipal
elections, held on 3 November, took place in generally
satisfactory conditions, thereby strengthening the
implementation of the 19 April agreement. In southern
Kosovo, the overall participation rate of the Serbian
population was even higher than that observed in 2009.
All of this is proof of the beginnings of the Serbian
community's ownership of institutions in Pristina.
Despite the incidents that occurred during the
first round of elections, which were very localized, the
elections in and of themselves constitute undeniable
democratic progress. The smooth holding of the repeat
vote, held on 17 November in the three polling stations
in north Mitrovica, seems to further suggest that the
lessons of the incidents of 3 November were quickly
learned. The second round of elections will be held
on 1 December, and France calls on the Kosovo and
Serbian Governments, as well as all communities in
Kosovo, to demonstrate the same maturity and the
same courage during this second phase of the elections.
Finally, like the Secretary-General, we encourage them
to continue their education and reconciliation efforts in
the post-election period.

In his report (S/2013/631), the Secretary-General
re-examines the incident that took the life of an
officer of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) on 19 September. Like all parties,
we regret the death of a European officer, who fell in
service to the rule of law. We commend both parties
for their assistance to the criminal investigation opened
by EULEX to bring the perpetrators of that murder to
justice. The attack shocked us all, and as noted by the
Secretary-General, stands in contrast to the security
situation in Kosovo, which otherwise remains calm.
We wish to acknowledge once again the work of the
EULEX mission, which, alongside the Kosovo police
and the Kosovo Force, plays a key role with the OSCE
in ensuring the smooth holding of the elections.

The decision to open European Union accession
negotiations with Serbia on the one hand, and to authorize
the European Commission to negotiate a Stabilization
and Association Agreement with Kosovo, on the
other, was made after both countries made significant
progress in normalizing their relations. That standard
was set by the European Union as a common criterion
for their respective European rapprochement processes.
We must therefore ensure that both parties remain
constructively engaged in the long term in improving
their relations. With respect to Serbia, that will involve
the effective opening of accession negotiations, which
the Commission now recommends. It also involves
ongoing discussions aimed at concluding a Stabilization
and Association Agreement with Kosovo.

Beyond the normalization of their relations, we
encourage Belgrade and Pristina to continue to pursue
their internal reforms, particularly in terms of the rule
oflaw and the protection of minorities. That is the only
way to enable Kosovo and Serbia to together turn over
a new leaf in their history and resolutely turn towards
regional peace and cooperation.

The international community must take note of
these positive developments. In this respect, we invite
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo to adapt its presence to the situation on the
ground, in agreement with the Kosovo authorities and
according to their actual needs.

