Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative Shearer for his briefing.
We have listened to the statements made by Assistant
Secretary-General Gilmour and Ms. Minagano.

Since the beginning ofthis year, the overall situation
in South Sudan has continued to turn for the better, with
the ceasefire holding in most regions. Most opposition
leaders have returned to Juba. The South Sudanese
Government and parties have been jointly promoting
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan and have carried out in-depth discussions on
ceasefire monitoring, constitutional amendments,
boundary demarcation, security and defence and other
arrangements with positive results.

On 2 May, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the South Sudanese parties
agreed to extend the pre-transitional period by six
months. Large numbers of refugees have voluntarily
returned to South Sudan, and an increasing number
of displaced persons wish to return home, which fully
demonstrates that peace in South Sudan has been further
consolidated. China welcomes those developments.

At the same time, the situation in South Sudan
remains challenging. The top priority is to continue to
have South Sudan maintain the hard-won momentum in
favour of peace. The implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement holds the key to a political settlement of the
issue of South Sudan. The international community,
and the Security Council in particular, should lend
greater support, while focusing on promoting the
parties' efforts to further implement the Revitalized
Agreement. Greater efforts should be made in the
following three areas.

First, the ownership of the South Sudanese
Government should be fully respected. The parties
in South Sudan have the primary responsibility for
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement.
International partners should enhance communication
with the parties, and with the Government in particular,
listen carefully to their input and provide the necessary
funding and material and technical support in the
political and security fields in the light of the country's
needs

Secondly, support for IGAD should remain ongoing
in its role as mediator. The international community
should strengthen coordination with IGAD and the
African Union to support their mediation efforts and
help the South Sudanese Government and the opposition
enhance mutual trust so that they can demonstrate
greater flexibility and sincerity in order to reach
agreement on such core issues as security arrangements
as soon as possible. Efforts should also be made to push
parties that have not signed the Revitalized Agreement
to join the peace process as soon as possible.

Thirdly, humanitarian and economic assistance
to South Sudan should continue to be provided. At
present, priority should be given to helping address
food security, assisting displaced persons with their
return and resettlement, increasing investment in such
fields as agriculture, energy, infrastructure, education
and health care, and helping the South Sudanese people
strengthen their capacity to rebuild their homes and
restart development. China highly appreciates the
important contribution made by the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan to maintaining
peace and stability in South Sudan and supports the
Mission's continued efforts aimed at helping the South
Sudanese parties implement the Revitalized Agreement
and move forward in the peace process.

China supports peace and development in South
Sudan. We will continue our active support and
constructive participation in the peace process so as to
contribute to lasting peace and sustainable development
in South Sudan.

