Mr. Savua (Fiji): The increasing challenges
confronting the United Nations in addressing the
upward surge in peacekeeping activities call for
constant review and reform of peacekeeping
operations, and the call by Pakistan for a debate on the
issue is timely and to be commended.

Any peacekeeping operation should strictly
observe the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter, and should not be used as a substitute for
addressing the root causes of conflicts. Any new or
ongoing mandate should be based on thorough
reconnaissance, proper assessment of completion time
lines and sound intelligence, and must provide for a
sound financial basis to meet its needs. While assessed
contributions have served us well in the past, continued
demands on the same sources of State funds has placed
undue pressure on Members, causing them to
reconsider their priorities with renewed focus. We
should be looking at new methodologies for funding
peacekeeping operations.

Added to that is the need to strengthen the
operational capacity of United Nations peacekeeping
organs and their relationship with resource-
contributing and troop-contributing countries and with
the Security Council. A closer working relationship
will ensure sustainable and effective operations.

Australia and New Zealand, together with
neighbouring States of the Pacific, have been active
players in regional operations in the Solomon Islands,
Bougainville and East Timor. We believe that with
increased United Nations facilitation and assistance,
more active and effective partnerships can be
established for long-term peace and stability in any
region.
Regional and subregional entities have to
complement United Nations initiatives and fulfil
specific assignments, such as the provision of rapid
reaction troops or standby battalions. It is thus
imperative that further efforts be made to strengthen
and deepen the relationship between United Nations
peacekeeping organs and regional and subregional
entities.

Recent media reports of brutal killings of
peacekeepers and other United Nations personnel of
field missions continue to bring home the fact that
safety and security are paramount in any operation.
That should be of the highest priority for the United
Nations. Fiji is gravely concerned about the continuing
attacks and other acts of violence against United
Nations personnel, and calls for the cooperation of
everybody concerned to ensure that all appropriate
steps are taken to ensure the safety and security of all
United Nations staff.

Accompanying that is the importance of
maintaining a high standard of discipline and
professionalism by peacekeepers in field missions. The
United Nations and troop-contributing countries can ill
afford to be sending troops who are not physically and
mentally prepared for such operations. A strong
emphasis on pre-deployment training and counselling
is important if peacekeeping troops are to be
exemplary in the discharge of their duties in mission
areas. Acts of misconduct can impede progress and
have a very negative effect on the fulfilment of United
Nations mandates in the achievement of international
peace.

All operations demand adequate logistics and
administrative support. However, while the need to be
accountable and transparent is important, more critical
is the need for all missions to be performance-focused;
periodic and regular reviews should ensure that value-
for-money service is produced.

The pressure on the United Nations to produce
results is mounting, and success will be measured by
how well we can respond to it. Peacekeeping is indeed
a necessary burden and sometimes a thankless task; it
is our ability to weather the storms and bring forth new
dimensions and enhanced capacities for peacekeeping
that will silence our most vocal critics.

Fiji subscribes to the view that international
peace can be attained only if the collective will and the
commitment of all are effectively harnessed and
exploited to a level commensurate with the new
challenges. The Government of Fiji extends its
unwavering commitment and support to the United
Nations peacekeeping and peacemaking processes.

