Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): Let me first of all
convey my thanks and deep appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for holding this public meeting on
Afghanistan. I would also like to extend a very warm
welcome to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Brahimi, and thank
him for his useful and comprehensive briefing on the
current situation in that country. My delegation
commends the efforts of the Special Representative and
his team in contributing to the success of the Loya
Jirga process. The fair and transparent manner in which
the process was carried out clearly indicates the
willingness of the Afghan people to embrace the
principles of democracy and the rule of law.

My delegation welcomes the positive and
constructive steps taken to implement the Bonn
Agreement, and we are particularly pleased to note the
establishment of the Human Rights and Judicial
Commissions. We also commend the work carried out
so far by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in the rehabilitation process
and in helping the Afghan women and children enjoy
their inherent rights and freedom.

We congratulate the people of Afghanistan, who
have shown their resilience, courage and determination
to rebuild their country and to make it a safe place to
live.

Now that the Transitional Authority is in place,
the primary task that needs to be undertaken by the
current leadership is to establish a political and
institutional infrastructure that will facilitate the
economic and social reconstruction of Afghanistan.
Security throughout the country will have to be given
priority on the agenda. The recent incidents of violence
and the assassination of Haji Qadir show that the
security situation in Afghanistan is still under threat.
We welcome the commission established by the
Transitional Authority to carry out an enquiry on the
assassination of the Vice-President.

The insecurity prevailing in Afghanistan is a
matter of concern to my delegation. Although the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) is doing
its best to maintain peace in Kabul, serious incidents of
threats and armed attacks continue to disrupt the life of
the ordinary Afghan citizen. It is important to
accelerate the process of the formation of the Afghan
police force, which will have to shoulder the
responsibility of maintaining peace and security
throughout Afghanistan on its own.
We welcome the holding of the recent Afghan
Support Group meeting in Geneva this month. We are
happy to note that donor countries and international
organizations have committed themselves to $1.8
billion in aid to the country for the year 2002, and a
total of $4.5 billion over the years. We appeal to the
donors to fulfil their pledges.

It is also important that the people of Afghanistan
collaborate with the international community in order
to realize the projects that will be put in place. We
agree with the observations of Minister Ashraf Ghani
that the problems of Afghanistan require a joint
approach to stabilize the country and to bring it
security, economic growth and development.

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan merits
the international community's urgent attention. The
return of more than half a million Afghan refugees
leads to enormous strains in Kabul. Internally displaced
persons need to be reintegrated into the society, since
they constitute an important element in building the
human and social capital in Afghanistan. Without
international support, it would be difficult for the
Transitional Authority to cope with the rapid influx of
refugees and internally displaced persons, who are
already suffering from malnutrition, food insecurity
and socio-economic vulnerability.

On the question of drug trafficking and drug
control programmes, the efforts undertaken by the
Interim Administration and its commitment to poppy
eradication need to be commended. The decree against

the cultivation of poppies should not be undermined for
any reason.

The establishment of the Ministry of Women's
Affairs under the Interim Authority is yet another
major achievement. As the country moves ahead in its
democratization process, it is my delegation's view that
the Interim Authority should continue to maintain the
momentum in supporting the advancement of women
and their integration in all recovery programmes. We
support all efforts undertaken in strengthening the
Ministry of Women's Affairs to allow for better
planning and coordination of the gender issue and
women's rights. We sincerely hope that this institution
will increase women's participation in the civil service
and allow them to take higher responsibilities in other
sectors, such as justice and administration, and at
decision-making levels.

Finally, I would like to express my appreciation
for the comprehensive report prepared by the United
Kingdom on ISAF during its first six months of
operation. ISAF's contribution to improving the
security situation in Kabul has been very positive in
regard to the establishment of law and order and in
maintaining security. We are confident that under its
Turkish command ISAF will continue along the same
path.

We support the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General for the limited expansion of ISAF
outside Kabul. Such expansion should, in the first
place, focus on the security and protection of aid
workers, particularly in sensitive and remote areas.

