Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
thorough briefing on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the preparations for the
elections to be held on 23 December. We also take note
of the statement by Ms. Josephine Mbela.

We continue to believe that holding the planned
elections according to schedule will help reduce the
political tensions in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As is evident in the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2018/886) and as we all had the opportunity
to see for ourselves during the Security Council
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
technical and legislative groundwork for the elections
is happening in line with the Independent National
Electoral Commission's electoral calendar. It is
important that once the electoral rolls had been audited,
a final version, without duplications or inaccuracies,
was published. We have noted the publication of the
final lists of candidates, and we are pleased that half of
the country's political parties have signed the election
code of conduct.

The political contest in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is intensifying and its political forces are
consolidating. In that regard, we call on the Congolese
parties to adhere to the comprehensive political
agreement of 31 December 2016. We do not deny how
important it is to ensure that the Congolese authorities
step up their implementation of confidence-building
measures, and that also applies to the so-called
emblematic cases mentioned in the political agreement
regarding political actors living abroad. We once again
call for respect for the sovereignty and laws of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same time,
we urge the opposition forces to abandon negative
agendas, play by the established rules of the game
and respect decisions already handed down by the
Congolese judicial bodies. The question of the fairness
of such decisions is not part of the Security Council's
remit, although for the sake of fairness, we should point
out that in reviewing lawsuits about electoral issues,
the Constitutional Court has already reached verdicts
in favour of opposition parties.

We urge colleagues not to obsess about the situation
regarding the Electoral Commission's decision to use
electronic voting machines, which is the sovereign
prerogative of the relevant Congolese bodies. As we
were able to see at first-hand during the Security
Council's visit, they are essentially printing devices for
ensuring the rapid output of ballots in a compact form.
It is our understanding that the Electoral Commission is
already making logistical preparations for the holding
of elections. We agree that it is essential to ensure that
Kinshasa provides reliable funding for the electoral
process in order to avoid disruptions. We respect
the Government's decision to rely mainly on its own
resources in dealing with this issue and note that the
next instalment of funds for pre-election needs was
disbursed in October. However, we also want to point
out that the logistical capabilities of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) should not
be forgotten.

As we understand it, the Mission's role in organizing
and conducting elections should not go beyond the
mandate established in resolution 2409 (2018). The
protection of civilians in the context of elections must
be carried out with full respect for the basic principles
of peacekeeping and without any interference in
Kinshasa's internal affairs.

I want to emphasize that the elections by
themselves will not be able to resolve every single one
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo's problems.
We must focus on addressing the underlying causes
of the crisis. We urge everyone not to forget about the
importance of continuing to fight the illegal armed
groups in the east of the country, which still pose a
threat to civilians and are capable of destabilizing the
Great Lakes region. We definitely believe that solving
that problem should be seen as the main indicator
for the country's stabilization and the withdrawal of
MONUSCO, whose chief function, after all, is dealing
with the security situation.

It will be impossible to stabilize the situation in the
eastern parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
through military measures alone. The implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
must continue, along with assistance in strengthening
State governance institutions and restoring social
institutions in areas that have been liberated from
the insurgents.

