Mr. Catarino (Portugal): Steps have been taken
recently in Angola by both the Government and UNITA
towards the fulfilment of important military tasks under the
Lusaka Protocol. We welcome the fact that UNITA has
made a formal declaration on the quartering of its troops
and the delivery of its armaments and other mate'riel and
that the Government of Angola has incorporated the nine
generals provided by UNITA into the Angolan Armed
Forces. They are indeed crucial steps for the further
progress of the peace process.

Nevertheless, we consider that the overall pace of
the peace process is still very slow. Several important
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol remain unfulfilled, and
both parties should implement fully and as soon as
possible the following tasks: first, the integration of
selected personnel into the Angolan Armed Forces;
secondly, the effective conclusion of the demobilization
process; thirdly, the dismantlement of all illegal
checkpoints; and, lastly, the extension of the State
administration throughout the territory of Angola.

Only a few days ago, the Deputy Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Portugal, Mr. Jose Lamego, during his recent
trip to Angola, strongly urged both parties to fulfil those
tasks.

We now look forward to firm initiatives from the
Government of Angola and UNITA towards national
reconciliation, and we hope to see very soon the
assumption by UNITA deputies of their seats in the
National Assembly, the establishment of a Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation and the determination
of a special status for the President of UNITA. Those
measures will lead to the reinforcement of mutual
confidence between the parties, which is essential for a
lasting peace in Angola.

It is also urgent and imperative that freedom of
movement of people and goods be guaranteed throughout
Angola in order to boost confidence among the population
and foster national reconciliation. We are therefore
concerned by reports we have received of increasing acts
of banditry in the country.

Portugal favours the phased withdrawal of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) by the Security Council following the
recommendation of the Secretary-General. We believe the
Government of Angola and UNITA must realize that they
are responsible for the successful implementation of the
peace process and that the presence of UNAVEM. III
cannot continue indefinitely.

However, it is crucial that the pace of withdrawal be
determined by the progress achieved in the different
phases of the peace process. A strong presence of
UNAVEM. III in Angola has shown itself to be of key
importance to the implementation of the process, which

 

indicates a need to take a cautious approach to the
withdrawal of United Nations forces.

The good work of the men and women of UNAVEM
III, currently the largest United Nations peacekeeping
operation, has been, and will continue to be, vital to the
success of the international community's efforts to bring
peace to Angola.

Portugal, one of the troika of observer States to the
peace process, fully supports the work of UNAVEM. III,
and wishes here to praise heartily the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Blondin Beye.

The international community has shown, as it is
showing today, its confidence in the Angolan peace process
and, as we have said before, the Angolan parties, who are
ultimately responsible for the successful implementation of
the peace process, must show clear signs that they are
worthy of such confidence.

We want to believe that after so many positive
achievements towards the consolidation of peace, the
signatories of the Lusaka Protocol will honour the efforts of
the international community and the commitments they
themselves have made, and place above all the interests of
Angola and its people.

We wish to renew here our appeal to the international
community to continue to support the peace process in
Angola. In particular, we would like to stress the urgency
of making the necessary financial resources available for
the demobilization and social reintegration of ex-
combatants.

Let us hope that the draft resolution to be adopted
today will constitute an encouragement for the Government
of Angola and UNITA to accelerate their fulfilment of all
the tasks necessary for a long-lasting peace and national
reconciliation, so much desired and deserved by the
Angolan people.

