Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation strongly welcomes the adoption
by the Security Council of resolutions 2283 (2016)
and 2284 (2016) on C6te d'Ivoire, concerning the total
lifting of sanctions against that brotherly country and
the extension for a final term of the mandate of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
until 30 June 2017, respectively. I take this historic
opportunity to extend the heartfelt gratitude and
congratulations of my delegation to the delegations of
France and Uruguay for the excellent work accomplished
over the course of the process that led to today's double
adoption.

For both the United Nations and CGte d'Ivoire,
this moment demonstrates yet again that peacekeeping
operations, as well as the judicious use of sanctions, are
effective tools for maintaining international peace and
security. The remarkable progress made by the Ivorian
Government on all fronts - which I will not detail
here - bears witness to that reality and made it possible
to obtain the results we welcome today. It deserves all
of our support and acknowledgement. In that regard,
my delegation extends its warm congratulations to Cote
d'Ivoire, through Ambassador Bouah-Kamon, whose
firm political will and unfailing commitment were
decisive. There will much to be do after the definitive
withdrawal of UNOCI to consolidate the political and
security gains made over the years.

Senegal shares a great deal with Cote d'Ivoire, both
bilaterally and at the subregional level, in particular
through the West African Economic and Monetary Union
and the Economic Community of West African States.
cote d'Ivoire is a pillar ofboth those organizations. We
are convinced that, in spite of ongoing challenges, C6te
d'Ivoire shall remain on its feet and will continue to
play its perennial role as economic engine in the West
African subregion. With regard to 30 April 2017, when
all UNOCI military components will be withdrawn,
the quick-reaction reserve force, which my country is
honoured to oversee, will still be present.

This afternoon, the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, which Senegal has the honour to chair, will
hold its second meeting. Ambassador Bouah-Kamon is
warmly invited to share his country's experience of a
peacekeeping operation over the years. The brotherly
country of Cote d'Ivoire can always count on the
support of Senegal and the international community, in
particular the Security Council.

