We thank Special Representative Zahir Tanin for his briefing and the commendable work that his team continues to do to fully implement their mandate on the ground even in the current circumstances. We also thank His Excellency Mr. Ivica Daeie and Mr. Glauk Konjufca for their statements today. At the outset, we would like to echo the call of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire and his invitation to the world to focus on the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). In this regard, we take note of Belgrade's recent declaration of its willingness to cooperate with Pristina to combat the pandemic. We would like to congratulate the citizens of Kosovo on the success of their recent legislative elections, with the highest participation ever recorded for a general election in the country, giving rise to a democratic and peaceful transition. At the same time, we regret the subsequent impasse that caused the fall of the current coalition Government. We acknowledge the efforts undertaken by the elected authorities aimed at forming a new Government and trying to develop an agenda that reflects the need of the people of Kosovo to move forward, including the need to normalize relations with Belgrade. However, we urge the political authorities in the country to take current conditions into account and implement the measures necessary to fight COVID-19 before setting the date for the next elections. We take note of the decision taken in Pristina on | April with regard to tariffs. We also note that this measure included removing 100 per cent of tariffs on goods from Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is vitally important that the parties move forward with measures that could help accelerate the resumption of negotiations between Pristina and Belgrade, taking into account the current circumstances. We believe that cooperation and the promotion of measures to build trust continue to represent an important pillar in accomplishing the normalization of relations. In this regard, we wish to acknowledge the cooperation shown by the Government, civil society and the international community in support of these confidence-building measures. We support the initiatives undertaken by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in collaboration with the United Nations team in Kosovo, particularly those designed to empower youth, women and civil society and those aimed at promoting multilingualism, intercommunity dialogue and respect for human rights. We take this opportunity to congratulate Ms. Vjosa Osmani-Sadriu on being elected Chair of the Assembly of Kosovo. She is the first woman elected to this post. We also extend congratulations to all the women recently elected to various positions. It is appropriate to mention the important role a reliable justice system plays in strengthening the rule of law. We would therefore like to highlight the efforts made by the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) Case Monitoring Unit in strengthening access to justice and improving the independence of the judiciary. Finally, we encourage the parties to uphold their commitments pursuant to the Brussels Agreement and act in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999). At the same time, we reiterate our support and appreciation for the work carried out in Kosovo by UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, the European Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and EULEX in pursuit of building peace.
