My delegation expresses its gratitude to Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her presentation on the nineteenth report to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), as well as the work of her Office vis-a-vis the situation in Libya. In 2002, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines ratified the Rome Statute of the ICC. Our position then, as it is now, was premised on the conviction that the ICC had a fundamental role to play in our collective quest for peace and justice. As we uphold the integrity of the ICC and the principles of international law, we stress the importance of investigating genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity, ending impunity for perpetrators of these atrocities, and bringing justice to the victims. The situation in Libya remains extremely worrisome and risks being further exacerbated by recent developments, including the coronavirus disease pandemic. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines renews its call for all warring parties to commit to a ceasefire and engage in an inter-Libyan dialogue to resolve the conflict peacefully. The escalation of violence - in particular the indiscriminate attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure - only aggravate the suffering of the Libyan people, especially the most vulnerable groups. We categorically condemn these acts of violence and demand the safety and protection of the civilian population in Libya. We also reiterate the importance of consolidating the United Nations three- point plan and the work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, and encourage all influential external actors to assist in this regard. The difficulties faced in Libya today, as underscored in the ICC's report, are made evident by the challenges encountered by the Office of the Prosecutor in effectively executing its mandate. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphasizes the importance of cooperation and the principle of complementarity of the Rome Statute, which are essential for the Court to assume its functions. Accordingly, we call on all States to respect their treaty obligations, cooperate with the ICC and adhere to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We also respectfully encourage those States not yet having done so to ratify the Rome Statute. The ICC remains at the centre of our international criminal justice system and is a primary mechanism to provide restitution to the victims and families of mass-atrocity crimes. In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines stands in solidarity with the people of Libya and reiterates its commitment and support to the ICC, which remains a bastion of hope and justice that is critical for building and sustaining peace.
