Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I, too, should like to thank the Chairmen
of the three Committees for their reports. It is truly
most useful to be able to address all the Council's
counter-terrorism activities in a single meeting. It
allows us to ensure due understanding of and
coordination in the Committees' work.

I fully agree with the statement to be made by the
presidency of the European Union, which particularly
emphasizes the fact that respect for human rights is
necessary to ensure the efficiency and legitimacy of the
fight against terrorism.

I should like to refer to a few specific aspects of
the work of the Committees.

With regard to resolution 1540 (2004), my
delegation has already had the opportunity to affirm
France's commitment to that tool, which supplements
existing multilateral non-proliferation instruments, in
particular in addressing the issue of access of non-State
actors to weapons of mass destruction and their means
of delivery. When we refer to non-State actors, we of
course mean terrorists, as well as traffickers who play a
dangerous key role in proliferation activities.

In that regard, resolution 1540 (2004) is an
important long-term tool of our collective security.
France favours renewing the mandate of the 1540
Committee for at least two years, and I believe that it is
time for the Security Council to work on that renewal.
It would send a useful signal of our common
commitment to non-proliferation. The unity of the
Security Council on that objective is crucial and should
be demonstrated forthwith.

As to the Committee's work, France attaches
great importance to its activities to promote the
adoption by States of the necessary measures to meet
their obligations under the resolution. That cooperative
approach has helped States to make the non-
proliferation objectives of the Security Council their
own. It is in pursuit of that path that the Committee
will be able to undertake useful work in its second
term. That approach is in utmost conformity with
resolution 1540 (2004), which draws attention to the
promotion of dialogue and cooperation in the field of
non-proliferation and stresses the issue of assistance.

The resolution is more than just the legally
binding decisions it contains; it also makes political
appeals. For instance, it calls on States to work to
universalize the non-proliferation instruments to which
they are party and to discharge their obligations under
such instruments. It recommends that they also strive
to promote non-proliferation. Such messages
demonstrate that, ever since the resolution's adoption,
the Security Council has sought to prioritize a
cooperative approach to its proliferation objectives.
Those provisions allow the Committee to use the tools
it needs to pursue its work harmoniously, and I hope
that the report to be made by the Committee will cover
all those issues.

The Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee,
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), has
undertaken important work to improve its working
methods on the basis of resolution 1617 (2005). The
Committee's guidelines have been partially revised
with a View to creating greater efficiency and
transparency. The information on the consolidated list
drawn up by the Committee will now be rigorous and
more accessible. The review of the guidelines should
be concluded as soon as possible, especially with
regard to provisions for listing, delisting and
humanitarian exemptions, so as to make such
procedures more transparent. Greater transparency
would meet the need for justice and enable us to
enhance the Committee's credibility and the Member
States' understanding of its work and, hence, their own
cooperation. It would also meet the need for efficiency.

Above and beyond procedures relating to the
listing of individuals and entities concerned, we should
undertake the effective implementation of sanctions
formulated in resolution 1617 (2005). The development
of the Committee's cooperation with Interpol is very
useful in that regard. It enables the Committee to have
recourse to additional information on individuals and
entities on the list, and in particular to mobilize the
Interpol network in the implementation of sanctions.
We need to further enhance that cooperation, and
especially to increase the number of notices that are
accessible on the Interpol network.

In December, we approved a far-reaching action
plan for 2006 for the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and its Executive Directorate. I should like to
thank my colleague Ambassador Loj, Chairman of the
CTC, for directing its work in its first quarter. The
Executive Directorate is now operational. The backlog
in the consideration of reports has been caught up and
we can now bring our efforts to bear on other aspects
of the mandate arising out of resolution 1373 (2001).

It is especially important that we make progress
in the area of reporting. Too many States are tardy. We
should help them, with the support, inter alia, of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
regional and subregional organizations. Moreover, we
should adapt reporting requirements to specific
situations and make progress on the concept of
consolidated reports.

The field visits begun last year have met the
expectations of the countries visited and of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. They should be
undertaken more frequently and become a priority
means of evaluating performance and need. The visits
should involve international and regional organizations
with the necessary expertise or the potential to offer
technical assistance, such as the European Union and
the Counter-Terrorism Action Group created by the G-
8 at the Evian summit.

The spirit of dialogue among States that has
guided the CTC should be reflected in greater
transparency in its activities. The communications
strategy it has just adopted and the publication of its
activities and increased contacts with States, both in
New York and at conferences and visits, should help to
that end.

In conclusion, I recall the importance my country
attaches to mobilizing all United Nations bodies and
agencies to combat terrorism.

