China welcomes Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi of Indonesia as she presides over today's open debate. I thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Ban Ki-moon for their briefings (annexes | and 2, respectively). I listened carefully to Ms. Sarah Cliffe's briefing (annex 3), as well. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) poses an unprecedented threat to the lives and health of people of all countries. The world economy is heading into a recession. The international community's efforts aimed at sustaining peace are facing great challenges. As noted in resolution 2532 (2020), the pandemic could reverse the gains in peacebuilding and development made by conflict-affected countries. We must step up our efforts to prevail over the pandemic and build back better at an early date. Solidarity, together with cooperation, is the most powerful weapon in the global fight against COVID-19. Conflict-affected countries are the weakest link in this fight. Helping them build a strong line of defence is most important for ensuring victory over the pandemic and consolidating peacebuilding gains. China calls on all parties to conflict to respond to the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire as soon as possible, not only to lay down their arms and silence the guns, but also to coordinate actions against COVID-19. We should support the United Nations and the World Health Organization in mobilizing countries to further strengthen policy coordination and increase resources to help with the preparedness and response of the conflict-affected countries. China appreciates and supports the assistance to relevant countries by the United Nations peacekeeping operations. We support the Peacebuilding Commission in providing tailored responses and reconstruction programmes for these countries, and we encourage the Peacebuilding Fund to reprioritize its projects and resources for that purpose. As we have seen, unilateral sanctions are seriously undermining the basic capacity of targeted countries to respond to the pandemic and safeguard livelihoods, making innocent civilians the greatest victims. We once again strongly urge relevant countries to acknowledge the negative humanitarian consequences of their unilateral coercive-measures actions and immediately move to lift them. Since the outbreak of COVID-19, China has been actively engaged in the global fight against the disease. China has been doing its utmost to support and assist countries in need, including many on the Security Council's agenda. In June, President Xi Jinping chaired an extraordinary China-Africa summit on solidarity against COVID-19, which demonstrated the determination of China and Africa to fight COVID-19 together. China has decided to cancel the debt on interest-free loans made to relevant African countries that is due by the end of 2020. China has also announced that COVID-19 vaccine development and deployment in China, when available, will be made a global public good. China is ready to continue providing medical supplies to affected countries, share experience in diagnosis and treatment, and send medical experts to assist in countries' response. Facing the impact of COVID-19, we need to better understand sustaining peace, improve and strengthen our approaches to peacebuilding. First, we should always be people-centred. The experience of many countries has shown that as long as we put people and life first, we can develop a set of effective methods for fighting the pandemic. In peacebuilding, we should also put people's interests front and centre, respect people's ownership in host countries and promote an inclusive peace process. Secondly, we should promote sustaining peace through development. Peacebuilding processes in conflict-affected countries can easily go back to square one after one or two crises owing to those countries' weak socioeconomic foundations. Development is the master key to solving all problems. The international community should attach great importance to the impact of COVID-19 on the socioeconomic situation of conflict-affected countries, help them improve their capacity for sustainable development, strengthen public-health systems and preserve and advance peacebuilding gains in order to build a solid foundation for sustaining peace. Thirdly, we should strengthen political leadership and the participation of the whole of society. In many countries, strong political leadership and social cohesion have made it possible to undertake early detection, isolation, diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19 cases. Rebuilding political consensus, mutual trust and social cohesion is also an important underpinning for national reconstruction. We need to support strengthening the authority of the legitimate Governments of conflict-affected countries, so that they can lead their respective societies to safeguard the hard-won gains of peacebuilding and achieving long-term security and stability. There is no doubt that the COVID-19 pandemic has had a tremendous impact on the world and brought great challenges to it. However, we have every reason to believe that humankind will eventually prevail and make the world a better place. To make that happen, we must be united and uphold multilateralism. Countries are dependent on each other and have a shared future. No one can artificially sever the ties that connect us. Unilateralism is a one-way train heading to a dead end, and there is no other option but to turn back from it. We should give stronger support to the United Nations, better meet challenges and pursue common development through multilateral cooperation. We must uphold justice and the rule of law. Justice is the hope of all and is rooted in the hearts of people. International law and the norms of international relations are important guarantees for international fairness and justice. All countries should honour their commitments and fulfil their due responsibilities and obligations. We cannot allow the practice of power politics, bullying and exceptionalism to take the world back to the age of the jungle. We must respect science and support technological progress. Advances in science and technology are the common pursuit of humankind. Everyone is entitled to a better life, including those living in developing countries. The practice of putting up artificial barriers to hinder other countries' scientific and technological development and to interfere with market competition for selfish gains is immoral, irresponsible and against one's own interests. It is our sincere hope that States Members of the United Nations and the international community will act together, shoulder responsibilities together, share the benefits together and jointly build a better future for all.
