Mr. Tillander: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting me to contribute to the
Council's deliberations today on Liberia. I am pleased
to be here together with Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Karin Landgren. I appreciate
all of the support that the Special Representative and
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) have
given me in my work. I also appreciate the guidance
provided by you, Mr. President, for today's briefing. I
shall focus my remarks on three issues - the political
agenda, UNMIL transition and the Liberia National
Police (LNP) - and in particular how the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) will engage and provide support on
those issues.

First, on moving forward the political agenda,
coherent and inclusive national reconciliation should
be at the centre of the Liberian peace process. That is a
core peacebuilding priority in the Statement of Mutual
Commitments, which is the compact between the PBC
and the Government of Liberia. Part of that process
entails mending relations between the State and society,
between communities and between individuals. That
includes reformulating the Liberian historical narrative,
including giving recognition to past persecution,
discrimination and marginalization. Reconciliation
is also linked to processes of constitutional review,
decentralization and electoral reform. All of those are
essential parts of the broader peacebuilding process in
Liberia. Those are transformative changes; a critical
factor for success will be the inclusivity ofthe processes.

One ofthe main challenges so far to the reconciliation
process has been to ensure a comprehensive and
coordinated approach. Since last year, the PBC has urged
national actors to develop a road map on reconciliation.
That road map has now been developed. The validation
process has been initiated and, ifinclusive, will generate
national ownership for the road map.

Later this month, the PBC will engage in
discussions with Internal Affairs Minister Nelson, who
is responsible for coordinating the reconciliation and
decentralization processes. It is my ambition to keep the
PBC configuration informed and engaged in a regular
dialogue. Maintaining political will is essential. In that
respect, the Statement of Mutual Commitments serves
as a useful accountability tool.

Financial resources, in addition to the Liberian
Government's allocation of $5 million, are also needed.
We have a responsibility in that respect. The PBC
pushed for the road map; we now need to consider ways
to support its implementation, financially as well as
with the in-kind resources that might be required.

A vibrant civil society acts as an important source
for civic engagement, and will also be vital to national
ownership of reconciliation. Yet, in Liberia those actors
are constrained by capacity limitations. We need to
find ways to encourage their work and strengthen civil
society, including by building their core capacities.
The PBC will maintain focus on this issue and I will
continue to meet with representatives of civil society
during my visits.

The PBC will liaise closely with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to ensure that
our efforts are fully coherent with those of the United
Nations. With the support of the United Nations country
team, UNMIL has a vital role to play in reconciliation.
The PBC fully supports the suggestion that this should
be reflected in UNMIL's mandate.

The second issue is PBC support to UNMIL and
the Liberian Government to prepare for the transition.
Strengthening rule of law and security sector reform
are key in that context. They are also priorities for the
PBC. While there has been progress, there are still
some significant capacity gaps with regard to justice
and security actors, in particular the Liberia National
Police. Oversight and accountability mechanisms also
need to be firmly established.

As part of the Statement of Mutual Commitments,
the Liberian Government is committed to increasing
the budget for justice and security. The PBC will
continue to watch that as part of our ongoing dialogue
on the Commitments. We will also benefit from the
public expenditure review carried out by the World
Bank and the United Nations. The review offers advice
on what costs the Government needs to assume and
how to gradually incorporate transition costs into
the national budget. Later this week, I will have an
opportunity to discuss the follow-up to the review with
the World Bank, as well as funding directed to critical
peacebuilding priorities within the international
envelope for development.

The review also shows a considerable funding gap
over the next several years. As the transition advances,
the international community must step up its efforts
to support a smooth transition. The message should
be that the United Nations, the international financial
institutions and bilateral partners will continue to
engage and support Liberia. The United Nations country
team, I am told, will be stepping up its efforts in the
coming United Nations Peacebuilding and Development
Assistance Framework cycle. UNICEF will be adding
extra resources to its country programme. I encourage
other United Nations agencies to do the same. As Chair,
I will work with configuration members to enhance our
efforts.

Key to resource mobilization is a coordinated
approach based on Government priorities. The Justice
and Security Board and its annual work plan offer
a comprehensive and coordinated basis, which is
also aligned with the work of the PBC, the Liberian
Peacebuilding Programme and the Statement of Mutual
Commitments. But efforts must be made to enhance the
functioning of the Trust Fund for Justice and Security.
Bilateral partners are presently working closely with
the United Nations Development Programme to that
end. A similar set-up is being discussed for support to
reconciliation activities, and it must work without flaws
or delays.

A key project already under way is the regional
justice and security hubs. The hubs should facilitate
the establishment of an effective and accountable
State presence throughout the country. That will also
contribute to closing gaps and avoiding any appearance
of a vacuum. However, delays in the construction of the
first hub generated valid questions about its viability.
The response can best be provided through action on the
ground, by completing the establishment of the hub and
showing its impact. As we begin to assess the impact on
the surrounding communities, if security is enhanced
and access to justice increased, the PBC will have a
persuasive presentation for resource mobilization for
the next hubs.

Several lessons have already been identified. The
United Nations system must be able to more effectively
coordinate its efforts between it and the Government.
Time frames must be adhered to. The design of the hubs
needs to be adjusted according to the circumstances of
each region. If the lessons are effectively applied, it
should be possible to complete the next four hubs within
tight time frames. The PBC will continue to monitor
the implementation of the hub and to draw attention to
shortcomings when necessary.

Finally, the third point has to do with PBC support
for capacity-building of the Liberia National Police. I
have already touched upon some aspects, but would
like to add the following.

After a request in May by the President of Liberia,
the PBC facilitated consultations on how to strengthen
and coordinate training support to Liberian National
Police. The outcome was an understanding that focus
should continue on Government ownership, building on
UNMIL accomplishments and its overarching role. But
it is also clear that, to ensure a smooth transition, we
must explore modalities for closer cooperation between
UNMIL, bilateral partners and the country team, with
the purpose of improving the quality and numbers of
the LNP.

The PBC will continue to encourage partners
to get involved, increase support and enhance
coordination. That should include increasing their role
in coordinating efforts and leading in specific areas.
The PBC will explore how it can contribute to creative
approaches to deploying highly skilled officers to
specific professional posts, which was an issue raised
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
at the briefing of the troop- and police-contributing
countries on 6 September.

The PBC is in the process of finalizing a resource
mobilization strategy and a corresponding work
plan. We will work closely with the Government and
UNMIL. The intention is to be a support to the Liberian
Government and its resource mobilization efforts.
A primary consideration will be how to build on the
investment of the PBF and its catalytic role. There is
much potential and good examples, such as Australian
support to PBF-funded youth empowerment and partner
support to the PBF-funded United Nations Habitat work
on land conflict resolution.

Later this month, we will meet with the Minister of
Finance, Mr. Konneh, and other key PBC counterparts,
who will brief the Commission on progress on
Government commitments. As previously indicated,
the Statement of Mutual Commitments is a valuable
accountability tool for both the Government and
members of the configuration.

We will continue to use it to its full potential, and
will keep the Council informed of the outcome of our
second review.

I thank you, Mr. President, for allowing the PBC to
share its views. We remain at the Council's disposal for
any questions now, as well as in the future.

