Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Government of Hugo Chavez Frias, Sir, I wish you
resounding success as you lead the work of the
Security Council during the month of April.

Haiti has played a stellar role in the history of
Venezuela. Francisco de Miranda, a forefather in our
fight for independence, created the first flag of
Venezuela in Haiti. Simon Bolivar, the liberator not
only of Venezuela but of other nations of the Americas,
was protected and supported by the illustrious leader
Alexandre Petion, father of independent Haiti - the
first nation of Latin America and the Caribbean to gain
its independence from colonialism. Haiti has suffered
various invasions and interventions throughout its
history and has been subject to the most despicable
imperial efforts to undermine its sovereignty.

According to a report of the United Nations
Development Programme, Haiti was ranked 146th out
of 177 countries in 2008. Life expectancy at birth was
59.5 years in 2005. That calamitous reality makes it
necessary for Haiti to obtain, on an urgent basis, the
social assistance and investment that will raise its
living conditions. Without such social and economic
cooperation and without setting limits on the perverse
logic of capital that seeks to turn a profit at any cost, it
will be impossible for Haiti to obtain full and self-
sufficient development for all its people.

From 1990 onwards, like other countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean, Haiti suffered under the
perverse prescriptions of neo-liberal economists,
imposed under the auspices of the World Bank. Those
prescriptions were totally unsuited to our realities. The
social and human consequences were devastating and
led to the dismantling of an already severely affected
economic base as well as agricultural and livestock
production. That situation created an opportunity for
imported products and voracious international
consortiums. The perversity of such capital was lethal
to the socio-economic structure of Haiti and had
terrible consequences that completely undermined its
food sovereignty. The current international economic
and financial crisis affects not only Haiti, but all poor
countries, increasing poverty and inequality. Haiti is a
warning against the predatory economic models and
the high social costs a country may have to pay for
them.

Since the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) entered Haiti, some stabilization
objectives for Haiti have been met, but it must also be
recognized that major mistakes have been made,
calling into question cooperation with the military and
police sectors and to prioritizing the strengthening of
security. My country's experience demonstrates that
this can even be counter-productive if no plan has been
set out for comprehensive economic and social
cooperation. The Bolivarian Government believes that
this is what the people and the Government of Haiti
require.

Mr. Rene Preval, President of Haiti, has stressed
the fact that MINUSTAH must reinvent itself to open
the door to a new era. He has mentioned the need to
reform Haiti's judicial system and above all to obtain
socio-economic support. We believe that President
Preval is responding to the social, political and
economic crisis.

The Bolivarian Government of Venezuela, led by
Hugo Chavez Frias, has provided sustained assistance
to the Haitian people in the form of energy cooperation
to help hospitals and clinics to provide treatment.
Together with our sister Government of Cuba, we have
provided food and health care assistance. We are
moved by our desire to overcome poverty through the
use of integration plans based on solidarity between
peoples and Governments. Venezuela has also stepped
up every time devastating natural disasters have struck
the country of Alexandre Pieton.

The people of Haiti are worthy and valiant. They
do not wish to be treated as less able. They have fought
valiantly for their freedom, self-determination and
independence. They do not want handouts from the
international community, but cooperation and
solidarity, the only possible cooperation in the
framework of which the people of Haiti can exercise
their own destiny in sovereignty.

