The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Peru.

I wish to begin by thanking the Secretary-
General, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Ms. Ann
Veneman and Mr. Gabriel Oling Olang, whose
statements this morning helped to illustrate this debate.

It is particularly satisfying to take the floor as
President of the Security Council, which is the
principal body of the international system for
maintaining peace and security. My presence in this
forum as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru is, above
all, a tangible expression of my country's commitment
to multilateralism. It is the most appropriate forum for
developing countries to participate in discussions and
in the quest for mechanisms to face the grave new
challenges facing the world today.

Those challenges arise from unfinished nation-
building processes, terrorism, the threat of nuclear
proliferation and certain contradictory trends in the
current international system. Indeed, while the world is
integrating in global terms, disparities are growing, not
only among countries, but also within States
themselves, generating conflicts that are not always
resolved by peaceful means.
Thus, paradoxically, the number of conflicts of an
essentially domestic nature has increased on the
Council's current agenda. In general, the origins of
such conflicts are found in widespread situations of
exclusion, instability and vulnerability, which too often
lead to scenes of humanitarian crisis requiring urgent
action by the international community.

We do not believe that such conflicts can be dealt
with exclusively from a traditional security
perspective. We need an approach that takes into
account not only the political, institutional and military
aspects, but also other structural factors that cause
exclusion, such as poverty, environmental degradation
and the loss of values.

In that context, I wish to emphasize that Peru is
developing domestic policies to fight exclusion. We are
convinced that the surest way to guarantee peace and
democratic governance is to reduce disparities and
poverty and to create opportunities through education
and economic inclusion. That also requires the
strengthening of a culture of duty based on the norms
that constitute the rule of law.

Therefore, we welcome the fact that the Security
Council, in addition to the decisions swiftly adopted
with regard to the conflict situations under its
consideration, is seeking to deal in a similarly efficient
manner with certain aspects common to them. The
issue of the impact of armed conflicts on children is a
remarkable example of the effort of the Council in this
regard.

My country has consistently and forcefully
condemned all acts of violence and abuse against
children in situations of armed conflict. They are a
flagrant violation of humanitarian international law. We
are particularly pleased, therefore, that this debate is
being held during the presidency of Peru.

On this occasion, we have before us the sixth
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2006/826), and I would like to thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative for
that document. The report provides us with valuable
information for assessing to what extent States and
non-State actors have been complying with their
obligations under the regime established by the
Security Council to deal with the serious abuses
committed against children in armed conflicts,
including killing or maiming children, recruiting or
using child soldiers, attacking schools and hospitals,

child rape or other grave acts of sexual violence
against children, the abduction of children and the
denial of humanitarian assistance to them.

In this regard, we welcome the progress achieved
in the implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism relating to children in armed conflicts. In
addition, we congratulate all the States that have made
significant efforts to implement the regime established
by the decisions of the Security Council, in particular
resolution 1612 (2005). However, a great deal remains
to be done, given the fact that, unfortunately, many
children are deprived of their basic rights in the context
of the armed conflicts currently under way. We
therefore believe that the Security Council, if it is to
fulfil its responsibilities in an effective manner, must
focus on adopting specific measures aimed at fully
implementing existing laws, rather than elaborating
additional standards.

The establishment of the Council's Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict is a significant
step in the right direction. We commend the work of
the Group, under the chairmanship of the
representative of France, Ambassador Jean-Marc de La
Sabliere, who contributed significantly to the
organization of this debate, for which I am very
grateful.

We believe that the Council must continue to take
into account the Working Group's recommendations.
By the same token, we also commend the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
including her activities in the field in situations of
armed conflict, which deserve our full support. The
same can be said of the important work being carried
out by UNICEF and other relevant institutions. We call
upon the parties to armed conflict to cooperate with all
of those organizations. We also urge the donor
community to support efforts to reintegrate and
demobilize child soldiers - a process that is currently
under way in certain countries. That is a way in which
donors can show their true commitment.

There is no doubt that the task ahead is
extraordinarily important, because there is no better
way to prevent conflicts than by providing the children
of today with the conditions conducive to their
becoming men and women of peace in the future. We
must spare no effort in facing this challenge.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Liechtenstein, to whom I give the floor.

