Ms. Quiel Murcia (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by commending the Peruvian
presidency for the initiative of convening this important
debate and by recognizing the value of the briefings,
which lay bare the current reality regarding the links
between international terrorism and organized crime.

One ofthe paradigms at play in the globalized world
has been the internationalization of organized crime,
whose illicit activities have expanded to include new
and dynamic methods and now increasingly challenges
our countries to identify and effectively prevent any
activity utilized by terrorist or criminal organizations.
In order to achieve their goals, terrorist organizations
associate themselves with organized crime, through
both legal and illegal activities, so as to generate the
financial resources that will allow them to develop their
ongoing or potential activities.

As a transit and bi-oceanic country that is a
bridge between North and South America, we are no
strangers to the scourge of organized crime, which goes
hand in hand with forced migration and trafficking in
persons, arms, cultural goods and drugs, among other
phenomena. As such, we are also aware of our global
responsibility to tackle it decisively.

Panama has expressed its firm commitment to
the head-on fight against the financing of terrorism.
We also recognize the value of joint initiatives with
international organizations. The support of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for such efforts
confirms that we cannot rely on isolated action alone.

We have ratified 18 international counter-terrorism
instruments at the regional and global levels and,
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), set up a national
list on terrorism and its financing. At the regional
level, together with the Inter-American Committee
Against Terrorism, Panama is implementing the
legislative assistance and combating terrorist financing
programme and continuing to enforce measures on
preventive freezing, travel bans, arms embargo and
other measures adopted at the Security Council through
the updating of the sanctions lists.

Panama's criminal code now criminalizes and
imposes a harsh penalty for the financing of terrorism.
We enacted a law on money-laundering, terrorism
financing and the financing of the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, which includes
regulations on preventive asset freezing, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Panama will continue to join forces in the fight
against terrorism and its financing, while investing
resources in improving its counter-terrorism capacity.
Our efforts are focused on protecting our borders
and financial and logistics system, with the aim of
preventing, deterring, detecting and suppressing
terrorism and organized crime networks.

The interconnected world makes us vulnerable and
continues to challenge us. The dynamic development of
telecommunications, social networks and connectivity
indicates significant progress in the area of economics,
as well as major security challenges. Based on today's
concept note (S/2019/537, annex), I underscore the role
that all actors - public and private alike - can and
should play in preventing terrorism and organized
crime from undermining our societies and generating
instability. Collective efforts, the constant sharing of
good practices and dynamic and effective cooperation
are prerequisites for generating responses with
comprehensive approaches that address the phenomenon
in the various environments where organized crime
is committed. Given that the challenges we face are
global, solutions must also be global.

In recognizing the significant importance of
multilateral efforts and, with them, the value of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
poised to conduct its seventh biennial review in 2020,
I reiterate that Panama will continue working with the
international community to maintain efforts aimed at
the higher purpose ofpromoting peaceful and inclusive
societies that are intolerant of organized crime
and terrorism.

