Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
oun your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We would also like to
express our appreciation to the delegation of the United
Kingdom, which competently led the work of the
Council during the past month. We also wish to thank
you, Sir, for your initiative in convening this debate. We
are also grateful to Mr. Eliasson and to the journalists
here today i Mr. Engel, Ms. Carroll, Mr. Abdinur and
Mr. Abdul-Ahad - for their informative briefings.

As members are aware, this is not the first time
that the Security Council has considered the issue of
the protection of journalists. As the previous meeting
on the subject was held under the Qatar's presidency
during the month of December 2006 (see S/PV.5613),
we are especially honoured to participate in today's
meeting and to see other Member States participating
as well.

Conflicting views as to what is taking place on
the ground pose a major obstacle to the international
community taking a positive role in resolving conflicts.
That situation can be overcome only by the presence
of professional, competent and qualified journalists
who can convey the real story from the field. Although
advances in technology and communication have
enhanced the ability of individuals to communicate, the
importance ofjournalists remains crucial to conveying
the truth about situations, both in time of war and peace.

We deeply regret the fact that instances of the
killing, imprisonment and abduction of journalists are
rampant. In fact, they have increased during the past
few years. Our region has had the largest share of such
violations.

According to the Committee to Protect Journalists,
45 journalists were killed during the past two years
in Syria alone. In addition, a large number of other
journalists and media professionals have faced
oppression, torture, arbitrary detention, intimidation
and threats. The fact that the Syrian regime's security
forces use draconian measures to suppress the freedom
of information was one of the reasons for the popular
uprising against that regime. In fact, that regime is still
using its media as part of a campaign to mislead the
world about what is taking place in Syria.

Journalists in occupied Palestine face similar
serious violations, including acts of aggression by
the Israeli occupation forces, all of which is being
documented.

The State of Qatar has demonstrated its desire to
strengthen the freedom of speech and the freedom to
information, including enhancing its professionalism.
We have done so based on our belief in the decisive role
that information and media play in boosting knowledge
and understanding in society and in fostering and
entrenching those values as the cornerstone of
civilization. The information sector can only perform
its noble task if it is completely free and ifjournalists
are allowed safe access to all areas, including zones of
conflict.

In January 2012, the State of Qatar hosted an
international conference on the theme of protecting
journalists in dangerous situations, organized by the
Qatari national committee for human rights, with
a view to enhancing coordination and to uniting
initiatives. The Doha Centre for Media Freedom has
been making considerable and commendable efforts
in training journalists on ways to secure their safety.
This programme is named for Ali Hassan Al-Jaber,
the famous Qatari photographer who was killed when
covering the war in Libya in 2011.

Ensuring the protection of journalists is one of
the priorities of those working to achieve peace and
security throughout the world. However, we must also
draw attention to such civilians working in zones of
conflict, who are more vulnerable and more exposed to
danger. Journalists reporing from conflict zones must
act in total freedom. We also emphasize that occupation
forces must respect the freedom ofjournalists. In order
to secure their commitment to that freedom, there must
be consequences for those who oppress journalists or
create obstacles for them. We must not tolerate such
actions. We must hold all those responsible accountable

We must look into the provisions that exist to
ensure accountability for those who harm journalists.
We should also consider how to give effect to article
79 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions,
relating to the Protection of Victims of International
Armed Conflicts. We reaffirm the provisions of
resolution 1738 (2006), as well as the presidential
statement of 12 February 2013 (S/PRST/2013/3),
concerning the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. We hope to achieve the goals set in those
documents.

