Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate, marking the first anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), which Morocco
co-sponsored. We also commend the other nations
behind that initiative that submitted the draft to the
Security Council alongside Uruguay, namely, Spain,
Egypt, New Zealand and Japan. Our thanks also go
to the representatives of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and Human Rights Watch for their
presentations this morning.

The subject chosen for today's debate is a call
on us all. In recent years, there has been a worrying
increase in attacks on humanitarian personnel and
medical facilities during periods of armed conflict. It
is important that the Security Council, as well as all
United Nations members, be able to reiterate the strong
signal sent last year on the vital importance ofrespecting
international humanitarian law and protecting civilians.
In that regard, I should like to point to resolution 2286
(2016), which strongly condemns intentional attacks
on medical facilities or any equipment bearing the
distinctive emblems of the Geneva Conventions, and
which qualifies such attacks as war crimes.

Several reports have described attacks or incidents
involving medical infrastructure or personnel in 23
countries in 2016. Beyond the failure to respect the basic
principles of international law, including international
human rights law, and international humanitarian law
in particular, the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the
additional protocols thereto of 1977, attacks on medical
infrastructure and personnel have serious direct
consequences. The following are some examples.

The first is the suspension of health programmes.
In many cases, attacks have resulted in the withdrawal
of humanitarian organizations that could no longer
ensure the security of their property and personnel.
This situation primarily affects civilian populations
already in situations of vulnerability due to conflict
and that greatly need health services. For example,
in the Central African Republic - where more than
half of the population is dependent on humanitarian
assistance - many non-governmental organizations
have had to cease their activities because ofthe violence
they have suffered, depriving people of assistance
when they most need it. This example can be seen
increasingly in many conflict-affected areas.

The second example is the degradation of existing
infrastructure. Some countries currently in crisis once
had functional health infrastructure, but because they
are subject to attacks or because fighting is taking
place in the vicinity, those facilities are no longer able
to operate at full capacity, even as needs increase. That
leads to a worrying phenomenon - the flight of skilled
medical personnel. Figures show that two-thirds of
specialized personnel have fled Syria. That gives an
idea of the magnitude of the problem.

In other countries where basic infrastructure is
lacking, clashes delay or nullify efforts to build or
rehabilitate health facilities. Morocco, which had
pledged to rehabilitate the university hospital of Bangui
in the Central African Republic, had to wait several
years before it could complete the rehabilitation work.
Indeed, it was impossible to finalize the work at the
height of the crisis, between 2012 and 2014, mainly
because of recurring looting in the country.

It is clear that despite the considerable legal arsenal
set up for the protection of civilians in the event of
conflict, the international community has failed to
eradicate this phenomenon and to address the serious
difficulties related to attacks on medical infrastructure
and personnel, whether those are ensuring the access
of humanitarian personnel to civilian populations,
bringing to justice those responsible for attacks or
simply collecting reliable data. Today, these difficulties
are growing due to the increase in attacks by terrorist
groups. In Syria, Iraq, Nigeria, Mali and many other
countries, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko
Haram and other terrorist groups are now deliberately
targeting medical infrastructure and personnel.

Firm measures should be taken in this regard. As
a first step, the relevant recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2016/722) following
the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) should be
implemented. Our first preventive measure should be
to ensure respect for international law. It is by investing
in prevention and strengthening democracy, the rule
of law, as well as development, that we can limit the
impact of conflicts, especially on medical personnel
and, from there, on civilian populations.

For quite some time, the Kingdom of Morocco has
integrated the teaching of international humanitarian
law into the training curriculum of the Royal Armed
Forces. Its provisions are an integral part ofthe rules of
engagement of our armed forces. Moroccan contingents
also benefit from this training before being deployed.

With a long tradition of deploying rural hospitals in
crisis theatres, Morocco takes very seriously the threats
to infrastructure and health personnel in times of armed
conflict. My country has deployed its most recent field
hospitals to Juba, South Sudan. In addition, Morocco
has set up a hospital in the Zaatari refugee camp, where
hundreds of thousands of people have been treated
since 2012. In the past, the Royal Armed Forces have
deployed hospitals in Kosovo and Somalia. Generally,
the equipment used is offered as a gift at the end of
the mission. Currently, Morocco is deploying a level-
II hospital under the United Nations banner within the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco shares the
Secretary-General's firm conviction that the protection
of civilian populations requires the implementation of
the provisions of international law and international
humanitarian law. The Kingdom of Morocco takes this
opportunity provided by this debate to pay homage to
those who are active in protecting civilians in conflict
zones and expresses its sympathy to all the humanitarian
actors and Blue Helmets who have paid with their lives
for their commitment to the serve in United Nations
operational deployment areas.

