Mr. Antonio: Allow me to start by congratulating
your country, Mr. President, on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January on the threshold of a new year. I also wish
to convey to you and, through you, to the wider
membership of the Council, the gratitude of the African
Union Commission for this opportunity to contribute
to this important and timely briefing on the situation in
Mali. We are confident that our discussions today will
give a strong impetus to the high-level engagements
to be held on the margins of the African Union (AU)
Summit, including the donors conference scheduled for
29 January.

(spoke in French)

Before dealing with the situation in Mali, allow me
to undertake the painful duty ofoffering my condolences
to the Algerian Government and people and to all
Governments and peoples whose citizens were victims
of the barbarous act committed by terrorists during
the hostage-taking in Amenas. The Chairperson of the
African Union Commission has condemned that odious
act in the strongest terms in a communique issued in
Addis Ababa.

(spoke in English)

Turning to the situation in Mali, following the
adoption of resolution 2085 (2012), on 20 December
2012, the efforts of the African Union Commission
have focused on helping to create the necessary political
conditions, both internally in Mali and within the region,
for the effective implementation of that resolution, in
close consultation and coordination with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Malian authorities and the United Nations, as agreed
in the Strategic Concept for the Resolution of the Crisis
in Mali.

The renewed attacks by armed terrorist and criminal
groups in northern Mali earlier this month, resulting
in the capture of Konna and the subsequent advance
towards Sevare, was a clear manifestation of the rapidly
deteriorating security situation in northern Mali. Those
attacks not only had far-reaching implications for the
territorial integrity of Mali and the countries of the
region but also were a potential security threat to Africa
and the world as a whole.

Such developments underscored the urgency
of accelerating the deployment of the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA),
authorizedby the Councilthrough resolution 2085 (2012).
That new situation reinforces the recommendation made
in the report of the Secretary-General (see S/2012/894)
that both the international support mission in Mali and
the Malian forces would need the requisite capacities
to carry out operations against terrorist and affiliated
groups in northern Mali. That will require the timely
and well-coordinated provision of a significant amount
of support by international partners, including general
and specialized equipment, logistics and funding. We
have therefore keenly taken note of the information
provided by the Secretary-General during his briefing
this morning regarding his letter transmitted to the
Security Council, as requested in resolution 2085 (2012),
containing options for a voluntary and United Nations-
funded logistics support package to the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA). We
look forward to the Council's reaction, taking into
account Africa's concerns as outlined by Mr. Feltman,
whom we thank for his very detailed briefing.

For its part, the African Union, through the
Chairperson of the Commission, Ms. Nkosazana
Dlamini Zuma, strongly condemned the renewed attacks
by armed terrorist and criminal groups in northern Mali
and called upon all African Union member States to
extend the necessary logistical, financial and capacity-
building support to the Malian defence and security
forces in line with relevant decisions of the AU Peace
and Security Council and United Nations Security
Council resolutions.

We wish to thank the African Union member
States that have so far pledged troops to AFISMA and
those contemplating doing so, as well as other partners
for providing logistical and financial support. In its
press statement issued on 14 January, the African
Union Peace and Security Council acknowledged
the assistance provided by France at the request of
the Malian authorities and within the framework of
Security Council resolution 2085 (2013).

The Commission of the African Union and
ECOWAS held a coordination meeting in Addis Ababa
on 16 January as part of their efforts to speed up the
deployment of AFISMA and help Mali to re-establish
its national unity and territorial integrity and facilitate
the effective restoration of constitutional order in the
country. The discussions focused on the following areas:
modalities for expediting the effective implementation
of Security Council resolution 2085 (2012); command
and control issues pertaining to AFISMA, including
how best to expeditiously operationalize and enhance
the command and control of the Mission based on the
ECOWAS/AU-harmonized concept of operations and
best practices from recent AU-led operations; and force
generation and funding.

The meeting agreed to set up a Mali integrated task
force at the AU headquarters made up of experts from
the AU, ECOWAS and the United Nations, including
representatives of other international stakeholders, to
provide strategic guidance and advice for AFISMA.
The meeting also agreed to source additional troop
contributions to AFISMA from other AU member
States.

The meeting also agreed to hold a donors conference
on 29 January, as decided by the AU Peace and Security
Council in its communique of 13 November 2012 and
endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 2085
(2012) following the AU Summit in Addis Ababa. The
Conference is expected to mobilize resources and other
necessary support for the Malian defence and security
forces, as well as for AFISMA.The Chairperson of
the AU Commission and the President of ECOWAS
Commission will meet on the margins ofthe AU Summit
to further consider issues relating to the deployment of
AFISMA and the implementation of other aspects of
resolution 2085 (2012).

Allow me to conclude by reiterating the commitment
made by both the African Union and ECOWAS in their
coordination meeting to spare no effort to expeditiously
deploy and operationalize AFISMA, as well as to
provide the requisite support, in consultation with the
United Nations and other partners, to the process aiming
at the full restoration of constitutional order in Mali.
The concrete measures taken by the Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS during the Summit held on
19 January in Abidjan provide a prompt response to the
urgency of the current situation in Mali.

We also wish to reaffirm the AU's full solidarity
with Mali, as well as our full support to the transitional
authorities of Mali, namely, interim President
Dioncounda Traore and his Prime Minister Diango
Cissoko.

Finally, we wish to appeal to all partners to actively
participate in the forthcoming donors conference to
be held in Addis Ababa and to contribute generously
to the proposed trust fund. We also wish to take this
opportunity to reiterate the appeal of the African
Union that efforts to secure funding through United
Nations-assessed contributions should continue and be
expedited.

