Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for the invitation extended to Nigeria to
participate in this open debate under the Tanzanian
presidency. We consider this initiative by your country
as a reaffirmation of the positive role in activities on
the African continent. We warmly congratulate your
country on its initiative.

Let me also pay tribute to the United Kingdom
presidency of the Council last month.

I wish to express my delegation's appreciation to
the Security Council for its continuing exertion on the
issue of preventing and resolving conflicts in Africa.
Since the year 2000 this interest has continued to
manifest itself in a number of resolutions, of which
resolution 1649 (2005) - adopted at the summit-level
meeting of the Security Council, at the margin of the
2005 World Summit - is noteworthy. This open
debate is, therefore, yet another indication of the
Council's determination to find a lasting solution to the
problems that have bedeviled the Great Lakes region.

There is no gainsaying the importance of peace,
security and stability of the Great Lakes for the overall
development of Africa, as well as for the achievement
of noble goals encapsulated in the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD). I wish to recall, in
this connection, the holding of the first International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region in Dar es-
Salaam in November 2004, in which President
Olusegun Obasanjo participated, both in his capacity as
leader of Nigeria, and as Chairman of the African
Union (AU). The issues addressed at that summit -
such as transnational crime and terrorism, disarmament
and repatriation of armed groups, governance issues,
including the rational management of resources and
coordinated approaches towards humanitarian
problems - constitute some of the challenges the
countries in the Great Lakes region face in building
trust and confidence among their peoples.

A second summit, which is being arranged in
Nairobi later this year, would enable the leaders to
adopt protocols and a programme of action that would
impact favourably on the political, social and economic
situation of countries in the region. The international
community should lend its support to the holding of the
summit and provide resources to ensure its success.

There are undoubtedly positive signs of a turn-
around in the political fortunes of countries in the
region, and that bodes well for the cause of peace and
security therein. In particular, the approaching end to
the transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the consolidation of peace in Burundi, and the
indictment of the leadership of the Lord's Resistance
Army, which has wreaked such havoc in parts of the
region, should encourage more active support for the
peace process. In the Democratic of Republic of the
Congo, for example, the support of the international
community for the electoral process and internal
reforms should be unambiguous. It should be given
expression through concrete assistance to the
Congolese Government, for without such substantial
assistance, the path that the Congolese Government is
courageously treading will be bumpy. On the other
hand, such assistance, when provided, will send a
positive message of support for the political process. It
will especially enable that Government confidently to
address governance issues, including the strengthening
of national institutions. Nigeria believes, however, that
national and regional ownership should remain
paramount in such efforts.

As regards the role of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we believe it should be able, under its
current mandate, to deploy United Nations troops
strategically, especially in the border areas, so as to
prevent arms smuggling. That would also be a
confidence-building measure. Meanwhile, I wish to
join previous speakers in conveying to the Government
of Guatemala our condolences and heartfelt sympathies
for the deaths of eight members of its contingent.

The swearing-in on Friday, 26 August 2005 of
Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza as the new President of Burundi
rekindled hope for the future of the people of that
country. The power-sharing agreement signed in
Pretoria, South Africa, in 2003 set the stage for the
election that brought him to power. Burundi should be
encouraged and assisted to deepen the process of
constitutional reform and national integration and
development. The cooperation of the international
community with the regional and subregional
organizations would strengthen the capacity of Burundi
to follow through on its commitments under the new
constitution.

The impending completion of the United Nations
Operation in Burundi should not signal the end of the
United Nations presence in Burundi. On the contrary,
Nigeria views the next phase in that country's
development - the-post conflict phase - as providing
an opportunity to activate and implement a programme
of reconstruction and development. We anticipate that
the newly established Peacebuilding Commission will
play a role in that regard. Nigeria has no doubt that the
country's new leadership has the political will to
sustain the current positive changes in the country.

Nigeria considers the activities of non-State
actors to be a major threat to peace and security,
especially in the Great Lakes region. As the Council
recognized in resolution 1649 (2005), the combination
of the proliferation of and traffic in arms, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, and the illicit trade in
those resources by those groups have continued to fuel
and exacerbate conflicts in the region. A firm and
unambiguous stand by the international community is
needed to rein in those groups and to hold them and
their collaborators, within and outside the region,
accountable for their misdeeds, including the violation
of international humanitarian law. Neighbouring
countries should not allow the use of their territories as
launching pads for attacks by those groups.

It is Nigeria's expectation that there will emerge
from this debate a clear message signaling the resolve
of the Security Council to support regional and
subregional initiatives targeted at promoting peace,
security and development in the Great Lakes region.
Such support should encompass the identification of a
new and effective mechanism of cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union, whose
Peace and Security Council is also actively seized with
those issues within the context of Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter.
Secondly, the capacities of the countries in the
region to meet the various challenges before them
should be enhanced through a substantial infusion of
assistance from donor countries and international
financial institutions.

Thirdly, democracy, good governance, the rule of
law and the protection of human rights should remain
important principles in the pursuit of initiatives on
peace and security in the region. National and regional
institutions should be nurtured and, where they are
weak, strengthened so as to ensure that those principles
are entrenched.

Finally, the humanitarian problems created in the
wake of the conflicts and reflected in the high number
of refugees, internally displayed persons and returnees
in the region should be addressed in a global and
comprehensive manner. That should be done through
the coordination of assistance among providers,
including civil society groups. The focus of those
efforts should continue to be the rehabilitation of
victims and their integration into the mainstream of
national life once conflicts are over.

