Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
would first of all like to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General. We
thank him for the information he gave us and for making
himself available to the Council.

 

Allow me also to take this opportunity to welcome our
new colleague, Ambassador Jean-David Levitte, who is an
eminent diplomat and friend with whom I had the privilege
to work in Tunis and in Paris, where I was able to
appreciate his great human and professional qualities. I
would like to assure him of our full readiness to continue
to work with him and his delegation, as we did with his
predecessor, Ambassador Dejammet.

Tunisia has taken note of the holding of the first
pluralistic and democratic elections in Tajikistan. We salute
the role played in this regard by the Joint Electoral
Observation Mission of the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. As
the Secretary-General stressed in his report, and as the
recent elections have shown, the transition to a stable
democratic regime has barely begun. It is important in this
connection for the international community to continue to
lend the necessary assistance to guarantee the continuity of
the democratic process in that country. Some sort of
ongoing United Nations presence will make it possible to
preserve the gains made and to consolidate the process of
national reconciliation in Tajikistan. Despite the difficulties
and tensions that have accompanied the entire transition
period, the United Nations, the Contact Group and other
actors have constantly promoted and helped the Tajik
parties overcome obstacles in order to enable their country
to embark upon the part of reconciliation and democracy.

Tunisia would like to express its satisfaction with the
role played by the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT), and with the goodwill of all the
parties near and far that have participated in helping make
the Mission a success. My country agrees with the decision
of the Secretary-General to terminate the United Nations
Mission in Tajikistan. Tajikistan must shoulder its
responsibilities, with the assistance of the international
community, and the international community should closely
follow the evolution of the situation on the ground in order
to guarantee the establishment of lasting stability and
democracy.

The role of the United Nations in the post-UNMOT
period will continue to be very important, particularly as
long as the United Nations continues to assist Tajikistan in
all aspects of peace-building, especially in the reintegration
of ex-combatants into civilian life and in income-generating
activities that are of economic and social benefit. We
encourage the authorities of Tajikistan to continue
consultations with the United Nations to define the role that
can be played by the Organization in future stages to
consolidate peace in Tajikistan.

