Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation thanks the
delegation of Kuwait for having convened this meeting of
vital importance. We thank His Excellency Mr. Antonio
Guterres for his extensive and exhaustive briefing. We
also thank Her Excellency Ms. Mary Robinson, Chair
of The Elders, and His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-Moon
for their wise and enlightening statements.

As indicated in ChapterI ofthe Charter ofthe United
Nations, the purpose of our Organization is to maintain
international peace and security through the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. We believe multilateralism
to be one of the main factors involved in achieving our
conflict prevention objectives. Multilateralism is the
highest expression, at the governmental level, of the
quest for a world of peace, prosperity, justice and human
rights -the founding pillars ofthe United Nations itself.
Multilateralism makes it possible to resolve issues and
conflicts in a formal partnership between States and
parties to disputes, and it is necessary in that regard
to support and promote the Secretary-General's work
for preventive diplomacy. We welcome the Secretary-
General's vision for focusing the Organization's efforts
in the peace and security arena on prevention and
the expansion of diplomacy for peace, which affirms
the founding mission of the United Nations with the
aim of replacing a culture of reaction with one of
prevention. We encourage all Member States to adhere
to that doctrine and to accept the good offices of the
Secretary-General as crucial elements for preventing
and mediating conflicts.

Based on Chapter VI of the Charter, the Security
Council has all the tools necessary for the impartial
mediation of any dispute that puts our main goals
or others of a similar nature at risk. We therefore
urge States to use the resources available to them
appropriately, prioritizing principles such as respect
for the sovereignty of all States and non-interference in
internal affairs, as well as other principles of conflict
mediation founded on international law. Extensive, close
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations is essential and demands
that we join forces to expand partnerships with a view
to doing more effective, efficient and transparent work.
In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea would like
to emphasize the importance of increasing the
participation of women and expanding their numbers
in conflict prevention and mediation missions. Their
involvement in mediation processes would help us to
better understand the causes of conflicts as well as
alternative solutions to them. We reiterate our thanks
to all the countries that contribute troops and police
to those missions, as their efforts and sacrifices make
the daily struggle to maintain international peace and
security possible.

