Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ambassador Arias, Chairman of
the Security Council Committee created under
resolution 1373 (2001), for his statement on the work
already accomplished by the Committee and for the
programme of work for its ninth trimester, submitted
this morning.

Terrorism did not come into being on 11
September 2001. But on that day its face took on
particularly odious and murderous features. In earlier
years, terrorists assassinated monarchs and politicians
but hesitated at striking innocent civilians in such great
numbers. Today, however, terrorist groups no longer
have any moral or religious scruples. They are
deliberately targeting civilians and can have access to
modern technologies with unprecedented destructive
power.

In the face of the worsening of the terrorist threat,
it was imperative that international cooperation be
intensified. Switzerland welcomes the role played by
the United Nations in this matter, particularly through
the use of instruments of multilateral cooperation and
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001). The United Nations is also taking
preventive measures by working to combat those
injustices that form the breeding ground from which
certain terrorist groups fill their ranks. In the long term,
the fight against terrorism will succeed only if we can
reduce those injustices and inequalities, defend human
dignity and develop dialogue between different cultures
and religions.

I would like to take advantage of this open
debate, briefly and for the first time here before the
Security Council, to outline the steps taken by my
country to prevent and suppress terrorism.

First, in the area of police and judicial
cooperation, Switzerland cooperates closely with
various countries in the pursuit of terrorist groups and
in the identification of their sources of funding.

Switzerland has also strengthened its legislative
arsenal. Changes have been made in the penal code to
increase the means for combating the financing of
terrorism. Banks and financial intermediaries have
been obliged to increase their vigilance. Those
legislative modifications permitted Switzerland to
ratify, last 23 September, the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and
the International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombing. Switzerland therefore is now party
to the 12 main United Nations conventions on terrorism
whose ratifications were requested by resolution 1373
(2001).

Regarding measures decided by the Security
Council against Al Qaeda and the Taliban, Switzerland
has applied them integrally from the start. By decree,
the Swiss Government has adopted and rapidly updated
the measures necessary to implement the sanctions set
out in resolution 1267 (1999) and in subsequent
resolutions. Switzerland is also cooperating closely
with other countries and with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in implementing Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001). My country has already
submitted three reports to the Committee detailing the
measures undertaken.

With regard to technical assistance, Switzerland
has provided various forms of support to other
countries in the fight against terrorism and its
financing. Such technical assistance includes the
training of legal experts for the drafting of new
legislative texts. It also aims to train banking
executives or representatives of financial
administrations to recognize suspicious operations
involving money-laundering or the financing of
terrorism. Within the framework of its participation in
the Group of Eight Action Group - established to
fight terrorism and to assist other countries in that
area i Switzerland will continue its commitment with
regard to technical assistance.

Finally, Switzerland is participating actively in
negotiations with a view to adopting a comprehensive
convention against terrorism. It has played a
facilitating role on certain points during the ongoing
negotiations in the Sixth Committee of the General
Assembly and hopes that those negotiations will
conclude swiftly.

Preventing and suppressing terrorism is a long-
term fight. The international community must remain
firm in its resolve to carry on that struggle. It must also
see to it that, in doing so, it does not sacrifice respect
for human rights and for the rule of law. In recent
years, disturbing tensions have appeared between
security and freedom. However, Switzerland is
convinced that it is not necessary to compromise
fundamental freedoms in order to ensure effectiveness
in the fight against terrorism.

In conclusion, Switzerland must congratulate the
Counter-Terrorism Committee on the remarkable work
accomplished in two years. We invite it to pursue, in a
spirit of tried-and-true consultation, close dialogue
with Member States and to increase its cooperation
with regional organizations and specialized technical
bodies such as Interpol, the World Customs
Organization, the International Atomic Energy Agency
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons.

