Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): The
Ambassador of France will be making an intervention
later in this debate on behalf of the members of the
European Union, and my Government fully supports the
statement he will make then, which will set out in detail
the European Union's views on this important issue.
My Government welcomes this opportunity for the
Security Council to debate the situation in the occupied
territories, since it offers Council members the
opportunity to reiterate their whole-hearted support for the
Middle East peace process, which is based on resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The peace process is
currently at a difficult and delicate stage, but we must not
overlook the dramatic successes of the past few years.

My Government regrets the fact that the question of
settlements has had to come before the Council again.
One of the major achievements of the peace process has
been that it has enabled the parties concerned to speak to
each other directly and to resolve problems by direct
negotiations. We want that process to continue.

But we understand the frustration felt by the
Palestinians in relation to Israeli settlement activity. The
British Government's position on settlements is well
known, and I reiterate it now: they are illegal, they
contravene the Fourth Geneva Convention and they
represent an obstacle to an overall peace.

Moreover, the Declaration of Principles defined
settlements as a final status issue, and the implication of
that is that the status quo would remain in the meantime.
Any expansion of existing settlements thus clearly goes
against the spirit of the Declaration of Principles.
Settlement expansion also undermines the confidence of
one party in the true intentions of the other. It cannot be
in Israel's interest to sow doubt about its good faith on
this crucial issue, especially when to do so plays straight
into the hands of those hostile to the peace process.

At the same time, my Government cannot and does
not underestimate or seek to belittle Israel's legitimate
security concerns. We condemned the Beit Lid bombing

 

in the strongest possible terms, and we have urged the
Palestinians to do all they can within their area of
responsibility to cooperate in the fight against terrorism.
But Israel's security concerns, however legitimate, must not
be allowed to hold up progress towards peace.

In the view of my Government, the only Viable way
forward is for Israel and the PLO to accelerate their
negotiations with each other with a View to completing the
process initiated on the White House lawn on 13 September
1993 and to implementing the Declaration of Principles and
the subsequent agreements reached at Cairo and Erez. The
international community must continue to offer its full
support to the parties in their efforts, but the international
community cannot become a substitute for direct bilateral
negotiations between the parties.

