The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General concerning the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, document S/2000/1023.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
report of the Secretary-General concerning the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, of 25 October
2000 (5/2000/1023).

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to enhance contacts at all levels between
the Georgian and Abkhaz sides, in close
cooperation with the Russian Federation, in its
capacity as facilitator, the Group of Friends of the
Secretary-General and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. It notes with
appreciation the expansion of such contacts,
which resulted recently in a series of meetings
and steps towards the implementation of concrete
cooperation projects between the two sides. It
notes the holding of the llth session of the
Coordinating Council and urges further
reinvigoration of this mechanism. It welcomes the
readiness of the Government of Ukraine to host
the third meeting on confidence-building
measures in Yalta at the end of November and
notes the important contribution a successful
conference held in a timely fashion would make
to the peace process.

"The Security Council notes with deep
concern, however, the continued failure of the
parties to achieve a comprehensive political

settlement, which includes a settlement of the
political status of Abkhazia within the State of
Georgia. It calls upon the parties, in particular the
Abkhaz side, to undertake immediate efforts to
move beyond the impasse and urges them to spare
no efforts in order to achieve substantive progress
without further delay. In this regard, it strongly
supports the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, undertaken with the
support of the Group of Friends of the Secretary-
General, to address the issue of the future
constitutional status of Abkhazia and, in
particular, his intention to submit, in the near
future, a draft paper containing proposals to the
parties on the question of the distribution of
competencies between Tbilisi and Sukhumi as a
basis for meaningful negotiations on that issue.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties
to agree upon and to take, in the nearest future,
concrete steps towards implementing effective
measures to guarantee the security of the refugees
and internally displaced persons who exercise
their unconditional right to return to their homes.
In particular, the undefined and insecure status of
spontaneous returnees to the Gali district is a
matter that must be addressed urgently. The
Council therefore urges the parties to engage in
genuine negotiations to resolve concrete aspects
of the matter and not to link this issue to political
matters. In this regard, it joins the Secretary-
General in encouraging the Abkhaz side to muster
the requisite political will to resolve the problem
of Georgian language education in the schools of
the district, as well as to find the resources that
those schools need, which the Secretary-General
notes may affect directly the magnitude of the
seasonal migration in the area.

"The Security Council welcomes the
achievements reached within the framework of
the policy implemented by the Government of
Georgia, the United Nations Development
Programme, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
World Bank, aimed at ensuring that the internally
displaced persons enjoy their right to be treated in
the same manner as all other Georgian citizens.

"The Security Council notes that

situation on the ground in the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) area of
responsibility has remained generally calm
although unstable during the reporting period. It
welcomes all efforts which have been undertaken,
the

in particular by the Special Representative, with a
view to alleviating tensions and increasing
confidence between the parties. It urges the
parties to cooperate closely in combating crime
and improving the work of their respective law
enforcement agencies.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the murder of Mr. Zurab Achba, legal assistant to
the United Nations Human Rights Office in
Sukhumi, recalls the commitment of the Abkhaz
side to keep UNOMIG fully informed on the
course of the investigation into this crime, and
urges the Abkhaz side to shed light on this matter.
It also deplores abductions of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel. In this context, the
Council recalls the relevant principles contained
in the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel adopted on 9
December 1994 and the statement of its President
of 10 February 2000 (S/PRST/2000/4). It calls on
the parties to refrain from any actions which
could increase tensions on the ground and to
ensure the safety of UNOMIG personnel.

"The Security Council welcomes the
contribution that UNOMIG and the Collective
Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS Peacekeeping Force)
continue to make in stabilizing the situation in the
zone of conflict, notes that the working
relationship between UNOMIG and the CIS
Peacekeeping Force has remained close, and
stresses the importance of continuing and
increasingly active cooperation and coordination
between them in the performance of their
respective mandates. It calls on the parties to
observe their obligations to prevent acts that
violate the Moscow Agreement on a Ceasefire
and Separation of Forces of May 1994
(S/l994/583, annex l) and could pose a threat to
the life and security of UNOMIG, CIS
Peacekeeping Force and other international
personnel."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2000/32.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.
