Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I should
like to thank today's briefers for their presentations.

Poland welcomes the successful holding of the
Somalia Partnership Forum in Mogadishu and the
renewed commitment of the Somali authorities to
State-building, with clearly defined objectives and
timelines for political, security and economic reforms.
Against that positive backdrop, we note with concern
the persistence of tensions between the Federal
Government and the federal member states, which pose
a major obstacle to the carrying out of the tasks crucial
to achieving a lasting peace in Somalia.

We call on the Federal Government of Somalia and
the federal member states to resolve the outstanding
issues through dialogue and compromise. The country
cannot waste valuable time and requires consensus and
concerted efforts on the part of all actors to advance
political and security reforms and build a stable future
for the Somali people.

With the deadline for elections approaching, we are
deeply convinced that the Federal Government and the
federal member states should spare no effort in working
to reach an agreement on a political framework for
fundamental electoral issues. In that context, we stress
the importance of adopting, by the end of the year,
an inclusive and credible electoral law in order to
ensure that federal one-person one-vote elections are
held according to the agreed timeline. We believe that
peaceful, inclusive, credible and transparent universal
suffrage would be a historic step in the rebuilding of a
democratic Somali State.

My country remains convinced that durable peace
will be hard to achieve without inclusivity and the
genuine involvement of women and young people in
political processes in Somalia. We underscore the
importance of promoting the active participation of
women in the political life of the country, including in
decision-making at all levels of Government. We hope
that reforms by the Government will include gender-
sensitive provisions and that the means for achieving
at least a 30 per cent quota of women in the Federal
Parliament will be provided.

Let me reiterate that Poland commends the
ambitious reform agenda set by the Federal Government
and the significant progress made so far in Somalia.
There is no doubt, however, that many challenges
remain, including the very fragile security situation
and the continued threat posed by Al-Shabaab, as well
as the slow pace of the implementation of the transition
plan. The dire humanitarian situation is another cause
of serious concern for us.

There is no doubt that Somalia cannot overcome
those challenges alone. It is only through close
cooperation and coordination among the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states,
supported by the African Union, the United Nations
and other international partners, that the country will
be able to achieve lasting peace. The international
community should continue to support the Somalis and
stand ready to cooperate with the authorities, in the
spirit of mutual trust and in the interest of the stability
and development of Somalia.

Allow me to conclude, as always, by expressing
Poland's continued appreciation for United Nations
actors and the African Union Mission in Somalia for all
of their efforts and sacrifices.

