Mrs. Morgan Sotomayor (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would first like to commend
the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina for its
initiative in convening this debate. Mexico agrees with
the importance that Bosnia and Herzegovina places on
the need to include institution-building as a principal
element in peacebuilding strategies.

We also recognize the fact that when conflicts are
resolved through a peace agreement or ceasefire
between the parties, there is a greatly increased risk
that those conflicts could break out anew in the post-
conflict phase. However, such occasions also provide
opportunities to build the basic capacities needed to
ensure that peacebuilding efforts take hold. Success is
most likely if the political will and readiness to forge
consensus on the part of national actors, however
minimal, are seized in a timely and rapid way under the
favourable political conditions that generally emerge in
the phase immediately following the signing of a peace
agreement or ceasefire.

When there is no civil authority, the top priority
for the population is the reestablishment of a feeling of
security. Once progress is made in the area of security,
a variety of measures need to be implemented, such as
the restoration of Government institutions that are seen
as representing the whole population and having
sufficient legitimacy to introduce reforms to transform
systems and structures from the past that may have
contributed to the socio-economic inequality that led to
violence.
During our recent membership of the Security
Council, Mexico noted that, in general, in countries
emerging from protracted conflict, attention is focused
on humanitarian assistance and recovery as immediate
priorities. In that regard, support for institution-
building is left to a later stage, which undermines the
capacity of the State to put in place conditions for
stability, national reconciliation, respect for human
rights and the promotion of long-term development.

My delegation would like to recall that, during
one of our terms as President of the Council, we
convened a debate on the strengthening of the rule of
law in the context of the maintenance of international
peace and security. On that occasion, the importance of
post-conflict capacity-building was recognized, in
particular building civil society capacity as a key
element for strengthening the rule of law and laying the
foundations of lasting peace.

Mexico believes that one essential task of the
Council is to set mandates for peacekeeping operations
that strengthen the rule of law within countries in or
emerging from conflict. My country therefore
appreciates and welcomes the fact that the Security
Council is increasingly incorporating this concept into
its decisions.

In that context, we reiterate that the immediate
priority in post-conflict situations must be supporting
the country to restore its institutions, including in the
initial phase, with the establishment of internationally
supported transition institutions, but also with the
decisive involvement of local capacities to ensure
national ownership and subsequent self-sustaining
development.

In these efforts, as recognized in the report
(S/2010/393, annex) of the 2010 review of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), co-facilitated by
Mexico, the Peacebuilding Commission must play a
more relevant role in providing advice and in drafting
and implementing peacebuilding strategies. It must
also strengthen its coordinating role and its strategic
relationships with other United Nations bodies,
regional organizations and international financial
institutions.

It is important for the PBC to ensure that
international assistance is in keeping with national
priorities and assists in building institutional capacities
in crucial peacebuilding areas. Mexico reiterates the
importance of establishing greater international civil

capacities in a fast, effective, coherent and coordinated
way in countries emerging from conflict. In particular,
we should take advantage of the capacities of the
southern hemisphere and the potential of women,
taking account of their crucial role in peacebuilding
processes. In that regard, we hope that the next report
of the Secretary-General on post-conflict peacebuilding
will include recommendations for strengthening the
capacity of the international community and the United
Nations to support national institutions.

