Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand): It is indeed most
unfortunate and regrettable that war has broken out,
but, as the Secretary-General said last week, it is time
to confront the realities of the present. Regardless of
the causes of this war, the undeniable reality is that
hundreds of thousands of civilians are suffering as a
result of it.

Our immediate attention must now be focused on
alleviating the plight and suffering of these innocent
civilians, particularly women and children. What we
need at this crucial juncture is a coalition of the
compassionate - a coalition of the giving - to
mobilize and coordinate the provision of humanitarian
assistance to the people of Iraq. It is incumbent on the
United Nations, with the full support of the
international community, to provide humanitarian
assistance to the people of Iraq in a timely manner in
order to protect the innocent, especially the most
vulnerable groups, including women, children and the
elderly, and to limit their exposure to and the impact of
the devastating consequences of war. And we do hope
that this war will end quickly so that the Iraqi people
can rebuild their lives and dignity in an environment of
enduring peace and freedom.
What is needed are rapid and well-coordinated
efforts to ensure that humanitarian relief reaches the
affected Iraqi population. Thailand commends the
Secretary-General's initiatives to help plan and
implement humanitarian assistance programmes for the
Iraqi people, including adjustments to the oil for food
programme. We are pleased that the Security Council is
considering this important issue of humanitarian
assistance in an active and urgent manner. We hope that
these efforts will soon bear fruit so that humanitarian
assistance will no longer be delayed. Thailand, on its
part, stands ready to join this coalition for humanitarian
assistance and will work with the United Nations and
others to help alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people
and eventually to assist in the reconstruction of Iraq.

