Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to convey our
deepest condolences following the death of Mr. George
Herbert Walker Bush, forty-first President of the United
States of America, a great patriot and a humble servant
of his nation and also a faithful friend of Poland. Our
sympathies go especially to his friends and family.

(spoke in French)

I would now like to thank the Secretary-General,
as well as the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, for their very informative briefings.
I would also like to congratulate Cote d'Ivoire on its
assumption of the Council presidency for the month of
December and to wish you every success, Mr. President,
as well as to commend the Chinese delegation for its
work during the month of November.

(spoke in English)

For more than 70 years, since the founding of the
United Nations, building sustainable peace has been
the holy grail of the international community. We have
worked very hard to find it and to fulfil the dreams
of so many, but so far to no avail. There have always
been new challenges and obstacles, such as conflicts
and violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. In order to tackle them, we should
deploy a broad spectrum of activities within the
competencies of all the Organization's three pillars
of peace and security, development and human rights,
which are all interlinked and mutually reinforcing. We
cannot ensure long-term peace and security without
addressing development and human rights. When they
are connected, they are stronger and more effective,
and that is why I would like to focus on those issues.

First, with regard to the peace and security pillar,
peacebuilding and sustainable peace are a fundamental
condition for development. To that end, the United
Nations should comprehensively address conflicts
by using every available instrument, from prevention
through peace settlement and peacekeeping to
comprehensive post-conflict restoration.

We should all underline the importance of sustaining
peace through multidimensional peacekeeping
operations, so as to strengthen national ownership
and capacity and seek greater coherence among
United Nations system actors, including through joint
platforms such as the global focal point for the police,
justice and corrections areas in the rule of law in post-
conflict and other crisis situations.

Let me now turn to the second pillar: development.
The complex nature of challenges in post-conflict areas
requires the combining of forces to target economic,
political and social inequalities, using needs-
based structural interventions and reforms, social
inclusiveness, reintegration and policy advice. It is
essential that the needs of the vulnerable, who suffer as
a result of conflict, not be ignored.

Furthermore, it is imperative to build resilient
societies that are economically and socially empowered.
Our own role in this regard should include sharing
responsibility and proving our solidarity with those in
need. However, humanitarian aid alone will certainly
not be enough. National and local actors need to assume
responsibility and leadership to the greatest extent
possible.

The role of Governments is essential to
strengthening investment in human development,
including providing better-quality education and access
to health care, both of which will contribute to a higher
level of development, while equal access creates the
opportunity for all to prosper. Policies should facilitate
the implementation of universal, adequately funded
health-care systems, and provide free and universal
primary and secondary education.

It is crucial that discrimination against ethnic and
religious minorities in the labour market and in access
to public services be prevented. Policies should support
incoming populations by providing necessary basic
socioeconomic services.

That brings me to my third point: human rights.
There is no successful peace process without full
respect for human rights. Respect for human rights
means social cohesion. Every member of a society has
the right to be equal and secure. Non-respect for human
rights in many parts of the world creates instability.
Young people also have a place in the human rights
pillar. When young people in a region experience
great frustration and desperation, the stage is set for
destabilization. Fostering the participation of young
people is crucial for effective implementation of the
peacebuilding and sustaining peace agendas. Equally
important is the empowerment of women. Women's
meaningful participation in all aspects of peace and
security is critical.

In conclusion, sustainable peace can only be
achieved when all segments of society are empowered
and included on an equal basis. Countries in post-
conflict transition periods need to develop adequate
capacity to take responsibility for their own
development, security and stability. In this regard,
Poland congratulates the people and the Government
of Cote d'Ivoire on the progress they have achieved in
the country's post-conflict transformation, which is
a cornerstone for long-lasting peace and stability and
economic prosperity.

