Mr. Kastrup (Germany): I appreciate that Member
States that are not members of the Council but are highly
involved in the implementation of the Dayton/Paris Peace
Agreement are being given an opportunity to express their
Views on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My
Government very much welcomes this step towards more
transparent and, therefore, credible work by the Council.

I would like to thank all those who have supported us
and ask for the understanding of those who have been
reluctant so far. We have suggested, as Council members
know, that the speaking time of non-members be limited to
not more than five minutes. I will try to live up to that self-
imposed restriction.

First of all, I would like to associate myself with the
statement made on behalf of the European Union by the
Portuguese presidency. But please allow me to make a few
remarks as the representative of a country that is heavily
involved in the peace process. We share the view
expressed by the Secretary-General and repeated by
Mr. Annabi today that there is slow progress in the
implementation of the Dayton/Paris Agreement as well as
in that of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). Germany is
therefore of the opinion that - despite other crises in the
region which are requiring the full attention and
commitment of large resources - the mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is far from being finished. We therefore
call on Member States to maintain their involvement at a
high level so as not to lose the momentum created over
the past four years.

My country welcomes the report of the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the progress in
implementing their New York Declaration of 15
November 1999, and I listened carefully and with the
greatest interest to what our colleague from Bosnia and
Herzegovina told us today. The commitments made in
this Declaration are well on their way towards being
translated into concrete measures.

Germany, however, cannot but express
disappointment that, once again, progress was possible
only after the intervention of the High Representative. We
hope that in the future the political leadership of Bosnia
and Herzegovina will be able to live up to their
responsibilities. The early adoption of an electoral law
and the provision of sufficient budgetary resources to
implement it would be visible proof of the maturity of the
political leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of
their capability to take ownership of their affairs. I would
like to associate myself with the remarks of my French
colleague, who spoke of the need for the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to take hold of their country's
destiny.

In this context, we would like to learn more about
the experience so far with the implementation of the State
Border Service Law, in particular with the responsible
authority for the Border Service. It would also be of
interest to know whether Bosnia and Herzegovina will
provide adequate funds in its budget for the
implementation of the Law. What are the planned next
steps?

We share the Secretary-General's concerns about the
continuing obstruction by Bosnian-Herzegovinan Croat
politicians in Mostar. Successful integration of the police
force and of the administration in general in Mostar
would set a precedent and allow for a breakthrough

 

elsewhere in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Germany is ready to
cooperate with UNMIBH and with the High Representative
in pursuing this goal. To this end, we would be grateful to
learn what steps UNMIBH and the High Representative
plan for the near future.

The Secretary-General's report states that the judicial
assessment programme will have concluded its task by the
end of this year. Given the fact that the implementation of
the reform of the judicial system has just started, and that
it is highly likely that there will be attempts to obstruct this
process, Germany would like to know how this reform will
be furthered and which body will be responsible for the
supervision of the judicial reform process. This question has
already been asked by other participants in this meeting.

My country welcomes the measures undertaken by
UNMIBH to raise the qualification standards for the
personnel of the International Police Task Force. In View of
the focus on co-location and consultancy tasks, those higher
standards will be essential if these tasks are to be
successfully carried out.

With regard to the options to be explored in
connection with the security needs of the Mission, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report, Germany
would like to draw the attention of the Council to the
experience of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia, which could be taken into consideration for
UNMIBH as well.

I thank you, Sir, for the Council's attention and, once
again, for the opportunity to take the floor on this occasion.

