Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the presence today of Foreign Ministers
Portas and Da Costa and Vice-Minister Machado, and
also Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ameerah Haq, not only for her sterling work in Timor-
Leste itself but also for her report here today.

That report highlights the fact that the past nine
months in Timor-Leste have seen a continuation of the
positive trends of recent years. The country remains
largely calm and stable. Continued strong growth has
enabled progress in addressing extreme poverty and
extending social services. And we have seen further
signs of broad commitment to a political culture based
on dialogue and respect for constitutional norms.

There has also been real progress in preparing for
a Timor-Leste without United Nations peacekeepers.
Resumption of full policing responsibilities by the
Timor police, the formal launch of the Government's
Strategic Development Plan and agreement on a jointly
owned transition plan have all laid foundations for a
smooth transition.

New Zealand supports a conditions-based
approach to UNMIT's withdrawal. Current trends
suggest that we are on track for a smooth drawdown
following next year's presidential and parliamentary
elections and for a transition to a post-UNMIT United
Nations presence by the end of 2012. Events over that
year will of course determine whether that can be
achieved. The coming elections will unquestionably be
the sternest test since 2006 of progress in building the
capacity of core State institutions.

Recent developments, however, do give us cause
for optimism. Growing electoral management
capability means that much less international support
will be required for next year's elections. New Zealand
welcomes the positive response from the United
Nations to Timor-Leste's requests for targeted electoral
assistance. We are also committed to providing support
bilaterally. Impressive habits of restraint and respect
for electoral rules and institutions have emerged, and
we will soon learn whether they can withstand the
intensity of high-stakes electoral competition.
Timorese-led political dialogue processes, such as the
retreat convened in July by the Bishop of Bacau, are
playing an important role in consolidating those gains.

Assuming continuation of those positive trends,
we must now focus on preparing for a smooth
transition, by intensifying work to strengthen core
Timorese institutions and by concluding Mission
activities or transferring them to other actors. The joint
transition plan provides a comprehensive framework in
that regard. We must work through that plan with key
stakeholders, particularly the Timorese Government,
the United Nations country team and donors, to ensure
its effective and sustainable implementation. That is
why we agree that the plan should remain a living
document, to be adjusted as required.

Developing an integrated, "one United Nations"
country strategy must also be a priority. Further
strengthening the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste,
particularly its logistical and operational capabilities,
will also be important ahead of the expected United
Nations police (UNPOL) drawdown after the 2012
elections. The PNTL-UNMIT Police Joint
Development Plan is a useful blueprint in that context.
We have been pleased at UNPOL efforts to recruit and
retain suitable personnel for the highly specialized
tasks of training and capacity-building.

Donors are also playing an increasingly important
role. For example, at the Government's request, New
Zealand is already scaling up assistance to the PNTL.
Our police recently completed a pre-posting evaluation
and preparatory visit for a bilateral programme focused
on strengthening community policing, which will
commence in January 2012, initially in four districts.
We will continue our long-standing security
partnership with Timor-Leste through a bilateral
assistance programme with the Falintil-Forcas de
Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL).

Over the coming year, we must also intensify
efforts to strengthen the capacities of other core State
institutions, including public sector oversight and
accountability bodies and the justice sector. That may
also be Timor-Leste's final chance to draw on UNMIT
support in addressing other long-standing challenges,
such as strengthening civilian oversight of security
institutions, investigating allegations of serious crimes
and agreeing on support for their victims.

It is particularly important for the long-term
health and legitimacy of Timor-Leste's security
institutions that allegations of serious crimes against
PNTL and F -FDTL officers be credibly addressed. We
therefore welcome the establishment of a joint
UNPOL-PNTL investigative team to process the
remaining allegations against PNTL personnel.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2011/641)
usefully outlines possible options for a post-UNMIT
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste, and provides
a good basis for further consideration of their
respective implications and merits. Any decision in that
regard must, of course, be based on careful assessments
of Timor-Leste's post-UNMIT needs, and be
determined in accordance with the priorities of the
Timorese Government itself. Realistically, that means
that the decision is still some way off and will be
made, at the earliest, only after a Government emerges
from next year's election processes.

The year 2012 should also mark a real shift in the
focus of international assistance, with stronger
emphasis being placed on Timor-Leste's long-term
development challenges, including improving health
and education and generating employment for its
swelling youth population. That requires sustained
growth in the non-oil private sector and particularly in
agriculture.

The Government's twenty-year Strategic
Development Plan, launched in July, sets out a
comprehensive framework for providing international
assistance in accordance with national priorities. New
Zealand is seeking Timorese endorsement of a strategic
framework to guide our bilateral aid programme over
the next five years, and Timorese agreement on a
shared vision for long-term development outcomes.
The draft outcome framework contemplates assistance
in three priority areas: strengthening the security and
justice sectors, facilitating private-sector investment
and providing education and training.

The year 2012 will be a watershed year for
Timor-Leste, and a critical test of its emergence from
post-conflict fragility. Should events proceed as we
hope, by this time next year we may be marking
UNMIT's valedictory. Credit is due to the Mission and
its leadership for the progress made since the 2006
crisis. Above all, however, the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste deserve praise for their
courage and determination in charting their own future,
and for their willingness and ability to define, for
themselves, the assistance that they need. That is
peacebuilding as it should be: national ownership in
action.

Timor-Leste will still require the ongoing support
of its friends in the region and beyond in addressing
the many political and economic challenges that it will
continue to face even after UNMIT's withdrawal. For
its part, New Zealand remains a proud friend and
committed partner of Timor-Leste as it writes for itself
the next chapter in its history.
11-60396

