The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Cote d'Ivoire, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djedje
(Cote d'Ivoire), took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/939, which contains the eleventh
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. Members also have
before them document 8/2007/8, which contains the
text of a draft resolution submitted by France.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in Russian): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1739 (2007).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at I p.m.
07-20558

