Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish first of all to comment on Ambassador
Greenstock's departure from the Council.

Ambassador Greenstock will be leaving us to take
up his new responsibilities. He was involved in the
drafting of resolution 1483 (2003) on Iraq - indeed
the United Kingdom was a sponsor of that resolution.
He therefore has an excellent understanding of that
resolution; it can even be said that he is an expert on it.
I am convinced, therefore, that in his new capacity he
will work in the spirit of the Security Council. He has a
very good understanding of the Council's attitude,
position and even sentiments towards that resolution. I
believe that he will do his best to implement resolution
1483 (2003); he was present when it was unanimously
adopted. I am certain that he will make a further
contribution to peace and reconstruction in Iraq.

I wish to take this opportunity, on behalf of my
country and of my delegation and on my own behalf, to
wish him every success in his new capacity.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important meeting. The peace process in
Cote d'Ivoire is now at a crucial stage. It is therefore a
very timely meeting, and it is necessary for the Council
to listen to the briefing and to exchange views on this
issue.

The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the Prime
Minister of Cote d'Ivoire, Mr. Diarra, for having come
to New York from afar to brief us on recent events in
that country. We welcome his presence here, and we
thank him for his visit. We deeply appreciate the efforts
made by the Government of Cote d'Ivoire to
implement the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement, to bring
about national reconciliation and to maintain national
stability.

We welcome the joint declaration signed on 4
July between the C6te d'Ivoire national defence and
security forces and Forces nouvelles. This declaration
undoubtedly is of crucial importance to the peace
process in Cote d'Ivoire. We have also noted that the
Government of Cote d'Ivoire has already presented the
amnesty law to the National Assembly, and we hope it
will be adopted very soon. We support the full
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes.

China has always closely followed the situation
in Cote d'Ivoire. It is our sincere hope that the parties
there will proceed from the fundamental interests of the
country and the nation, bury the hatchet and strengthen
cooperation in a spirit of mutual understanding. We
hope they will sincerely implement the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement and the Accra Agreement so as
to achieve national stability at an early date and to
create a sound environment for the economic and social
development of the country.

Peace and reconstruction in Cote d'Ivoire cannot
be separated from the support and help of the
international community. The Chinese delegation
appreciates the peace efforts by the United Nations, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and France in the country. We support the
work of the United Nations Mission in Cote d'Ivoire
under the leadership of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and in accordance with the
mandate of the Council.

China calls upon the international community,
especially the donor countries, to continue to provide
generous support to the people and Government of
Cote d'Ivoire. We call upon the donor countries to
provide ECOWAS with further support in order to
facilitate its peacekeeping efforts there. We support the
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and ECOWAS so as to further promote the
peace and reconciliation process in the country. I
sincerely hope that process of peace, reconciliation and
development in Cote d'Ivoire will be smooth. I also
hope that the people will move towards peace, stability
and prosperity.

Countries in West Africa are closely interwoven
and have influence with each other. We favour the
proposal by the Council's West African mission that a
regional approach be adopted to settle the conflicts
there. We believe that the rampant activities of
professional mercenaries, the proliferation of small
arms and the illegal exploitation of natural resources
lead to instability in West Africa. But it is a fact that
poverty is a root cause of such problems. Therefore,
the eradication of poverty, along with economic
development, is the fundamental way out for achieving
lasting peace in West Africa. The United Nations must
carefully study this issue - how to help the West
African countries eradicate poverty and achieve
sustainable development.

