Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the 15 member
States of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS).

At the outset, I would like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey
Feltman for his very informative briefing on the
current situation in Mali. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Oumar Daou, Permanent Representative
of Mali, for his statement, as well as Ambassador Tete
Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African Union, for
his intervention, which ECOWAS fully supports.

Before taking up what Ambassador Tete Antonio
has just said, I would like, on behalf ofthe 15 ECOWAS
member States, to pay tribute to the victims of the
tragic events that took place at the in Amenas gas
plant in Algeria. The events claimed victims of several
nationalities. In the light of these events, the whole
world is once again reminded of the brutality and
barbarism constantly displayed by terrorists.

Those tragic events confirm, as if there were
any further need, that terrorism is a global threat, to
effectively counter which will call for strengthened
international solidarity. The intervention of French
troops, at the request of the legal authorities of Mali,
to assist the Malian armed forces in beating back the
offensive by terrorist groups underscores the urgent
need for such international solidarity.

That was, moreover, the core of the message
delivered by President Alassane Ouattara, Chairman of
ECOWAS, at the extraordinary session of the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of State and Government held on
19 January in Abidjan, when he said "The time has
come for a broader commitment to show greater
solidarity with France and Africa".

It is fitting to express our sincere gratitude to
France for its leadership in handling the crisis in Mali
and to the Governments of the United Kingdom, the
United States of America, Canada, Germany, Belgium,
Denmark, Russia, Spain and many other countries
for the various forms of support they are providing
in the ongoing operations in Mali. We welcome the
substantial involvement of the European Union as well,
which confirmed at the end of the 17 January meeting
its commitment to providing training for the Malian
armed forces. In the same vein, we would like to thank
the neighbouring countries in the Sahel and Maghreb
regions for their frank cooperation in this process. We
call on them to cooperate further to improve security
across the entire region.

The extraordinary ECOWAS summit took
important decisions in the context of resolution 2085
(2012). Those decisions relate to the specific and
immediate methods for a stepped-up deployment of
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali
(AFISMA), given the deterioration of the security
situation in Mali and the neighbouring countries. In
that regard, as Mr. Feltman said, the appointments of
Maj or General Shehu Usman Abdulkadir of Nigeria and
Brigadier General Yaye Garba of the Niger, as the Force
Commander and Deputy Commander of AFISMA,
respectively, have been approved.

The establishment of a joint coordination mechanism
for implementing resolution 2085 (2012) by the United
Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS was decided
for the purpose of facilitating regular consultations
on political leadership, resource mobilization and
accountability, as well as the monitoring and assessment
of expenditures. It was also decided that logistical
supplies and financial support would be requested of
the United Nations for the deployment of AFISMA,
pending the Council's decision on the logistical support
called for in resolution 2085 (2012) and given the
evolution of the events on the ground in Mali, which
has required the accelerated deployment of AFISMA.
The President of the ECOWAS Commission was also
instructed to take, in close collaboration with the
African Union, all the necessary steps for the holding
of the donors conference scheduled for 29 January in
order to mobilize financial, logistical and material
resources for the deployment of AFISMA.

With regard to force generation, I would like to
say that the following ECOWAS countries have pledged
troops - Burkina Faso, Benin, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, the Niger, Nigeria,
Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo. A number of other
African countries, although not members of ECOWAS,
also pledged troops or other forms of support, thereby
showing the great solidarity of the African continent
on this matter. Among others, those countries include
Burundi, Chad, Rwanda, South Africa and Tanzania.

From a practical point ofview, I would like to inform
the Council that, on the orders of President Alassane
Ouattara, a mission led by the Minister for Foreign
Affaires of Cote d'Ivoire went to Bamako yesterday in
order to support and encourage the ECOWAS troops
deployed in AFISMA. The delegation also visited
French troops, held a working meeting with the
AFISMA command and met the troops already there,
namely, troops from Benin, Nigeria, Senegal and Togo.
Given all the announcements that were made, the total
number of AFISMA personnel, which was projected to
be 3,300, could be doubled. Up to now, however, only
946 have been deployed.

The visit on the ground brought up three major
difficulties, as Mr. Feltman indicated. First, the
AFISMA budget has not yet been established, given
that contributions are not yet available. Secondly,
the AFISMA Force Commander does not have the
resources needed for its smooth operation. Thirdly,
AFISMA does not have the logistics support it needs to
deploy outside Bamako, while AFISMA troops should
be rapidly deployed to reinforce Malian and French
troops in places liberated from the terrorists.

Given the gravity of the situation in Mali and the
subregion, ECOWAS therefore calls the attention of
the Security Council to the vital need of making the
emergency logistical and financial support package
available as requested by the ECOWAS Commission
President in his correspondence dated 18 January,
which was passed on to the Secretary-General and the
Council as an official document.

Motivated by the urgent needs that have arisen in
the theatre of operations in Mali, the African Union and
ECOWAS, as stated in the press release of the African
Union dated 11 January, renewed their request to the
Council that it authorize emergency financing through
United Nations contributions in order to allow for the
swift deployment of AFISMA and the effective conduct
of operations. For its part, ECOWAS is taking internal
measures to make its contribution in order to deal with
the situation.

Furthermore, ECOWAS calls on the goodwill of all
people to play an active role and to make commitments
to contribute during the donors conference scheduled
for 29 January in Addis Ababa, in order to mobilize
the financial, logistical and material resources that
are essential to accelerating an effective and efficient
deployment of AFISMA. On behalf of the Chairman of
ECOWAS, I would like to renew the appeal launched
to the Secretary-General for him to continue to be
personally involved with a view towards making the
logistical and financial support package available to
AFISMA on an emergency basis. ECOWAS would
therefore like the Secretary-General to be able
personally to attend and co-chair the donors conference,
given the stakes of that meeting for the entire African
continent. In that regard, we are convinced that the
effective presence of the Secretary-General at that
important donors conference would not only ensure its
visibility but it would above all ensure its success.

In conclusion, as was emphasized by President
Ouattara at the summit held last week in Abidjan,
the military intervention and the current course of
events were imposed upon us just as all of the efforts
of ECOWAS and the African Union were focused on a
political resolution among the Malian parties as part of
the discussions of Ouagadougou and Algiers and in the
context of resolution 2085 (2012).

ECOWAS therefore would strongly remind the
transitional Malian authorities of the need to comply
with resolution 2085 (2012), the relevant decisions of
ECOWAS and those of the African Union as it develops
the transitional road map that will permit the holding
of the presidential election within the timetables given,
with the support of the international community. In the
light of that, ECOWAS would like to reiterate that the
Tuareg issue and the question ofthe north ofMali cannot
be hijacked by terrorist forces. A11 mingling between
Tuareg and narco-terrorists must be avoided, and the
settlement of the underlying causes of the conflict must
be approached with pragmatism. The Government of
Mali must therefore establish, in collaboration with
ECOWAS, the African Union, the United Nations
and all partners, the conditions for a genuine national
dialogue with all components of the nation, including
the representatives of the communities of northern
Mali.

