Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for today's updates. I would also like to
welcome the new Permanent Representative of Yemen.
It must be rewarding for him to participate in his first
Security Council meeting on a day of hope.

Yesterday marked an important day. The agreements
reached in Stockholm can be the breakthrough that is
needed for peace and to end the humanitarian crisis
in Yemen. As others have said, our efforts must now
turn to immediate implementation and maintaining
momentum in the political process. Let me express our
very deep appreciation for the extraordinary efforts
of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths in that endeavour.
We also truly commend the personal engagement of
the Secretary-General himself - an illustration of the
strong international commitment to the crisis in Yemen
and of the urgent need to find political solutions. We
also thank those who played a crucial role in making the
agreements happen, including Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Oman and the Ambassadors
accredited to Yemen, including those of the permanent
members of the Council. Without intense preparations
and active international support, the consultations in
Stockholm would never have been possible.

But most of all, we would like to extend our sincere
gratitude to the Yemeni delegations. Their decision to
come together for the first time in more than two years
was a significant step towards ending the conflict. As
we have just heard, crucial agreements were reached on
several issues. Most important was the agreement on a
ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah, with a mutual redeployment
of forces and a neutral management of the port. Its
implementation is now urgent, not least to address the
desperate humanitarian situation in Al-Hudaydah and
in other parts of the country.

The understanding reached to ease the tensions in
Taiz, including with a view to allow for humanitarian
corridors and demining, was also important. We fully
support the efforts to find an agreement to open Sana'a's
airport and to enable the exchange of prisoners, which
would constitute important humanitarian measures
and build further confidence. Reaching an agreement
to continue the dialogue on economic issues is another

essential element. And finally, the commitment to
continuing to engage on a negotiating framework will
be critical to the important process ahead.

The atmospherics at the talks in Stockholm bode
well for moving forward, but as we have just heard,
today the situation in Yemen is still the world's
worst humanitarian crisis. As the United Nations-led
consultations have progressed, fighting, which has
included civilian casualties, has continued in many
parts of Yemen and the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate, with an increased risk of widespread
famine, as outlined by Mr. Lowcock today.

The Stockholm agreement must therefore be
urgently translated into concrete action. The Council
should come together to support and fully back its
implementation. Very much in line with what the
representative of the United Kingdom has just outlined,
we would like to see a draft resolution swiftly prepared
in support of the agreement that includes the United
Nations monitoring of the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah.

We must also continue to fully support - in
practical and political terms - the "asks" made by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to
alleviate the suffering and prevent widespread famine.
The upcoming high-level pledging conference early next
year provides a key opportunity for the international
community to demonstrate its commitment to the
Yemeni people.

The constructive engagement with United Nations
efforts by all sides must also continue in order to
make progress on the issues that are still pending. We
welcome that the parties plan to meet again by the end
of January, and we hope to see further progress even
before then on the issues left open, as indicated by
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths this morning, including
on the economy and the Sana'a airport.

We encourage the parties to continue discussions in
the same spirit of dialogue and compromise demonstrated
during the meeting in Stockholm earlier this week. We
appreciate the Special Envoy's efforts to increase the
representation of women in the political process, and
we commend the Yemeni Women's Technical Advisory
Group for their important contribution. In future
rounds of talks, however, further efforts are needed to
ensure the full and effective participation of women in
this process.

In conclusion, we are honoured to have hosted of
the United Nations-led consultations in Stockholm.
We truly hope that this will mark the turning point for
peace in Yemen. We will continue to play an active
role in support of sustained United Nations efforts
in Yemen. The people of Yemen must now see the
concrete benefits of the agreements. It cannot be that
we celebrate a diplomatic breakthrough on paper and
people continue to suffer.

