Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, and the delegation
of Nigeria for convening this debate. I would also like
to express my gratitude for the briefings by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Under-Secretary-General
Holmes and High Commissioner for Human Rights
Pillay, which have once again served to underscore the
commitment of the United Nations to strengthening
international humanitarian law in order to protect the
victims of armed conflict.

I should like to make special mention of Under-
Secretary-General Holmes. In carrying out his
responsibilities in such an excellent manner, he has
been part of one of the best aspects of the Organization
on the ground - humanitarian protection.

The multiplicity and complexity of today's
conflicts, the lack of respect for the norms of
international humanitarian law and the use of
increasingly sophisticated weapons that have
indiscriminate effects on civilian populations are all
factors that have served to increase the challenges
facing the Security Council. They have become the raw
material for determining the course that the
international community must take in addressing an
issue of such crucial importance.

Important progress has been made in fine-tuning
legislation and international norm-setting bodies.
Thanks to that progress, we have been able to more
adequately elaborate the concepts on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts. The Council is moving in
the right direction, as evidenced by last November's
adoption of resolution 1894 (2009), which places an
innovative focus on mandates for peacekeeping
operations to ensure that they include plans of action
and strategies for the protection of civilians that ensure
coordination between United Nations missions and
humanitarian organizations.

The Security Council has also made progress
with regard to the protection of children in armed
conflict. During the debate on that issue held a few
days ago (see S/PV.6341), the representative of
UNICEF pointed to the development of action plans
for the successful demobilization of children in the
Philippines, Nepal and the Sudan, which have resulted
in freeing thousands of children in countries where
United Nations reporting oversight mechanisms are in
place. Nevertheless, our good intentions have not yet
emerged from the realm of the abstract and we
continue to lament the various acts of aggression to
which civilians are subject in different regions.

Violence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo continues to take a toll on the lives of millions
of civilians. The humanitarian situation there, which is
marked primarily by forced displacement and the use
of sexual violence as a weapon of war, is among the
world's most critical.

The deterioration of the situation in Somalia as a
result of decades of armed violence and social and
political instability is also worrying. In Darfur, the
deaths of humanitarian workers providing assistance in
conflict areas is alarming. In Chad, where half a
million people require humanitarian assistance,
preventing a restriction of the area in which
humanitarian work is being carried out is a major
challenge. Afghanistan, Gaza and Iraq are also at the
centre of our concerns in that regard.

To these examples we must also add the fact that
parties to current conflicts are making excessive use of
force and using weapons prohibited by international
law, causing indiscriminate harm to civilian
populations and damaging goods that are essential for
their survival, which are protected by international
humanitarian law.

It is therefore essential that progress be made in
the effective implementation of Security Council
sanctions regimes, in particular arms embargoes. In a
broader sense, meeting the international obligations set
forth in the Palermo Protocol and the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects is essential.

My delegation reiterates the importance of having
a balanced strategy that allows us to make progress in
defending and protecting civilians in armed conflict.
That should also include compliance with international
humanitarian law and accountability in order to put an
end to impunity as essential components in armed
conflicts.

In that regard, we support the decision of the
Secretary-General to undertake an impartial and
independent investigation into the violations
committed against the civilian population at the end of
the armed conflict in Sri Lanka, including the
appointment of a panel of inquiry. We call upon the
authorities of the Government of Sri Lanka to
cooperate and facilitate the work of the panel, which
has as its sole objective the promotion of justice and
national reconciliation in that country.

The Geneva Conventions of 1949, their
Additional Protocols and other instruments of
international humanitarian law and customary
international law provide a solid foundation of
principles and standards for protecting the life and
dignity of all of those who are not participating in
hostilities or who have ceased to do so. Strict
compliance with international law should allow us to
end the suffering of civilian populations affected by
armed conflict and to provide guarantees that will
make it possible to repair the damage done to victims,
help them to rebuild their lives and restore their dignity
as human beings.

We must also bear in mind that Violations of
international humanitarian law are war crimes and that
Member States have the primary obligation for
investigating and prosecuting those allegedly
responsible for committing such acts. In that regard, as
highlighted last week during the debate on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law, the
fight against impunity has been strengthened through
the work of the International Criminal Court, the
special and mixed tribunals and the specialized
chambers of national tribunals. Nevertheless, it is
important that States reaffirm their strong opposition to
impunity and their responsibility to meet their
obligations in order to put an end to it.

Our consideration of this issue today should
contribute to overcoming political interests that hinder
the full implementation of the obligations flowing from
international law. It should also make it possible for us
to respond quickly and decisively to any humanitarian
crisis and to ensure accountability in the face of
flagrant impunity. Let us not fall into an endless
theoretical debate while reality on the ground
overwhelms the Organization's capacity to act. On the
contrary, let us make progress in consolidating a
culture of respect for the principles and standards of
international humanitarian law in order to eradicate
impunity and repair the damage done to civilians in
armed conflict.

