Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): The Republic of Korea
is gravely concerned about the slow progress in the
Angolan peace process. Of particular concern to us is the
stalling of the demilitarization of UNITA, owing to its
failure to provide additional information, and the
disappointingly slow pace of the extension of state
administration, including Mr. Savimbi's position that
Andulo and Bailundo will be turned over to the Angolan
Government only after his return to Luanda. What is more
regrettable is that UNITA's cooperation has not been
forthcoming after the postponement of sanctions late last
month. Now that UNITA has not taken the steps necessary
to comply fully with resolution 1127 (1997), we believe
that it is incumbent upon the Council to show its
resoluteness by allowing no further postponement of the
sanctions envisaged in the resolution.

We once again draw the UNITA leadership's attention
to the fact that the measures set forth in resolution 1127
(1997) are meant not to punish UNITA, but to lead it to
cooperation. We strongly hope that it will disarm and
demobilize all its personnel, give up its means of hostile
propaganda and cooperate in the normalization of State
administration without any further delay. We stress once
again, in this regard, the importance of a meeting on
Angolan territory between the President of Angola and the
leader of UNITA, which is long overdue, despite the
repeated calls by the international community for its
convening.

We would also like to express our concern about the
tension created by the movement of Government troops,
which is affecting negatively not only the Angolan peace
process, but also peace and security in the whole region.
We are especially concerned about the newly emerging
pattern of cross-border interventions in the region, in clear
violation of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. We therefore strongly support the statement that
the President of the Council will make at the end of this
meeting, calling for the immediate withdrawal of foreign
forces from the Republic of the Congo. We are also
concerned about the acts of banditry in areas where the
Angolan Government is in control and about the
restriction of free circulation of people and goods, in
particular the restrictions imposed on the movement of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)
and international personnel engaged in humanitarian
activities. We urge the Angolan Government to take steps
to address these serious problems and to extend full
cooperation to the peace process.

In these circumstances, we believe that the continued
international presence in Angola is needed and support
the Secretary-General's proposal to extend the mandate of
MONUA until the end of January 1998 and to postpone,
accordingly, the drawdown of its military component. We
will therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution before
the Council.
We renew our appreciation and support of the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, Maitre
Beye, and the personnel of MONUA, as well as the troika
of observer countries, for their dedicated efforts. We trust
that they will continue to assist the parties in moving
towards the successful conclusion of the peace process.

