Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for having convened today's open debate and
for the informative concept paper (S/2014/869, annex)
on this very important subject. I also wish to thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General of the
Department of Political Affairs, and the representative
of the African Union for their respective briefings.

We join other speakers in expressing condolences
and sympathy to the Government and the people of
Pakistan as well as to the bereaved families of the
victims of the recent terrorist attack on the school in
Peshawar. Malaysia strongly condemns the attack and
the senseless killing of schoolchildren, and we would
like to express our support for and solidarity with
Pakistan and its people in these difficult times.

Terrorism and cross-border crime constitute a grave
threat to global stability, peace and security. It is evident
that terrorism, including its links with cross-border
crimes such as money-laundering, arms trafficking,
trafficking in illicit drugs, people-smuggling,
kidnapping and piracy forms part of a complex set of
new security challenges to the international community,
which have to be addressed urgently in all aspects and
in all forums.

We note with concern that there is growing evidence
that the presence of terrorist groups involved in cross-
border crime tends to complicate the efforts undertaken
by the United Nations and regional organizations,
particularly in the areas of conflict prevention and
resolution. As highlighted in the concept paper, there
have been many instances in which the involvement of
terrorist groups in cross-border crime contributes to
undermining the authority of States, their security and
stability, governance, social and economic development
and the rule of law. There are also indications that in
some instances, terrorist groups make large profits
from their involvement in cross-border crimes such as
trafficking in arms and illicit drugs, and kidnapping.

In this regard, we concur with the proposal that
there is a need to look at the strategic impact of the
intersection of terrorism and cross-border crime. It
is evident that cross-border crime can weaken State
authority and its military and policing capability.
Cross-border crime can also embolden terrorist groups
and make them formidable rivals to the State. As such,
we share the view that there is a need for the United
Nations to consider looking at all the tools available to
it to reduce and ultimately eliminate the strategic space
that cross-border crime affords terrorist groups.

The proposed measures could, however, perhaps be
built on the existing resources and the commendable
work already being done, including the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate's analytical
expertise and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force's capacity-building expertise. More broadly,
the effort should also include the relevant United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and United Nations
field missions, so that the combined United Nations
response would be stronger and more integrated. With
such a holistic and synchronized approach, the United
Nations has the potential to deliver truly impactful
support to the regions and countries most vulnerable to
the threat of terrorism and cross-border crime.

Malaysia fully supports the four pillars of the
approach of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy: addressing the conditions that
spread terrorism, preventing and combating terrorism,
counter-terrorism capacity-building, and respecting
human rights and the rule of law. It is indeed crucial
to address the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism and cross-border crime, which include, among
others, poverty; violations of human rights; political
exclusion; and socioeconomic marginalization.

Groups and individuals in vulnerable and poverty-
stricken environments serve as potential recruits for
radicalization. Extremists often take advantage of the
situation resulting from poverty and marginalization
to foster the conditions that enable them to carry out
their violent actions. The international community
must therefore redouble its efforts to bring the fruits of
balanced and sustainable socioeconomic development
to areas where such development is lacking.

Malaysia condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. We reaffirm the need to combat by all
means, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts and cross-
border crime. In the wake of the rampant advance
of terror and violent extremist groups-in terms of
capturing both actual territory and intellectual or
ideological space-Malaysia co-sponsored resolution
2178 (2014) last September. In doing so, Malaysia
sought to lend its support to galvanizing international
action to combat terrorism in general and the scourge of
foreign terrorist fighters in particular.

While we acknowledge the sovereign prerogative
of Member States in securing their borders, we wish to
stress the crucial role of the United Nations in leading
and coordinating the effort to address the challenges
of terrorism and cross-border crime. In this regard, we
believe that the relevant entities of the United Nations
system, including the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the Department of Political Affairs, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations Development Programme and INTERPOL
should enhance their collaboration so as to prevent
terrorist groups from benefiting from cross-border
crime. It is also important for the Peacebuilding
Commission and other relevant international
organizations to support the development and
strengthening of the capacities of national and regional
institutions to prevent, investigate, prosecute, judge
and punish those responsible for cross-border crimes.

We are also of the view that it is imperative for
Member States, regional organizations and the relevant
international organizations to enhance cooperation and
strategies and build their capacity to secure their borders
against terrorism and cross-border crime. This can be
done through cooperation in the form of exchanges of
information, capacity-building, technology transfer
and confidence-building measures.

In conclusion, Malaysia fully shares the spirit and
the sentiment that underlie the convening of this open
debate on terrorism and cross-border crime. Malaysia
will continue to give its full support and pledge its
cooperation to combat terrorism and cross-border crime
for mutual benefit among the countries and citizens of
the world.

