Mr. Pascoe: I appreciate the opportunity to once
again brief the Council on the situation in Libya.

I will focus on what the United Nations has been
doing since the adoption of resolution 2009 (2011) on
16 September and a brief update on the current
situation. I must say that I am also delighted to see
Mr. Mahmoud Jibril, Chairman of the Executive
Committee of the National Transitional Council (NTC),
here with us today.

As Council members are aware, the Secretary-
General convened a high-level meeting on Libya in
New York on 20 September on the margins of General
2
Assembly, at which participants officially welcomed
the National Transitional Council of Libya as the
legitimate delegation representing the Libyan people at
the United Nations. Participants also expressed full
support to the interim authorities in Libya, led by NTC
President Mr. Mustafa Abdel Jalil.

At that meeting, President Jalil pledged to uphold
the principles of human rights and establish a society
based on tolerance and co-existence. The NTC has
repeatedly and publicly embraced essential principles
of tolerance, moderation, reconciliation, human rights,
and the rule of law, and in particular the rights of
women and migrant workers. Mr. Jalil thanked the
international community for its support and outlined
the United Nations support for the early establishment
of the State and resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973
(2011). He also highlighted the main challenges ahead,
such as removing any pockets of resistance, addressing
reconstruction needs and compensating families of
those killed, injured or maimed.

Special Representative Martin returned last week
to Tripoli, where the presence of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya is being established. I can
report that the capital city displays remarkable
normality, with its infrastructure overwhelmingly intact
and public servants back in their offices, even while
Government appointments are awaited, banks and
shops open, businesses re-establish themselves, most
children are back in school, and traffic is once again
quite heavy.

However, fighting continues in Sirte, Bani Walid
and a few other pockets of resistance in the country,
with NATO continuing its military operations in Sirte
over the weekend. Some civilians have fled the areas of
fighting. The humanitarian country team is working
with the Libyan authorities to enhance support in
conflict areas. An assessment of the needs in the area
around Bani Walid is to take place tomorrow, with
follow-up missions to Sabha and Sirte in the coming
days. The leadership of the NTC continues its efforts to
restore security and peace in other areas, but recent
reports have shown that the security situation in some
parts of the country remains fragile, as demonstrated
by the attack by pro-Al-Qadhafi forces on the town of
Ghadamis near the Algerian border.

The challenges faced by the NTC are many. I
would like to mention four here today.
11-51341

First, it is essential that steps to address national
reconciliation and unity and to ensure that all military
groups are brought under a unified command and the
political authority of the NTC be carried out quickly.
The formation of a new inclusive interim Government
that reflects the full diversity of Libyan society will be
a crucial step in this direction. We hope that, despite
the difficulties, the new Libyan Government will soon
be announced and, with the support of the new United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and other partners,
will begin working on these critical issues.

Secondly, it is imperative that the NTC and the
international community establish control over the
large stocks of sophisticated arms, including ground-
to-air missiles, amassed by the Al-Qadhafi
Government. The spread of these weapons and the
danger that they could fall into the hands of terrorists
are matters of grave concern.

Re-establishing control over chemical weapons
material is of paramount importance. In a letter to the
Secretary-General dated 5 September, the Director-
General of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), Mr. Ahmet Uzi'imcii,
reported that it had become apparent during a recent
meeting of the OPCW Executive Council that the risk
to the safety of the category-1 chemical weapon
stockpiles had increased as a result of the rapidly
changing situation in the country. As members will
recall, in December 2009 the Conference of State
Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction granted
Libya an extension of its deadline to complete
destruction of remaining category-1 chemical weapons
to 15 May 2011. However, inspectors from the OPCW
who had been on site to monitor destruction activities
departed Libya on 8 February 2011 and destruction
activities were halted.

On 22 September, news reports stated that forces
associated with the (NTC) had discovered a depot of
chemical weapons materials located in the area of
Al-Jufrah, approximately 435 miles south of Tripoli,
that had been previously undeclared. OPCW is working
on confirming this information.

It remains important for the NTC to take
necessary steps to ensure the safety of all remaining
chemical weapon stockpiles in Libya and, as the
situation in the country allows, resume destruction
11-51341
activities in cooperation with the OPCW and other
agencies. The NTC may now wish to invite inspectors
back to the sites.

Thirdly, reports of the uncovering of a mass grave
near the infamous Abu Salim prison in Tripoli, with
some 1,270 remains reportedly of prisoners killed in
June 1996, indicate further the enormity of the human
rights crimes perpetrated by the former regime against
its own people. It is essential that the Libyan
authorities secure this and other grave sites so that the
fate of disappeared persons may be clarified as forensic
expertise is available and evidence is preserved for
future accountability mechanisms. At the same time,
every effort must be made to prevent reprisal attacks
on members or supporters of the former regime. All
countries must cooperate with the International
Criminal Court to ensure that those indicted are
apprehended if they leave or have left Libya.

Fourthly, the Secretary-General has repeatedly
expressed his concern over the welfare of African
migrants and third-country nationals. The United
Nations continues to facilitate the evacuation of
people- over 200,000 since the beginning of the
crisis - while many more who require assistance
remain in the country and in transit camps. We also
urge the early processing of those in detention and the
security of those who continue to work in Libya.

Let me briefly turn to the status of our
deployment to Libya.

Following the unanimous adoption of resolution
2009 (2011) of 16 September, which mandated the
establishment of UNSMIL, the Secretary-General
announced on 19 September the appointment of
Mr. Ian Martin as his Special Representative and
Mr. Georg Charpentier as Deputy Special
Representative. Mr. Charpentier has also been
designated as Resident Coordinator ad interim and as
Humanitarian Coordinator.

Essential personnel are already deployed in
Tripoli. The senior management of the Mission -
including the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, the Deputy Special Representative, the Chief
of Staff, the Chief Political Advisor, the Chief Police
Advisor and the Chief of Mission Support - are in
place, with political officers in Benghazi as well as in
Tripoli.
3

The Chief of my Department's Electoral
Assistance Division accompanied Special
Representative Martin to Tripoli last week for meetings
with members of the NTC and other Libyan
interlocutors. The first electoral experts will arrive in
Libya this week to further assess electoral needs and to
discuss assistance necessary to support Libyan national
efforts. In the coming days, senior human rights
experts will follow up with the Libyan transitional
authorities and civil society on human rights priorities,
including on issues relating to transitional justice.

With the assistance of the Department of Safety
and Security and the Department of Field Support,
initial security and logistical constraints are being
overcome. Meanwhile, discussions are under way with
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for a status-of-mission
agreement that establishes the rights and privileges of
United Nations personnel in Libya.

UNSMIL has also begun to implement one of its
key mandated tasks to, "coordinate support that may be
requested from other multilateral and bilateral actors"
(resolution 2009 (2011), para. 12 (f)). On
20 September, following the high-level meeting on
Libya, a technical coordination meeting was held,
co-chaired by Mr. Ahmed Jehani, Chairman of the
Libya NTC stabilization team, and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ian Martin.
Mr. Jehani reiterated the NTC's request that the
international community coordinate its assistance to
Libya under the leadership of the United Nations and
in the areas of priority identified by the interim
authorities. He was unequivocal in stressing the fact
that the assessment of transitional requirements would
be conducted under the leadership of the NTC. A first
meeting of the friends of Libya in Tripoli will be
convened this week.

On the humanitarian front, since mid-August at
least 60,000 new displacements of Libyans have been
recorded as fighting intensified around Sirte and Bani
Walid. Requests for humanitarian support received
from local authorities indicate urgent humanitarian
needs for water, health items, food and some non-food
assistance. Humanitarian efforts are ongoing in areas
where they are most needed. United Nations agencies
have delivered food assistance to 117,000 vulnerable
people, including internally displaced persons (IDPs)
from Bani Walid, southern Libya, Sirte and Tawarga,
and to migrant workers. Food stocks have been
pre-positioned in Tripoli, Benghazi and Misrata, ready

for distribution to currently inaccessible areas when the
situation permits. Additionally, water is being trucked
to some 40,000 displaced people from Bani Walid.
Medical kits have been deployed to IDP-affected areas
that are sufficient to cover those populations for the
next three months. These services will be continued
until more sustainable solutions are identified.

We are also concerned about reports of forced
displacements of groups of civilians among the
Tawergha and Gwaliosh peoples, who have been
perceived as loyal to Al-Qadhafi. NTC efforts must
become effective in ensuring that all armed forces
respect the rights of civilian populations of any
background and that international humanitarian law is
fully respected.

Libya faces many challenges in the post-conflict
phase, but I am confident that the Libyan people will
overcome them with our collective support and
assistance. The three-month mandate given to the
United Nations Mission offers us an opportunity to
provide immediate assistance and advice to the NTC
and to engage with Libyan civil society. It will also
provide time to assure that any long-term mission that
the Secretary-General may propose to the Security
Council can be designed to provide effective assistance
to the Libyan people for the longer term and to closely
reflect Libyan ownership and Libyan wishes. We look
forward to the NTC forming an interim Government in
the near future and assigning interlocutors to enable us
to engage with them and to provide the required
assistance and advice, as needed, in the priority areas
that have identified.

