Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic ofKorea): Iwould
like to congratulate you and the Angolan delegation,
Mr. President, on your presidency of the Council this
month, and to thank you for organizing today's very
timely and relevant open debate.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes region are now at a critical juncture as
they move towards a more peaceful and democratic
societies based on sustainable development. The lack of
consensus on key issues such as the electoral calendar
makes it unclear whether the presidential election can
be held in November, as the Constitution mandates, in
a peaceful and democratic way. The security situation
is still fragile, with rising political tensions and
ongoing attacks from armed groups like the Forces
Democratiques de liberation du Rwanda. Moreover, the
economic downturn caused by low international prices
for raw materials is undermining the foundation of
development and peace.

Against this backdrop, a comprehensive development
strategy that links peace, security and development for
the effective implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region is essential. In that sense,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's recent participation
in the Great Lakes Private Sector Investment Conference
in Kinshasa and the establishment of the United Nations
Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework 2016-2017
are highly commendable in that they have created
new momentum for this comprehensive approach. The
Republic of Korea would like to underline two points.

First, security, political stability, democratic
institution-building and governance must be the
bedrock for sustainable development. Above all, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
should fulfil its primary responsibilities to protect and

serve its own people by undertaking extensive reforms
in the areas of security and governance and promoting
democratization and reconciliation. In particular, we
look forward to seeing tangible outcomes in security
sector reform, such as the establishment of a rapid
reaction force that can more quickly and effectively
engage in conflict and protect civilians. We believe
that these efforts will also contribute to materializing
the gradual and progressive exit strategy of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We
also urge the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the political parties to engage in
inclusive dialogue to reach consensus on the issues
pertaining to the election process.

Secondly, regional stakeholders should formulate
an effective mechanism for sustainable economic
development and co-prosperity. In particular, a
sound and effective mechanism for natural resource
management is essential to break the link between
natural resources and conflict, and transform
natural resources into a strong engine for economic
development and co-prosperity. Regional stakeholders
need to develop a model for creating regional or global
value chains that exploit, process and export natural
resources in a way that helps local, national and
regional economies. At the same time, the countries
of the region should increase efforts to create a more
favourable environment for foreign investments by
accelerating economic integration.

The Republic of Korea has made constructive
contributions that focus on building the capacity of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
the areas of water, public health, and rural development.
It has been carrying out various development assistance
projects that draw upon Korea's unique experience of
having achieved successful economic development
within just a half century through, among others, the
Saemaul Undong, or New Village Movement. The
Saemaul Undong, which greatly contributed to rural
development in Korea in the 1970s with community-led
comprehensive resource mobilization based on a can-do
spirit, can be shared with many other African countries
in the context of the contemporary situation. In addition,
our sustainable mine development and reclamation
training programme for officials of the Ministry of
Mines aims to assist the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in developing a sustainable
mechanism for natural resource management. We are
also running various other training programmes for
Government officials of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi in the areas of

justice, e-Government and human resource development
with a View to lending support to the strengthening of
institutional capacity and governance in the region. The
Republic of Korea also contributed to the protection of
civilians and human rights in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo by providing $1 million of budgetary
support to the joint protection teams of the Joint Human
Rights Office under MONUSCO in 2014.

Finally, I would like to reiterate my Government's
full support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit,
and MONUSCO. We appreciate their relentless
efforts for sustainable peace and development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. The
Republic of Korea will continue to play a constructive
role in achieving this important goal.

