Mr. Martin: On 17 February the people of Libya
marked the first anniversary of the beginning of their
revolution. People took to the streets of Tripoli,
Benghazi and other cities and towns in celebration.
Many of the celebrations were spontaneously organized
in neighbourhoods. Libyans remarked on the contrast
with the State-organized demonstrations that
characterized the previous regime. While remembering
those who died in the struggle for freedom, they
signalled hope and determination for the future.
Despite concerns that there might be attempted attacks
or disruptions by elements of the former regime, the
anniversary passed peacefully, with effective security
operations coordinated among State security forces,
local civilian authorities and brigades of former
revolutionary fighters.

While it is one year since the uprising began, the
new Libya has still only had a Government for three
months. Next week the Council Will hear from Prime
Minister Abdurrahim El-Keib his account of its
2

challenges and its efforts, and What it is planning to
accomplish in the short period before elections to a
national congress provide the basis for a new
Government and the drafting of the constitution.

It is clear that the Libyan people are eager to
move forward with the transition to democracy. Their
most central expectation of the United Nations is that
we will support them in doing so. When I last briefed
the Council, on 25 January (see S/PV.6706), the
National Transitional Council (NTC) had adopted the
electoral administration law and appointed the High
National Electoral Commission, and was continuing
consultations on the main electoral law. That law was
adopted on 28 January, with the final amendments
approved on 7 February.

The law provides for a mixed parallel electoral
system, with 120 seats to be elected by majoritarian
races reserved for individual candidates, and 80 seats
to be elected by proportional races reserved for lists to
be submitted by political or other groups. Like all
electoral frameworks, this parallel system is a
compromise among competing views and interests, but
our judgment is that the law provides a reasonable
foundation for the election of the national congress,
although some gaps and shortcomings remain. While
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) had encouraged the NTC electoral
committee to ensure that the right to vote should be as
inclusive as possible, the law excludes members of the
armed forces from voting. There is also a need for
measures to ensure the participation of internally
displaced people in the electoral process.

It is particularly welcome that the law includes a
formula, albeit a modest one, to ensure the
participation of women in the national congress, as
UNSMIL had urged. The special measure requires that
the candidates on the lists for proportional races be
listed alternately by gender; thus for multi-seat
constituencies where there will be party lists, every
other candidate on the lists must be a woman.

The proposed division of the country into
constituencies and the allocation of seats is being
finalized and has not yet been published. The
distribution among the regions, cities and towns may
well be controversial, but it is important that this issue
be resolved without further delay to allow election
preparations to proceed.
12-24698

It is understandable that the process for
developing an electoral law took longer than
envisaged, in view of the political complexities
involved in deciding the basic electoral foundation for
any country and the fact that this will be the first
election in Libya in more than 40 years. Despite the
delays, the NTC has publicly confirmed its intention to
hold the elections according to the timeline envisaged
in the constitutional declaration, although the official
call for the elections has yet to be made.

To achieve that timetable, activities to implement
the legal framework must begin immediately and
progress swiftly. I commend the 15 Commissioners of
the High National Electoral Commission, who were
sworn in on 12 February, for immediately commencing
work on establishing subcommittees to address the
core issues as well as a functional administration. I met
with them myself this morning, and confirmed that
they have high expectations that UNSMIL's assistance,
which has been well appreciated by the electoral
authorities during the legislative period, will now be
carried forward in the operational phase. In response,
the United Nations is expanding its support to the
Electoral Commission by strengthening its advisory
role within the Commission, launching support of voter
education and coordinating the assistance of other
international actors.

Meanwhile, the determination of communities to
establish the legitimacy of local representation has
been displayed in the election of a new local council in
Misrata on 20 February. An eight-member local
elections committee, appointed by the local council in
early January, organized the election, including the
administrative division of the city, the allocation of
seats and the registration of voters. Approximately
65 per cent of the eligible population registered and
57 per cent of registered voters cast their votes for
28 seats. The candidates elected were announced
following a two-day counting period in a peaceful and
amicable environment. The police and brigades
provided comprehensive security within the city and
outside of the 78 polling stations.

In other cities I visited during the reporting
period, local councils viewed the Misrata elections
positively and expressed their desire to hold their own
elections. Of particular significance, given recent
controversy there, is the appointment by the Benghazi
local council of a well-respected judge to oversee the
formation of a committee charged with preparing for
12-24698
local elections in Libya's second-largest city, where the
uprising for democratic transformation began.

Of the utmost importance to the successful
conduct of elections nationwide is, of course, a positive
evolution of the security situation. The Libyan
authorities well recognize that their foremost challenge
is to address the future of the revolutionary fighters
and the wide circulation of weapons and to develop
professional State security institutions under civilian
control. However, while the diverse armed brigades
continue to lack clear lines of command and
coordination, there is some appreciable progress in the
development of State authority over brigades in the
provision of security, including through the
establishment of local security committees under the
direction of the Ministry of the Interior to coordinate
security operations among participating brigades. The
coordinated deployments during the 17 February
anniversary celebrations were a significant illustration
of that progress. The brigades continue to perform
important security functions, as they have for long
periods, often without payment.

Contrary to the impression given by some media
reports, although they seek guarantees that the
transformation for which they have fought is securely
on track, there is little indication that they wish to
perpetuate an existence outside State authority. The
Government issued a decision last week regarding the
transfer of control of land, air and sea port
infrastructure from the brigades to the Ministry of
Interior, which when implemented will be a significant
step forward in exerting State control.

At the same time, Government plans for the
registration and integration or demobilization of former
fighters are proceeding. The registration process for
ex-combatants that started in January is nearing
completion. The Warriors Affairs Commission for
Rehabilitation and Development reports that
approximately 148,000 have registered to date, and
will be referring those preferring to join the police to
the Ministry of the Interior and those who choose the
army to the Ministry of Defence.

Approximately 15 per cent appear to be opting
for each of those entities, so the majority of ex-
combatants are seeking, and must be afforded,
educational or vocational training and employment or
self-employment opportunities. The Ministries of the
Interior, Defence and Labour are developing their plans
3
for integration and reintegration, including an initial
recruitment of 10,000 former fighters under the
Ministry of Interior and 5,000 under the Ministry of
Defence.

On 20 and 21 February, UNSMIL, upon the
request of the Prime Minister, facilitated an inter-
ministerial retreat to review the most critical security
challenges confronting Libya and to decide upon
immediate steps to address them in a coordinated
manner. In opening the retreat, the Prime Minister
highlighted border security, security in Libyan cities,
weapons proliferation and human rights violations as
the major security preoccupations. He also emphasized
the need to strengthen Libya's security and defence
forces swiftly within the remaining four months of his
Govemment's tenure, urging the relevant Ministries to
pool their efforts and coordinate closely.

The retreat developed a priority action plan, with
key recommendations that include strengthening police
deployment and security coordination among all
relevant actors in the lead-up to elections and securing
the southern border in an integrated action plan against
human trafficking, arms smuggling and other illegal
activities. All participants welcomed the commitment
to strengthened inter-ministerial coordination and
cooperation, a marked difference from the practice of
the previous regime. They recognized the need for an
overarching national security framework and strategy,
including a national security coordinating committee
under the Prime Minister. The Deputy Prime Minister
briefed international partners on the outcomes of the
workshop in order to further enhance coordinated
assistance in those areas.

In addition to the support to inter-ministerial
coordination and communications, UNSMIL continued
to support the efforts of the Government in
coordinating with bilateral and multilateral partners in
the areas of arms proliferation, border security and the
rehabilitation of the police. There are now three
UNSMIL advisers embedded in the Ministry of the
Interior, supporting the Ministry in the areas of police
training, logistics and communication and media
relations. UNSMIL is also assisting the Government in
preparations for the high-level regional conference on
border security that Prime Minister El-Keib announced
Libya's intention to convene when he addressed the
African Union Summit in Addis Ababa on 29 January.
The new Government faces tremendous
challenges and a heavy legacy from the former regime
as it tries to tackle illegal migration and smuggling,
effective border control, the proliferation of weapons
and the need to reverse policies of long-standing
discrimination against minority communities and foster
national reconciliation among tribes. The latter has
been tragically highlighted in recent days by deadly
clashes that erupted between the Tabou and the Zwaya
tribal brigades in the southern city of Kufra over a
two-week period, with approximately 100 reported to
have died and many seriously injured. While those
clashes appear to have been triggered by the initial
killing of a Zwaya man and the subsequent death of a
Tabou youth, it is the latest incident in a long history of
conflict of simmering tribal tensions fuelled by policies
of the former regime, including State-sponsored
discrimination against the Tabou, and by local disputes
over control over smuggling, including illegal
migration.

Religious leaders and tribal chiefs, among others,
negotiated a ceasefire to restore calm. The Government
dispatched units of the national army to the area,
although there were criticisms of too slow a response
by the authorities. A joint mission of United Nations
agencies and UNSMIL visited Kufra from 23 to 26
February to assess the most urgent priorities, including
support to third-country nationals and vulnerable
communities whose services were interrupted by the
fighting. United Nations agencies have delivered
humanitarian assistance through the Libyan Red
Crescent and the Ministry of Health, but difficulties
have yet to be overcome to ensure that the Tabou areas,
isolated by the fighting, receive sufficient humanitarian
support.

Since the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and I briefed the Council on 25 January, further
information regarding torture and ill-treatment of
detainees, including deaths in custody, has come to
light through non-governmental organizations and
UNSMIL's own visits to places of detention. I and my
colleagues have discussed immediate measures to
prevent further incidents of torture and mistreatment in
several meetings with the Prime Minister, the Minister
of Justice and other ministers and senior officials. On
31 January, Deputy Prime Minister Mustafa Abu Shagur
announced that the Government had issued a circular to
clarify the rights of detainees, including a directive that
torture and mistreatment of detainees was forbidden
and that allegations would be investigated. Addressing
the Human Rights Council in Geneva yesterday, Prime
Minister El-Keib reiterated the Government's human
rights commitment and cooperation with the United
Nations and others in that domain. Strong and urgent
measures are essential to give effect to those
intentions.

I have particularly stressed the need for a task
force that brings together the Ministries of Justice,
Defence and the Interior to regularly inspect facilities
still under the control of various brigades, to identify
all detention locations and to implement an overall
strategy on conflict-related detentions. The Ministry of
Justice has indicated that such inspections have
commenced, and the Prime Minister has given
assurances of the formation of a committee to
investigate allegations of torture and stated yesterday
that such investigations are now under way. UNSMIL
has visited or revisited detention facilities in Misrata,
Zawiya and Tripoli to identify those that should be
scrutinized as priority and has made an initial
submission to the Office of the Prime Minister and the
Ministry of Justice. We will continue to work closely
with the authorities and to encourage them to ensure
that inspections of known facilities are undertaken, that
secret locations are identified and brought under
Government control, and that abuses are investigated.

UNSMIL has also strongly urged the
investigation of the attack on 6 February on the
Tawergha camp for internally displaced persons at the
Janzur marine academy in Tripoli, when a brigade
entered the camp in heavy force and attempted arrests.
When camp detainees took to the streets to protest,
they were also fired upon. The combined attacks
resulted in the deaths of seven people, including three
children and two women. The United Nations has
pressed for better security not only at this camp, but
also at locations of displaced Tawergha in other parts
of the country. This latest incident underscores the
urgent need for the responsibility for arrests and
detention to be exercised by the Ministry of Justice
alone. As a contribution towards reconciliation,
Tawergha tribal leaders issued an apology on 23
February to all citizens of Misrata for the crimes
committed by members of their community and called
upon on all those who had committed such crimes to
surrender themselves to the justice system. My Deputy
continues to work with the Libyan authorities to
address the short- and longer-term needs of the
Tawergha community.

UNSMIL continues to urge the Ministry of
Justice to accelerate the process of asserting control
over the facilities currently run by the brigades, where
we estimate that approximately 5,000 to 6,000
detainees remain. Since my last briefing, two
additional detention centres have been placed under
Government control, bringing the total to eight, with a
total of 2,382 detainees. Progress continues to be
complicated by insufficient numbers ofjudicial police.
Several partners have expressed a willingness to assist
in the training of judicial police, and the Ministry of
Justice has also requested assistance in the training of
prosecutors.

Libya's court system is slowly coming back into
operation, with several courts in Tripoli and Benghazi
resuming operations, despite some concerns about the
security of judges and lawyers. On 5 February, the first
criminal proceedings of more than 40 persons accused
of having committed crimes in support of the Al-
Qadhafi regime during the conflict opened before a
military court in Benghazi. On 22 February, the
military court ruled that the trial should move to a
civilian court, which is to be welcomed. As further
trials commence, it will be crucial that the accused be
granted adequate legal representation, full due
processes and assurances that any confessions that may
have been taken under torture are not admitted into
evidence.

The transitional justice law on the establishment
of the foundation of national reconciliation and
transitional justice was made public on 14 February.
The law establishes a fact-finding and reconciliation
commission mandated to investigate crimes and human
rights violations committed since 1969. It will
comprise 11 members to be appointed by the NTC. The
law also establishes a victims' compensation fund, but
does not prevent victims from seeking justice through
the courts. While the law does not necessarily reflect
best practices elsewhere, it provides an important
opportunity to start a comprehensive truth-seeking
process in Libya.

A vital part of the transitional justice process is
the search for and identification of missing persons.
The Ministry for Assistance to the Families of Martyrs
and Missing Persons has already commenced the
collection of DNA samples from families as well as
work on the exhumation of mass graves. UNSMIL is
encouraging the Ministry to invite an international
expert assessment that will help to define a clear
strategy according to international standards, so that
quick measures do not harm prospects for the future
identification of remains. UNSMIL has also proposed
the drafting of a new legal framework to better
safeguard the rights of the families of the missing in
Libya.

In all of my meetings, at both the national and
local levels, officials have increasingly been
highlighting their inability to cope with the increasing
numbers of migrants and refugees, and are seeking
sustained assistance to address those challenges
humanely. In the absence of a clear legal or
administrative framework on migration, irregular
migrants and some potential asylum-seekers, including
elderly persons, women and children, continue to be
detained in facilities operated by different authorities
or brigades, often in poor conditions with limited
access to humanitarian assistance. Of the 18 Ministry
of Interior migrant detention facilities in operation
prior to the crisis, only two are under full Ministry
control. The International Organization for Migration
(IOM) continues to assist migrants in distress through
the facilitation of citizenship verification, the issuance
of travel documents and voluntary repatriation
operations; however, access to migrants and the
absence of secure transit facilities in the west and south
of the country remain the greatest challenges to direct
assistance.

In response to the poor conditions at the
Qanfouda detention facility in Benghazi, where
numbers have now swollen as a result of transfers from
Kufra, LibAid and other humanitarian actors have
undertaken refurbishments and provided non-food
items as well as improved the provision of health
services in attempts to address the growing needs.

The deteriorating security situation in Syria has
led to an influx of refugees entering Libya via the
Egyptian border. At the Salloum border crossing, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) has provided stranded Syrians
with more than 4,000 meals, while IOM. has been
providing support in the form of medical treatment and
some non-food items. Within Libya, UNHCR is
assisting local support organizations in their efforts to
cope with new arrivals through technical assistance in
registration and the provision of non-food items and
support for vulnerable individuals.

As anticipated in my last briefing, Deputy Prime
Minister Mustafa Abu Shagur convened a workshop on
30 and 31 January to discuss the coordination of
international assistance, bringing Libyan ministries,
institutions and civil society organizations together
with international partners. The workshop was an effort
to synchronize coordinated offers of external support
with the Government's urgent priority planning. It
served to identify needs and opportunities for support
in the five areas of social services delivery: public
administration, transitional justice, civil society, media
and Government strategic communications. The
Government is close to presenting its national plan to
the international community and to putting in place
coordination arrangements to follow up on
international offers of support, involving the Prime
Minister's Office and the Ministry of Planning,
supported by UNSMIL, the European Union and the
World Bank.

When I have the opportunity to address the
Council again next week, I will, of course, update
members on significant developments in any of those
areas, although I will mainly be presenting the
Secretary-General's proposals for the role of UNSMIL
for the period ahead. Alongside our major engagements
during this period with the Government in Tripoli and
our work in integrated mission planning, I have, since
my last briefing, visited three more of the cities most
affected during the fighting - Sirte, Brega and
Ajdabiya. I have also held discussions with the local
council and civil society representatives - many of
them young people and women - in Benghazi. Such
visits make clear the extent of the need for
reconstruction, service delivery and the clearance of
mines and remnants of war.

But an equally strong impression is given by the
extraordinary show of civic responsibility and
initiative, which has led local people to set to work
immediately - without waiting for assistance from
central Government or international actors - to
resume as much of the elements of normal life as
possible. Along with that sense of responsibility of
local leaders goes the determination of civil society to
play its own role and to hold any future leadership to
account. Such attributes inspire not just hope but
confidence that Libya will overcome its legacy and its
current difficulties, and will pursue the path towards
the goals to which it recommitted itself on 17 February.

