Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
want to thank the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
presenting her twenty-ninth report on developments in
the Darfur investigation. On behalf of my country, I also
want to commend the vital work done by the Prosecutor
and her teams under resolution 1593 (2005) for almost
14 years now. It is necessary not only to ensure justice
for the victims of the serious crimes committed in
Darfur, but also to enable the emergence of the rule of
law in the Sudan and the stabilization of the country.

In that respect, France roundly condemns the
violence that has taken place in the Sudan in recent
weeks. Peaceful protests have been repressed with
immense brutality. Such a disproportionate use of force
is unacceptable. We urge all the actors involved to
show restraint and to refrain from the use of violence.
We recall that the Transitional Military Council is
responsible for the security of all the Sudanese people.
France asks that light be shed on the abuses that have
been committed, including acts of sexual violence,
which were described by Pramila Patten in her very
worrisome communique last week. The perpetrators
must answer for their actions. In this respect, we
deplore the postponement sine die by the relevant
Sudanese committee of the publication of the results
of the investigation into the violence that took place on
3 June in Khartoum. We call for that outcome to be
made known as quickly as possible.

What is at stake now is the resumption ofa political
dialogue between the generals of the Transitional
Military Council and the opposition, with a view to
achieving a negotiated, consensus-based, civilian-led
transition. France commends the determined stance
of the African Union in this respect. We hope that the
United Nations will fully support the mediation efforts
undertaken by the African Union and supported by
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed of Ethiopia. It is vital
that the African Union-led mediation be supported
at every level and by all parties. While all efforts are
welcome, it is also important that they be coordinated
and harmonized with those of the African Union.

We are also extremely worried by the reports of
violence in Darfur in recent weeks, notably in Jebel
Marra, as mentioned previously, which make clear
once again the volatility of the situation in the region.
We know that Darfur is an unstable region and that
the root causes of the conflict there, including access
to land and the future of 2 million displaced persons,
have not truly been resolved. We must do everything
we can to prevent the region from spiralling once again
into violence and conflict. The presence and protection
provided by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur are essential in this respect.

The fight against impunity is also key, and the
Sudan must fulfil its responsibilities in this area. It
is now more vital than ever that the Sudan allow the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to conclude its
investigation. The Sudan must cooperate with the Court
in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), and among
other things that involves the execution of the arrest
warrants issued by the ICC and the transfer of suspects
to the Court.

In the context of the obligation to cooperate, France
would like to recall that the immunity enjoyed by
representatives of States under customary international
law, which is crucial to the good conduct of international
relations and to which there can be no exception, can be
removed only by an express renunciation of the States
concerned, just like the one to which the States parties
to the Rome Statute consented, which applies also to
non-States parties whose situation has been referred to
the Court by the Security Council.

By transferring to the Court suspects who are
subject to an ICC arrest warrant and who are already
in detention, the Sudanese authorities would be not
only fulfilling their international obligations but
also sending a strong message to the international
community that they are determined to put an end to
impunity. We also call on the Sudanese authorities
to allow the Prosecutor's teams access to Darfur to
gather the necessary information, as she called for
earlier. Such developments would constitute a concrete
demonstration of the will of the Sudan to take a decisive
step towards justice, peace and an acknowledgement of
the crimes committed in Darfur. It would also be a very
important stage in the country's political transition
and stabilization.

