Mr. Klein: To be very precise and specific on the
issue of returns, returns are not inhibited by security
issues. Overall positive security trends are there. The
key problems with refugee returns are economic - that
is, jobs - and cultural - that is, education, which the
various ethnic communities demand.

With regard to the United Kingdom's question on
how quickly the State Border Service could be
implemented, it could be implemented completely by
next September, at the latest. I have a funding dilemma.
I have 120 officers ready to deploy right now, but we
do not have the funding for them. That is an issue I
have no control over. There is a $12 million shortfall.
If we get that, and I hope we will, it will be completed
by next September.

The question of plans and time lines has been
raised several times, by several members. We have
found that the Mandate Implementation Plan has given
all our people a sense of dedication and focus, and I
recommend a similar approach to other national
organizations. In other words, rather than having
amorphous, open-ended benchmarks, which are often
not met, the questions to be asked should be, "What is
your mandate; what are your plans to achieve it; and
what resources do you need?"

On the issue of war criminals, it is embarrassing
and it concerns me as we deal with the issue of
international terrorism. Mr. Karadzic has been free now
for some five years. That basically demonstrates the
impotence of the international community in the face
of evil. His continued freedom emboldens hard-line
Serbs to resist, it makes moderate Serbs cautious about
engaging with us, and it undermines cooperation across
the spectrum. He continues to be an albatross around
our necks. It is a poison cloud that hovers over much of
what we do. In my own province of Alsace we have an
old proverb which goes something like this: if you have
to swallow a frog there is not a whole lot to be gained
by staring at it. We have stared at this frog for five
years now, and I think we ought to get on with it.

I have in my Mission 95 nationalities. They are
your citizens and your nationals. I assure you that they
are doing excellent work and that you can be extremely
proud of them. Sometimes the only thing I fear is that
when historians write the history of this period 40
years from now, they will say that we in the
international community and you, the members of the
Council, cared more about the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina than their own leaders did.

