Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting and
appreciates the important briefings of the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-
Brook Zerihoun; the Ambassador of Brazil, Mr. Mauro
Vieira, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission; and Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.

I would like to start by highlighting the recent
progress made in Guinea-Bissau following the
adoption of resolution 2404 (2018). Peru welcomes
the appointment of Mr. Aristides Gomes as Prime
Minister, which was the result of consensus among
all parties in accordance with the provisions of the
Conakry Agreement. We look forward to the legislative
elections scheduled for 18 November, and we note that
the National Assembly was able to meet for the first
time since 2016. Those developments should allow
for progress in the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement, the fundamental framework for resolving
the country's political crisis. In that respect, we would
like to refer to three specific aspects that we believe
require urgent work in order to achieve sustainable
peace in Guinea-Bissau.

The first aspect concerns free and fair elections.
We believe that successful legislative elections this
year will favour the normal development of the 2019
presidential elections. That implies promoting citizen
participation on a large scale, particularly women and
young people, in an inclusive and transparent process.
We welcome the fact that the National Assembly has
appointed the four members of the National Electoral
Commission, including its Chair. However, we
underline the need to adequately finance the process
and have the necessary equipment and logistical
capabilities. We therefore support the work that the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) has been doing in terms
of mediation, providing good offices and supporting
the organization of elections. We welcome the support
of the United Nations Development Programme, and
we note the need for the international community to
continue cooperating.

Secondly, it is necessary to improve security and
access to justice. We are especially concerned about
the vulnerability of Guinea-Bissau to threats such as
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime,
which undermine institutions and the social fabric. It is
important to prevent terrorist groups in the region from
establishing links with those scourges. We therefore
consider it important to strengthen institutional
capacities, particularly in the area of security and
justice, and to promote greater cooperation by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime with UNIOGBIS in
order to support national efforts in those areas.

The third point concerns the construction of
a prosperous, peaceful and inclusive society. It is
necessary to address the root causes of conflict,
especially when the majority of the population lives in
a situation of poverty and vulnerability. That situation
could be aggravated by a decrease in cashew production,
the main export. In that regard, we emphasize the need
to guarantee predictability and stability in the financing
that the Peacebuilding Fund devotes to support the
efforts of Guinea-Bissau to allow its population access
to basic education, health and justice services, among
others. We encourage that the projects promoted by the
Peacebuilding Commission prioritize the sustainable
development of the country and that they empower
women and youth. We highlight the importance of that
work being appropriately coordinated with UNIOGBIS,
the United Nations country team and civil society.

In conclusion, we would like to highlight the
important mediation role played by the Economic
Community ofWest African States, as well as that ofthe
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries and the European Union, among other
international actors committed to peace in Guinea-
Bissau. We also recognize the work of Mr. Modibo
Toure as Head of UNIOGBIS and welcome the
appointment of Mr. Jose Viegas Filho, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary General for Guinea-
Bissau and Head of said Office, whose professional
qualities are widely recognized.

