Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China welcomes and thanks you, Mr. Minister, for presiding over this open debate. We thank Ms. Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as Mr. De Roux and Ms. Sooka for their briefings. Some conflict-affected countries and regions are currently faced with the arduous task of post- war reconstruction. Their conflict-weary populations eagerly look forward to an early restoration of the rule of law and justice so that they can embark on the road towards sustainable development. The United Nations peacebuilding architecture is committed to coordinating the international community's support for the reconstruction of post-conflict countries and has played a positive role in consolidating the fruits of peace and achieving sustainable development in the countries affected. The issue of transitional justice is a key component of peacebuilding. It should be addressed in the context of peacebuilding and sustaining peace and its discussion should be strictly limited to in-conflict and post-conflict situations. First, based on the Charter of the United Nations and universally recognized international law, it is imperative to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of every country. It is important to respect the countries concerned in their efforts to advance their transitional justice processes step by step, in a manner consistent with their own national conditions. No models should be imposed from outside, or should any interference be permitted in their internal affairs or struggles. Only by adhering to the principle of sovereignty can transitional justice efforts be justified, thereby winning the trust of the countries concerned and promoting peace and development. Secondly, it is necessary to help the countries concerned enhance their capacity-building, with a focus on the effective functioning of their judicial systems. In the long term, no special interim measure or external measure can substitute an effectively functioning domestic judicial system. After an extended period of turmoil and conflict, the rule of law of a given country will have been seriously affected and it must be faced with shortages and challenges in financial, technological and human resources. The international community should reach out to the countries concerned and enhance their capacity-building. The Peacebuilding Commission, as a body jointly established by the General Assembly and the Security Council, with the advantage of straddling both the political security and development areas, has an important role to play in that regard. Thirdly, the nexus between transitional justice and the political process, economic development and social integration should be viewed through the correct lens and integrated measures should be taken to promote the rule of law and judicial justice. Transitional justice is not only a legal issue but should also contribute to establishing lasting peace and _ stability, economic development and social progress in the country concerned, as well as the long-term well-being of local populations. Security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts should be carried out in order to advance the transitional justice process. Economic and social measures, such as poverty eradication and job creation, should also be adopted in order to promote peace, achieve national reconciliation and eliminate the latent threats of conflict. The rule of law and justice must be highlighted at both the national and the international levels. Many of the ongoing conflicts in the world today have remained unresolved for decades, with ever-deepening rifts between the parties - a deplorable situation. Such difficult situations often represent the bitter consequences of breaching international consensus and disrupting the international order based on international law. The basic principles of international law, such as adhering to the peaceful settlement of international disputes and prohibiting both the threat and use of force, constitute the core of the Charter of the United Nations, which underpins the contemporary international order and other obligations under international law that countries must abide by. They embody the authentic meaning of the rule of law at the international level. As the cornerstone of the international security architecture, the Council must shoulder the loftyresponsibility of upholding international law and the basic norms governing international relations. It needs to effectively advance political settlements, support good offices and mediation, maintain unity and cooperation and ensure the implementation of relevant resolutions. That is the only way in which we can truly prevent and resolve conflicts and avoid creating further differences and divisions. Efforts should be made to enable the people of the world to enjoy the same vision of peace and prosperity and to facilitate the building of a community of shared future for humankind. As the late former Secretary-General Annan said at the General Assembly in September 2004: "Those who seek to bestow legitimacy must themselves embody it; and those who invoke international law must themselves submit to it." (A/59/PV.3, p. 3)
