Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes today's adoption of this resolution on Kosovo,
which paves the way for a peaceful settlement of this
conflict. Most immediately and importantly, it will create
the conditions for the safe return home of refugees in
neighbouring countries and displaced persons within
Kosovo. It was the plight of these innocent civilians which
necessitated the intervention in March; it is the imperative
of restoring their security, their hope and their future that
motivates our action today.

Today's decision of the Council is a clear
demonstration of international unity on the way ahead in
Kosovo. It is a success for the diplomacy which brought it
about, particularly the work of the G-8. The adoption of
this resolution on Kosovo marks the effective
re-engagement of the Security Council in the search for
peace in Kosovo, something for which Canada has been
working hard over the past year. By taking leadership
today, the Council's credibility has been enhanced and with
it international confidence in a rules-based collective
security system.

(spoke in English)

The actions and processes authorized by the resolution
adopted today pose new challenges for the international
community. We have set in motion a complex but
eminently workable arrangement involving multilateral,
regional, national and non-govemmental organizations. We
must build on the positive experience gained from recent
examples of such interaction and collaboration, under
United Nations leadership, in the context of peace
implementation. Canada is confident that the many
organizations which will be engaged not only can work
effectively as one, but also can play a vitally important
role in creating the conditions for a lasting peace in
Kosovo. The Security Council can and must play a
constructive leadership role in overseeing this process.

Canada is committed to this effort and will
contribute actively through a number of forums. We are
currently deploying a substantial number of Canadian
Forces personnel to participate in the international
security force in Kosovo. Our humanitarian and economic
assistance to the region, which since March 1999 has
totaled $45 million in Canadian funds, will continue as
needs evolve. We also look forward to participating in
and assisting the international civil presence in Kosovo as
it takes shape and as roles and responsibilities are
assigned to its constituent parts.

The international community has recognized that a
lasting peace in Kosovo must be based on justice. Canada
therefore strongly argued for the provisions of this
resolution which facilitate the work of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The
Tribunal's role will be indispensable in building
confidence in a just settlement in Kosovo, one in which
the perpetrators of crimes against humanity will be held
accountable. Canada has supported the Tribunal's efforts
in other parts of the former Yugoslavia and will continue
to do so in Kosovo by contributing a team of forensic
experts to assist in its investigations.

The Council's response today is a recognition of the
human dimension of international peace and security.
From Rwanda to Kosovo, there is mounting historical
evidence which shows how internal conflicts which
threaten human security spill over borders and destabilize
entire regions. We have learned in Kosovo and from other
conflicts that humanitarian and human rights concerns are
not just internal matters. Therefore, unlike the delegation
of China, Canada considers that such issues can and must
be given new weight in the Council's definition of
security and in its calculus as to when and how the
Council must engage.

We wholeheartedly agree with the Ambassador of
the Netherlands that the tensions in the United Nations
Charter between state sovereignty on the one hand and
the promotion of international peace and security on the
other must be more readily reconciled when internal
conflicts become internationalized, as in the case of

 

Kosovo. Canada believes that the agreement reached today
in the Council is an important step towards a broader
definition of security by the international community.

The resolution adopted today effectively locks in the
commitment of the international community to peace-
building in the Balkans. Canada pledges its commitment to
that process and calls on all parties in Kosovo and the rest
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to do the same.

