I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui and our briefers today. At the outset, I would like to offer the United Kingdom's condolences following the death of the Indonesian peacekeeper during the attack on the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) on 22 June. Our hearts go out to the families Ambassador Djani wrote to. Nothing can soften the blow or the anguish they feel, but the thoughts of the whole Council are with them. I agree with Ambassador Djani that we should redouble our efforts regarding the protection of our peacekeepers. We also reiterate our condemnation, as a Council, of the senseless attack and call on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure that the perpetrators are held accountable. We welcome the response of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak and commend MONUSCO for its support in responding to the pandemic. It is, however, concerning that COVID-19 preventative measures are hindering humanitarian access. Reallocation of resources and expertise is increasing the vulnerability to other health issues, such as Ebola and measles, of which the Democratic Republic of the Congo is currently dealing with the world's largest outbreak. We recognize that the secondary efforts concerning COVID-19 will also hit the Democratic Republic of the Congo hard, requiring support to address the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic. That will require a unified response from the political class of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as support from the international community. The United Kingdom remains a committed development partner and friend to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its people. In 2019, the United Kingdom was the second largest donor, providing more than $99 million in humanitarian appeals. COVID-19 poses a risk not only to health but also to the progress made on stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We remain concerned about the overall security environment, in particular the deterioration in the security situation in Ituri, where 333 civilians were killed between March and May. We are disappointed that no armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have responded to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and therefore echo that call and urge all armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to lay down their weapons. In addition to tackling the threat armed groups pose to civilians in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, sustained efforts must be undertaken to cut the revenue streams that enable them to operate. We heard a bit about this again today. In that regard, we commend the work of organizations such as Save Act Mine and call for the strengthening of regional efforts to address illegal cross-border trade in national natural resources. There has been important progress at the regional level in the past year. It is critical to the stability of the Great Lakes region - in particular, the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo - that the momentum is not lost and that States resolve their differences through diplomatic efforts. In this regard, we are concerned by the increasing tension at the Democratic Republic of the Congo-Zambia border and urge a resolution to be found through diplomatic channels. We must not lose sight of the vital work that is still needed to put an end to instability in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In the difficult circumstances posed by COVID-19, we commend the continuation of MONUSCO's operations, and the UK welcomes the progress made to review and tailor protection of civilian strategies to each province where MONUSCO is present. Delivering protection of civilians on the ground remains challenging, and we are alarmed by the number of civilian deaths during this reporting period. We urge MONUSCO and its troop- contributing countries to pursue the reforms set out in the report Jmproving security of United Nations peacekeepers by retired Lieutenant General Santos Cruz and to promptly implement the necessary improvements to its Force Intervention Brigade. We welcome the continuation of closer working and coordination between the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo and MONUSCO to address the security challenges in the region. We encourage them to continue to deepen their cooperation in order to improve civilian protection. In the spirit of cooperation, we call on the Government and MONUSCO to resume, as soon as possible, the vital initiatives that have been paused due to COVID-19. In particular, we call for the resumption of the Government's engagement with MONUSCO on security sector reform. We also call for the prompt resumption of discussions between the Government and MONUSCO on the Mission's exit strategy, as well as the development of clear benchmarks for the transition of the United Nations presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In concluding, let me underline what the United Kingdom believes to be the top priorities for MONUSCO in the coming months, namely, to continue to support the Government and the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the context of COVID-19; to implement the Santos Cruz report recommendations; to work on the reform of the Force Intervention Brigade; and the joint development by the Government and MONUSCO of the Mission's exit strategy. We will be monitoring those issues closely and hope to see progress ahead of MONUSCO's mandate renewal later this year.
