Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank Mr. Ashraf Qazi for his
presentation of the Secretary-General's report and
Ambassador John Bolton for his briefing on the
activities of the Multinational Force (MNF). I should
like to make the following comments.

My delegation fully shares the observation of the
Secretary-General that Iraq remains at a crossroads.
The security situation is of deep concern and the risk of
its deterioration cannot be ruled out. But the prospects
for an improvement still exist and, in spite of
considerable difficulties, it is not too late to get out of
the spiral and to chart a course for emergency from the
cr1s1s.

The Government of Iraq, whose establishment we
welcomed last May, has undertaken significant and
commendable efforts, at the political level with the
National Reconciliation Plan, at the security level with
its plan to re-establish security in Baghdad, in terms of
reform, with its resolve to undertake substantial
legislative work in parliament and also, now, with the
initiative for the International Compact for Iraq.

Still, as I have already indicated, the challenges
remain huge. As was noted by the Secretary-General,
Iraq has become one of the most violent conflict zones
in the world. Intercommunity tensions have risen to a
dangerous level to the point of breeding fears of a civil
war in the country. The number of civilian casualties
has grown considerably - more than 100 per day -
almost 6,500 killed in June and July 2006 alone, and
the number of displaced persons has also increased
substantially.

In this context, France wishes to reiterate its
support for the Government of Iraq and for its Prime
Minister, and to say once again that we are prepared to
develop cooperation with him and to remain at Iraq's
side.
We welcome Iraq's will to provide a
comprehensive response to the challenges posed and,
as the Secretary-General said, there will not just be a
single military response to the challenges, but several

types of responses to be found. At first, there will be a
political response, which is the purpose of the National
Reconciliation Plan launched by the Prime Minister. In
that regard, we believe that only a truly inclusive
process will help isolate extremist groups and bring
back into the political arena those communities that
have been excluded from it. I also note the Secretary-
General's appeal to undertake a constitutional review
process well aware though we are of the difficulty of
the exercise.

And then there is the response to the legitimate
security needs of Iraqis. There must be an end to the
violence that has increased and that my country
condemns in the firmest possible fashion. The training
of Iraqi security forces remains a priority, as does the
handling of the phenomenon of militia which, the
Secretary-General's report notes, continues to grow.

My delegation likewise remains convinced that a
clear and agreed timeline for the withdrawal of foreign
forces is indispensable to allow the Iraqis to persevere
in a context of responsibility and sovereignty.

There is also the response to the challenges of
reconstruction and the expectations of the population.
That is the purpose of the International Compact with
Iraq. France, with the European Union, welcomed the
launching of that project and expressed our willingness
to support it. It was in that spirit that the French
Minister for Foreign Affairs attended the meeting of
the preparatory group in Abu Dhabi.

But my country also stressed the importance of
establishing this project around a number of principles.
This process must be conducted by Iraqis and be based
on the mobilization of their efforts and their resources,
in particular, their natural resources; the political and
security conditions necessary for any substantial
reform must be created; and this new contract must
establish a genuine partnership on the basis of well-
identified criteria and the implementation of the
principle of conditionality.

Furthermore, there must be the support of the
regional and international communities. Any political
solution presupposes that the major players involved,
particularly among Iraq's neighbours, should be
associated in one way or other with the efforts to
promote the unity and integrity of that country. In that
regard, my delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his willingness to convene a meeting on those items on
18 September.

To conclude, I should like to commend UNAMI
for its remarkable work and to recall our support for
United Nations action in Iraq, not only at the political
level, to support the process of dialogue and national
reconciliation and to contribute to full respect for
human rights in the country, but also at the economic
level, to coordinate international assistance and to
promote implementation of the Compact initiative.

The Secretary-General's report usefully recalls
both the difficulties and the hopes and outlines the
prospects. The priority remains re-establishing an
independent, sovereign, pluralistic and united Iraq that
is able to find its way back to the path of stability and
regain its standing in the community of nations. The
international community must continue to play its role
of helping Iraq and its leaders move forward in that
direction. France intends to do its utmost in support of
those efforts.

In that connection, my country expresses the hope
that the initiative undertaken by the League of Arab
States with the support of the United Nations will soon
lead to the convening of a conference on an inter-Iraqi
national accord.

