Mr. Al-Hamadi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on presiding
over the Security Council, and thank you for convening
this important meeting.

I also thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for her comprehensive briefing
and continuous efforts to highlight the situation of
children in armed conflict and provide them with
effective protection by preparing inclusive, independent
and unbiased reports. I would like also to thank
Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF,
and Ms. Yenny Londofio, civil society representative,
for contributing to this important debate.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends for Children and
Armed Conflict.

The statistics in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/465) are causes of grief and concern.
They indicate a significant increase in the number of
violations against children in armed conflict in 2017,
despite the important progress made, as set out in the
report, in strengthening protection for children as
Governments and armed groups cooperated to prevent
those violations. In that regard, we are truly alarmed by
the ongoing violations against children in many areas
around the world, as noted by the Secretary-General
in his report. Consequently, the protection of children
and their rights is especially important, and we must
pay special attention to that matter, particularly when it
comes to incidents that are considered by the Security
Council, in our region and beyond.

The international community has a collective
responsibility to redouble its efforts and take additional
decisive measures to address the issue as an integral
part of any comprehensive strategy to prevent and
resolve conflicts and establish a sustainable peace
that ensures that children are not deprived of the
protection that is provided for them by their families,
communities and the law. In that regard, we welcome
the manual on integrating the protection of children
into peace processes.

We are pleased to announce that the State of Qatar
will participate in organizing the first international
conference on the participation of youth in peace
processes, in partnership with Finland and Columbia
and in cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, to be
held in Helsinki in December 2018.

The State of Qatar strongly believes that children
and youth hold the keys to peace and security. They are
our hope for the future. We believe in the importance of
investing in developing, protecting and educating those
two categories, especially children. We are convinced
that the right to education shall not cease to exist due
to armed conflict. The State of Qatar has therefore paid
special attention to providing education to children in
emergency situations, especially in armed conflict.
We have established the Education Above
All Foundation and launched other initiatives and
education programmes that are being implemented and
funded by the State, in cooperation with international
organizations. Allow me to highlight the significant
achievement made by the Education Above All
Foundation, in partnership with UNICEF and over 80
global partners. We have provided quality education
to 10 million children deprived of school in over
50 countries around the world, including countries
suffering from armed conflict. That was made public
by Her Highness Sheikha Moza Bint Nasser, the
head of Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and
Community Development, during an event held in New
York last April.

The State of Qatar is committed to protecting
education in emergency situations. We were among the
first countries tojoin the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration.
We also understand the close link between protecting
the rights of children and youth and their empowerment,
on the one hand, and preventing conflicts, on the other.
Therefore, we have paid close attention to creating job
opportunities for youth through policy development
and relief programmes that are implemented by
the State at the national, regional and international
levels. In September 2017, the State of Qatar signed a
memorandum of understanding with the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and Silateck, a Qatari
foundation, to enhance the employability of the youth
and build their capacity, as well as launch projects to
protect them from violent extremism.

In conclusion, we welcome resolution 2427
(2018), adopted by the Council this morning. The
State of Qatar co-sponsored the resolution because it
reflects the principles of protecting children in armed
conflict. The resolution is in line with our priorities in
that regard. We emphasize that we will also support
international efforts to achieve the goal of protecting
children. We will do our best to fulfil that goal under
any circumstance and by any means, and to create
an appropriate environment so that they can grow up
in safe and healthy conditions under which they can
develop their potential and make a peaceful, safe and
prosperous future for all the peoples of the world.

