Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): First of all, like other
members I would like to extend our thanks to the
Special Envoys, Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Salim Salim,
not only for today's briefings, but also for the work
they have been carrying out over the past 18 months.
We would like to extend our strong support for their
work.

We express our deep frustration that the situation
in Darfur and other parts of the Sudan deteriorated
further during the reporting period. Not only did the
security and humanitarian situation, which was very
bad some months ago, deteriorate further, but the
political process, despite the ongoing mediation efforts,
stalled, and there is clearly no political will among the
parties to cease hostilities and pursue substantive
negotiations. What is more, some parties possess no
political will to pursue a political solution to the
situation.

In that regard, we affirm the central role of the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). We welcome the announced
appointment of a joint chief mediator and express our
deep hope that this would be a step forward in the
direction of getting all sides together at the negotiating
table. There is always obviously a clear link between
security situations, political processes and
humanitarian situations. That is so in Darfur as well.
The experience of our recent visit to Darfur makes it
clear that security is a precondition for all other
processes. We have seen the situation on the ground;
we have talked to the people in the camps for refugees

08-3959]
and internally displaced persons, and obviously there is
a feeling of despair, which is caused primarily by
security concerns, which are extremely grave.

One of the facets of the security element is, of
course, respect for and implementation of the arms
embargo. There is obviously a need to cut the free flow
of arms throughout the Sudan and throughout the
region. The arms embargo should be fully respected by
all actors.

The deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), as has
already been mentioned today - and before - is slow.
Even the targeted figure of 80 per cent by the end of
the year is not satisfactory. It is not only an issue of the
pace of the deployment, but also an issue of equipment.
That is also where we are facing problems. During the
visit, it was stressed - at least this was my
understanding - that the crucial issue is that of
helicopters. It should be part of our responsibility to try
not only to ensure that deployment is on time, but also
to get the equipment delivered on time.

It was mentioned that another precondition is the
normalization of relations between the Sudan and
Chad. We saw how this issue influences not only the
whole political process, but also the concrete security
and humanitarian situation on the ground. Today, in the
briefings and in our discussion, it was stressed that, all
stakeholders should be involved in the future political
process, which means not only the Government and not
only the movements, but also the representatives of
civil society and traditional leaders. We think that that
direction is the only possible one. We saw on the
ground how important that structure, that portion of
society is.

We also welcome the announcement regarding
the convening of a high-level meeting, but we stress
that this meeting, as has already been noted today, must
be well prepared. I believe it was the Italian
representative who said that we have no time for
brainstorming sessions, we must really have well-
prepared high-level meetings.

Allow me to say that, while Darfur should remain
in our focus, there are other very pressing points that
should not be overlooked. The north-south conflict
continues to affect large numbers of people as well, as
recently demonstrated by the tragic events in Abyei.
Therefore, the continued implementation of the

Comprehensive Peace Agreement is relevant and
necessary.

Finally, allow me to stress a point that has been
raised already. It has been said that there are no
confidence-building measures on the ground, that there
is an obvious lack of them. In our opinion, one of the
key elements in such confidence-building measures is
the issue of impunity, an issue that was stressed during
our visit. We saw that bringing those responsible for
crimes to justice would contribute greatly to public
support for confidence-building measures. In our talks
on the subject with officials in Khartoum, we stressed
our conviction that all sides must cooperate fully with
the International Criminal Court and implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

