The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its previous
resolutions and presidential statements on
Somalia, in particular its resolution 1863 (2009),
which reaffirmed the Djibouti Peace Agreement
as representing the basis for a lasting resolution
of the conflict in Somalia.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the Transitional Federal Government as the
legitimate authority in Somalia under the
Transitional Federal Charter and condemns the
recent renewal in fighting led by Al-Shabaab and
other extremists, which constitutes an attempt to
remove that legitimate authority by force. The
Council demands that opposition groups
immediately end their offensive, put down their
arms, renounce violence and join reconciliation
efforts.

"The Security Council urges the
international community to provide its full
support to the Transitional Federal Government in
order to strengthen the National Security Force
the

and the Somali Police force, reiterates its support
for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), expresses its appreciation for the
contribution of troops by the Governments of
Burundi and Uganda, and condemns any
hostilities towards AMISOM.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the loss of life and the worsening humanitarian
situation arising out of the renewed fighting, and
calls on all parties to abide by their obligations
under international humanitarian law, in
particular to respect the security of civilians,
humanitarian workers and AMISOM. personnel.

"The Security Council also expresses its
concern over reports that Eritrea has supplied
arms to those opposing the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia in breach of the United
Nations arms embargo, and calls on the Sanctions
Monitoring Group to investigate.

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for the political process outlined in the
Transitional Federal Charter, which provides a
framework for reaching a lasting political
solution in Somalia. The ongoing attempts to take
power by force can only delay the political
process and prolong the suffering of the Somali
people."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2009/15.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.45 17.711.
09-33882
