Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
I should like to start by commending your initiative
of holding this meeting, which provides us with an
opportunity to once again exchange views on the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine. I wish to convey my gratitude to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive briefing,
which clearly underscoredthe links between the impasse
in the political process, the unacceptable continuation
of the settlement policy and related activities, and the
very difficult humanitarian situation, especially in
Gaza.

Less than a month after our last meeting on the issue
(see S/PV.7757), we are gathered here yet again to discuss
the very difficult situation prevailing in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We note that, unfortunately, the
settlement policy and related activities are continuing
and intensifying, rendering increasingly uncertain the
prospects for a two-State solution.

According to the United Nations, in the month
of August 2016 alone, Israeli security services either
destroyed or confiscated 85 civilian structures
throughout 28 communities in the West Bank. In total,
more than 786 housing units and structures have been
destroyed in the West Bank in 2016 alone, leading to the
displacement of 1,197 people, including 558 children.
More than 200 of the structures destroyed had been
used for humanitarian purposes.

Then we have the destruction of the water-supply
system, which was built with UNICEF in the Jordan
River Valley, which impacts about 1,000 Palestinians
throughout five Bedouin communities that have
particularly erratic access to water, especially in
summer. In addition, communities including Daqiqa,
Khan Al-Ahmar, Umm Al-Khair, Abu Nuwar and
Susya, to list but a few, host very vulnerable Palestinian
communities, where families, which consist mainly
of displaced persons, live in constant fear of finding
themselves shelterless from one day to the next.

That is why my delegation denounces once again the
continuing and increasing demolition and confiscation
of Palestinian houses and structures, and urges the
Israeli Government to put an end to the forced transfer
of populations and to the physical and administrative
restrictions they have imposed, which exacerbate
tensions between the two communities.
Palestinian children continue to pay a very heavy
price in this conflict. Thousands have lost their lives,
including 535 during the military assault on the Gaza
Strip in 2014. Their suffering is compounded by
administrative detention, the disproportionate use of
force and extrajudicial assassinations that, in addition
to constituting violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law, do nothing but stoke hatred and
violence. I express my delegation's deep concerns over
the critical situation of three young Palestinians: the
brothers Muhammad and Mahmoud Balboul - a dentist
and army officer, respectively - and the journalism
student Malik Al-Qadi, who has been on hunger strike
for almost two months.

The catastrophic humanitarian situation in Gaza - a
small enclave of some 36,000 square kilometres that has
been besieged for over nine years, and where 1.3 million
of its 2 million inhabitants require assistance - should
weigh on our collective conscience. Following the
conflict two years ago, three-quarters of Gaza's homes
are in need of repair as a result of the failure to honour
commitments amounting to $3.5 billion undertaken
in the framework of the Cairo donors conference of
2014. I therefore take this opportunity to welcome the
activities of humanitarian players, including United
Nations agencies, to mitigate the daily impact of the
conflict on children by enhancing their psychosocial
well-being, improving the supply of such basic services
as water, rebuilding schools and catching up on the
education of students who have fallen behind. Given
these circumstances, my delegation reiterates its call
for international protection for the Palestinian people,
who have been under occupation for nearly 50 years,
and reaffirms its support for the initiative to make 2017
the year that marks the end of the occupation.

Extreme poverty, a high level of unemployment and
the total lack of development prospects are scourges
that could promote the emergence of a new conflict.
The Quartet has drawn attention to that danger in its
report (S/2016/595, annex), which reveals that only
5 per cent of Gaza's water is potable and that access
to electricity is scarce. In that regard, the report of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
is unambiguous. It tells us that the rate of growth of the
Palestinian economy could easily double if there were
no occupation, leading to a virtuous cycle of reduced
unemployment and poverty and offering the Palestinian
people conditions conducive to a better social and
economic life. We therefore echo the Quartet's appeal
to the Israeli Government to implement previous
agreements and transfer competencies to the Palestinian
Authority, especially in Area C, so as to promote long-
awaited progress in housing, access to water and energy,
communications, agriculture and natural resources.

As the occupying Power, and in compliance with its
commitment to the two-State solution, Israel will have
to end all settlement and related activities and launch
sincere negotiations according to a pre-established time
table with explicit goals, leading to a lasting peace that
meets both its own security needs and the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people to a sovereignty
State on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

I cannot conclude my statement without voicing
our hope that, despite the delays, local elections will be
held throughout the Palestinian territories and open the
way to reconciliation among the political stakeholders,
leading to the formation of a Government of national
unity on the basis of the Cairo agreement. We reaffirm
our conviction that influential countries of the region
and the Security Council have a crucial role to play in
the optimal management ofthe peace process. Similarly,
we reiterate our support for the Paris conference as a
contribution to the solution to the conflict based on
existing platforms, such as the Arab Peace Initiative,
leading to the establishment of two States of Israel and
Palestine within the pre-l967 borders.

