Mr. Diarra (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to convey greetings from the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Laurent
Gbagbo, of the Government of National Reconciliation
and of the people of Cote d'Ivoire.

I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this Security Council meeting on
Cote d'Ivoire. I should also like to commend and
congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Lavrov, for
the work carried out during the Russian presidency of
the Security Council in the month of June, in particular
the Council's visit to Cote d'Ivoire during its mission
to West Africa, which was led by Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock. The report (5/2003/688) on that subject
and the conclusions and recommendations that it
contains have been examined by the Ivorian
authorities.

That visit and this meeting attest to the
importance that the United Nations attaches to C6te
d'Ivoire and its people at this difficult moment in their
history. In this regard, I would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate my gratitude to the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his tireless support for
the process of restoring peace in Cote d'Ivoire. I should
also like to commend the commitment of his Special
Representative, Mr. Albert Tevoedjre, Chairman of the
Monitoring Committee for the Linas-Marcoussis-
Kleber and Accra II Agreements, and the other
members of the Committee, as well as France and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), who are working to bring about a
successful resolution of the Ivorian crisis.

The Council is well aware of all the details of the
Ivorian crisis. Its most recent visit to C6te d'Ivoire
provided an opportunity to consider once again how to
resolve the crisis, and its report takes due account of
this.

I should like, at the outset, to focus on what has
been achieved since the signing of the Linas-
Marcoussis-Kleber and Accra II Agreements,
particularly since the formation of the Government of
National Reconciliation. My Special Adviser for the
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Programme will then provide a briefing on that issue
prepared by Cote d'Ivoire. Lastly, I will be available to
Council members to answer any specific questions that
they may wish to ask me.

What progress has been made in the
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement
since it was signed? On 13 March, the Government of
National Reconciliation was instituted. This comprises
all the signatories of the Linas-Marcoussis-Kleber and
Accra II Agreements. All the ministers have been
appointed and are working. On 3 May the integral
ceasefire agreement between the National Armed
Forces of C6te d'Ivoire and the Forces nouvelles was
signed. On 24 May, the extension of the ceasefire
westward to the border with Liberia was implemented.
On 1 June, a buffer zone between the National Armed
Forces of Cote d'Ivoire and the Forces nouvelles was
defined. On 8 June the cantonment
areas - eight for the National Armed Forces of C6te
d'Ivoire and nine for the Forces nouvelles - were
designated.

Relations with neighbouring countries have been
normalized. I should like to note in particular the visits
of the Ministers for Trade and for Transport to Burkina
Faso and Mali and of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Burkina Faso and the President of the Republic of
Mali to Cote d'Ivoire. Safe transportation corridors
between Cote d'Ivoire and neighbouring countries have
been opened. Those are some of the main achievements
since the Government was established.

I should also like to point out that, from 30 June
to 2 July 2003, Council members gave new impetus to
the Linas-Marcoussis-Kleber and Accra II Agreements,
and further progress has been made. A joint statement
that war had ended was issued on 4 July by the Armed
Forces of Cote d'Ivoire and the Forces nouvelles and,
subsequently, the Council of Ministers adopted an
amnesty bill. That bill has been submitted to the
National Assembly and will be considered on 4 August
at an extraordinary meeting and on 6 August in plenary
meeting. The authority of the State has also been
strengthened, in particular by restoring and maintaining
order following the incidents that took place at the
television centre on 27 June. Security has also been
strengthened for all ministers and political figures
through the establishment of an integrated operations
centre, including the National Armed Forces, the
Forces nouvelles, Operation Licorne and the ECOWAS
forces.

Prior to my departure for New York, I was in
contact with the President of the Republic and the
political forces with a view to holding discussions to
appoint ministers for defence and internal security. By
agreement with the President of the Republic and
various political forces, I will, upon my return to
Abidjan, undertake initiatives to address this issue so
that the Government can be complete. To date, I can
say that the Government is working normally and that
the functions of the ministers for defence and security
are being carried out.

Within the framework of resuming economic and
social activities, last week I travelled to Belgium,
where I met bilaterally with the Belgian authorities
and, on a multilateral basis, with officials from the
European Commission, in particular President Romano
Prodi.

Upon my return from New York, I will devote the
month of August to visiting the various regions of Cote
d'Ivoire in order to reassure the people about
developments in the process of the return to peace.

All of these activities will lead, in September, to
the relaunching of the economy and, in particular, to
contacts with the Bretton Woods institutions and the
private sector.

What kind of support are we expecting from the
Security Council with a view to giving new momentum
to the process for the restoration of peace? Nationally,
we will undertake what I would call the extension of
phase-3 security throughout Cote d'Ivoire. This will be
followed by the transition from phase 3 to phase 2.

There will be a need to finance the ECOWAS
Mission in C6te d'Ivoire; the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme and the
redeployment of administration throughout the national
territory. Financing will also be needed in the areas of
health and education, particularly as the 2003-2004
school year begins.

My Government will also be making a request for
support from the United Nations for the holding of fair,
transparent and open elections.

There will, additionally, also be a need to re-
launch the economy and increase humanitarian
assistance, as well as to provide assistance in the
training of young people and in the creation of jobs.

At the subregional level, there will be a need to
settle the Liberian conflict, which will bring about
stability throughout the entire subregion. Lastly, there
will have to be a robust campaign against poverty in
the subregion, which is the source of instability
throughout Africa. In that connection, I believe we
must focus on reducing poverty in order that we can
provide stability in both C6te d'Ivoire and the whole
subregion.

With the President's permission, I would ask my
special adviser to introduce the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme that has
been worked out by Cote d'Ivoire with the support of
the World Bank, the European Union and United
Nations Development Programme.

