Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): I have this special
opportunity to speak on behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
Let me at the outset thank you, Sir, for having
organized today's open debate on the theme "Threats to
international peace and security: securing borders
against illicit flows". We also express appreciation for
the presidential statement S/PRST/2012/16 that was
adopted by the Council earlier today.

As a region that, due in part to its geography, is
faced with the daily challenge of securing large, porous
and remote sea and land borders against illicit flows of
guns and ammunition, illegal drugs and the trafficking
of persons, this matter is of particular relevance and
importance to us. For CARICOM. member States, the
illicit flow of guns and ammunition, as well as illicit
drugs, across our borders not only constitutes a crime
and security challenge, but also represents an
existential threat to our present way of life and current
efforts being undertaken to establish safe, secure and
developed societies for our people.

In recognition of the interlinked nature of
growing levels of crime and violence in the region
fuelled by the illicit movement of drugs, guns and
ammunition, it should be recalled that CARICOM
leaders in 2007 established crime and security as the
fourth pillar of the region's integration. CARICOM
member States - both collectively, through the
conclusion of the 2011 CARICOM. Declaration on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, and individually -
have been undertaking a number of measures to secure
our borders against illicit flows. In recognition of the
potential cross-cutting gains that can be realized
through securing our borders, border management and
security have thus become one of CARICOM's major
security priorities.

Through the CARICOM. Implementation Agency
for Crime and Security, and in collaboration with the
Caribbean Centre for Development Administration,
efforts have been undertaken in various CARICOM
member States to harmonize and standardize policies,
practices and procedures utilized by border security
agencies throughout the region. In addition to the
harmonization of policies, numerous training and
educational programmes are also being undertaken. In
conjunction with our bilateral partners, including most
notably the United States through the Caribbean Basin
Security Initiative, CARICOM. Governments have been
actively taking steps to protect our borders and our
societies. Other regional partners that have contributed
to our efforts to secure our borders include the
Organization of American States, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean. I
wish to express appreciation to the Ambassador of New
Zealand for his country's recent assistance to and
collaboration with CARICOM. Governments.

While the major challenges facing our region are
posed by illicit drugs, guns and ammunition, as States
parties to the major international terrorism instruments
and in View of our commitments to the implementation
of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
CARICOM. member States have also taken steps to
secure our borders against the illicit flows of money
and equipment that could also be used to commit acts
of terror in the region or elsewhere.

At the international level, CARICOM. member
States have also advocated for greater attention to be
given to the issue of border control as a component of
the broader crime prevention measures, and
specifically to prevent the flows of small arms and
light weapons and ammunition to the region, in
particular within the context of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. CARICOM. has also long
advocated that, if we are to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects, we must also address the
questions of ammunition and the cross-border
movement of such weapons.

While Member States have been taking steps at
the national and regional levels to secure their borders,
much more work needs to be done at the international
level. CARICOM. is of the View that, given its long-
standing experience, the United Nations has an
important role to play in assisting Member States to
improve their capacity in the area of border security
and management, including in facilitating technical
assistance.

While there has been significant attention focused
on stemming the illicit flows of materiel that could be
used to commit acts of terror across borders, similar
high-level focus also needs to be directed towards
stemming the illicit flows of small arms and light
weapons and ammunition. In acknowledging the
distinctions between the different categories of illicit
items that flow across national borders, a more
comprehensive approach to border management and
security by the United Nations will, in our View, prove
to be a more effective approach in the long run. We
believe that greater symmetry in securing borders
against the illicit flows of chemical, biological and
nuclear material, as well as the illicit flows of
conventional weapons, including small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, will significantly
contribute to the goal of international peace and
security.

CARICOM. agrees with the proposal outlined in
the concept note (S/2012/195, annex) for an assessment
to be conducted of the different United Nations
structures, with a view to determining the extent to
which they are meeting States' capacity-building needs
in this vital area, as well as improving the
Organization's ability to help Member States counter
illicit flows. At the same time, however, such a review,
and attempts to address this issue in a holistic manner,
should not lead to any contraction in the capacity-
building programmes and projects currently afforded to
Member States in this vital area.

Finally, we would also urge that, in the context of
such a review, attention be paid to the specific
challenges being faced among countries and regions in
the design and delivery of future projects. In that
context, we would reiterate our fervent hope that, on
the basis of the ongoing discussions between
CARICOM. member States and UNODC, that the
UNODC Caribbean regional office will soon be
reopened. CARICOM. remains convinced that the
office will play a vital role in assisting countries of the
region to build their capacity to reduce the illicit flows
of guns, drugs and other materiel, including through
strengthened border management and security and, in
so doing, achieve our goals of a safe and secure region.

