Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): Portugal aligns
itself with the statement delivered earlier on behalf of
the European Union.

I would like to congratulate Poland on choosing
this particular topic for an open debate at the Security
Council. Reflecting on how respect for international law
affects peace and security is relevant for the success of
the United Nations. International law is not merely a set
of rules and mechanisms aimed at prescribing conduct
and settling disputes. It also embodies a powerful
ethical discourse and, as such, is an important referent
for action as well as a tool of international progress.

The Charter of the United Nations, itself an
international legal instrument, confers on the United
Nations the fundamental responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. But it also affirms
that measures to fulfil that mission must be taken
in conformity with the principles of justice and
international law. The Security Council, a collective
organ for collective action, is therefore not only bound to
act in accordance with the applicable international law,
but also has an important responsibility to promote and
contribute to respect for international law. That is not a
simple abstraction; it is in fact a condition of success for
its crucial mission in maintaining international peace
and security. Allow me to share some quick thoughts
on how, in our view, the Security Council can increase
its contribution to international peace and security by
upholding international law through concrete steps.

Portugal considers that the Security Council can
further promote recourse to methods for the pacific
settlement of disputes, including negotiation, inquiry,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement
and use of regional mechanisms, as provided for in
Chapter VI of the Charter. Portugal also considers that
when acting under Chapter VII, the Security Council
could reinforce its legitimacy by clearly stating the
reasons for which it understands that a given event is
a threat or breach of the peace or an act of aggression.
Those are concepts for which international law provides
useful guidance.

Regarding respect for international obligations, a
closer monitoring of the implementation of Security
Council resolutions can certainly help in preventing
future violations of international law. The emergence
of new and interlinked types of global threats, such
as climate change, new typologies of conflicts,
transnational organized crime or terrorism, must also
be kept in mind, as it may be necessary to further
develop the existing legal framework in order to better
deal with new challenges.

Upholding accountability is a never-ending
challenge for the United Nations and each and every
Member State. Portugal considers that despite the
progress that has been made in the past few decades,
the current accountability framework can be further
improved. Although the Council is not, and should
not be, a judicial organ, it can contribute to ensuring
accountability, including by referring situations
to the International Criminal Court or mandating
peacekeeping operations to help in investigations or the
arrest of those responsible for the most serious crimes
of international concern. In the same vein, restraint
on the part of the permanent members from the use of
veto, at least when crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes are committed, would be a
very important step.

In conclusion, although the international context is
now quite different from what it was in 1945, the need
for the United Nations, and the Council in particular, to
be at the very heart of international peace and security
is ever more acute. Respect for international law is at
the core ofthat effort, both as the reason for and purpose
of United Nations action.

