Mr. Lal (India): We welcome this discussion on
peacebuilding in Africa, which is of relevance not
only to the African continent but to all of us in our
interdependent world.

India has a long-standing engagement with Africa.
We have worked together on decolonization and against
apartheid and for the rights of developing countries and
are now significant development partners.

Indian contingents have served in 22 peacekeeping
missions in 16 African countries so far, including 6
countries at present. India has engaged actively in
international peace and security issues, including in the
Security Council. India remains the largest cumulative
troop contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
efforts and has been a member of the Peacebuilding
Commission since its inception. We appreciate the
complexity of the changing nature of conflicts and the
challenges in conflict prevention and building peace.

India firmly believes that conflict prevention and
resolution must be primarily a political activity. Also,
peace and security cannot be seen in isolation from
the wider development-related issues. A more holistic
approach is needed to prevent conflict and build peace.

The Peacebuilding Commission has not been
taken seriously enough at the United Nations so far.
Its funding is completely inadequate - not even 1 per
cent of the peacekeeping budget. We need to empower
the Peacebuilding Commission through adequate
resources, capacities to gauge the requirements on the
ground and serious consideration by the Council of its
advice.

The recent adoption of resolutions by the General
Assembly and the Security Council on the issue of
sustaining peace reflects a growing recognition by the
international community of the long-term importance
of peacebuilding efforts, an aspect that is still not fully
grasped. We especially welcome the emphasis given to
the importance of sustainable development, economic
growth and enhanced funding.

Last year we finalized the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1),
thereby underscoring the importance of sustainable
development in building peace and security. Also last
year, the African Union adopted Agenda 2063, which
incorporates a similar vision of extensive strengthening
of institutions and capacities.

The spirit displayed during the adoption of the
SDGs has not, sadly, been matched in the discussions
on the collective mobilization of resources to achieve
our common goals. That once again demonstrates a
lack of appreciation that in today's world there cannot
be islands of peace and prosperity. We can see this all
around us in the cross-border reach of terrorist groups,
the growing refugee crisis, the outbreaks of pandemics
and the spread of hate ideologies.

In the past couple of decades, the African Union
(AU) and some African regional groups have undertaken
peacekeeping initiatives in about 20 conflicts within
Africa. Coordination between the Secuirty Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
has become institutionalized. Over the last decade,
several African countries have emerged as major
troop contributors. Six of the current top 10 troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) are African, and Africa
today contributes the largest number of personnel
to peacekeeping. There are 38 African countries
providing half of all United Nations peacekeepers,
60 per cent of the international civilian peacekeepers
and 80 per cent of its national peacekeeping staff. That
is in addition to the participation in non-United Nations
peacekeeping operations by our African friends, which
accounts for several thousand more. We welcome those
developments, including the recent decision by the AU
to achieve greater self-reliance in terms of its peace and
security budget through a peace fund.

The AU, regional organizations and national
Governments in Africa are best placed to address most
of the challenges facing their region. However, it is the
responsibility of the international community, in our
collective interest, to strengthen their capabilities.

The huge success of the third India-Africa Forum
Summit of last October, in which all of our 54 African
partners participated, has taken our long-standing
and growing partnership to an even higher level. It
was reinforced by a series of visits to Africa by our
President, Vice President and Prime Minister in the
first half of this year. Our cooperation with Africa has
focused on sharing expertise and resources and helping
to build capacity as per their own priorities. Our areas of
cooperation include education and vocational training,
health care, women's empowerment, constitutional
and parliamentary processes, digital connectivity for
tele-education and telemedicine, e-governance, clean
energy, agricultural productivity, agribusinesses,
climate change adaptation, disaster management, the
blue economy, maritime security, infrastructure and
trade, investment and technology linkages.

In the past five years, India has offered nearly 25,000
scholarships for more than 300 training programmes in
more than 60 institutions in Africa. In the past decade,

a total of nearly $9 billion in concessional credit was
approved for nearly 140 development projects in more
than 40 African countries, with special emphasis on the
least developed countries and small island developing
States partners.

The first-ever female formed police unit was
provided by India and deployed in Liberia. It was
recognized as a role model for pursuing gender
balance. Earlier this week, a course on United Nations
peacekeeping for African partners commenced in India
in cooperation with the Government of the United
States. It is aimed at assisting in building the capacities
of African TCCs to help regional efforts to maintain
peace and security.

All those efforts have played a part in assisting
Africa in building its own capacities in terms of human
resources, institutions, appropriate technologies,
infrastructure and employment opportunities. Many
of those efforts have been in countries emerging
from long periods of conflict. All such efforts help
to promote development, improve lives and build
peace and prosperity. What continues to elude us is a
real comprehension of the importance of sustainable
development in building peace and security and, even
more importantly, of the indivisibility of peace and
security across borders in today's world. Without that
comprehension and consequently the political will to
address these issues over the longer term, conflicts will
continue to obstruct our collective better future.

Last week, India demonstrated its commitment
to the cause of peacebuilding in the United Nations
context by making a contribution of $1 million to the
Peacebuilding Fund. We hope that other partners will
come forward to commit resources, including at the
pledging conference on peacebuilding in September.

