I thank the briefers and my colleagues for their remarks today in this very important discussion. Last month, Mr. Griffiths expressed cautious optimism following the prisoner exchange between the Yemeni Government and the Houthis, and a reduction in fighting in and around Ma'rib and Al-Hudaydah (see S/PV.8770). I thank him for what he is doing to resolve this tragic situation through diplomatic means. Mr. Lowcock's remarks about the devastating truth about hunger and famine were deeply moving. And as painful and disturbing as it is to hear them, he owes it to us, as he does with every briefing, to bring the truth home. I therefore thank him for bringing the truth to the Security Council. The Council needs to take this to heart and do everything it can for the Yemeni people. Mr. Beasley's passionate plea for funds and the vision he laid out, which can be achieved with international support, really holds each of us accountable. So, I hope, like the representative of Germany said, that we each use our contacts to be able to bring in more funding for this very important cause. These successes, due in no small part to Mr. Beasley's efforts, remind us that the United Nations and the actions of the Security Council have a real-world impact. We must take from that fact renewed motivation to improve Yemeni lives and support movement towards an inclusive political resolution. Inspiration and political will are the right combination for success. Unfortunately, the goodwill of the international community has not been matched by the Houthis, who continue to focus their efforts on prolonging the conflict and lashing out against Yemen's neighbours. The United States condemns the Houthis' brazen attacks against Saudi Arabia on 28 October - attacks that included unmanned aerial vehicles launched in the direction of Riyadh, which posed a grave danger to the lives of many civilians, including United States citizens. The Houthis have now launched hundreds of drones and missiles at Saudi Arabia over the past several years. The Houthis must be held accountable for their murderous conduct, as must their primary supporter, the Islamic Republic of Iran. I am reminded of the Iranian regime's Foreign Minister, Mr. M. Javad Zarif, sending out a preachy tweet on Sunday about the need for multilateralism and Iran's record as a practitioner of "responsible diplomacy". It is so ironic, and it would be funny if it were not so tragic - a diplomat using Twitter to spread propaganda on a platform that his own people are forbidden to use in order to profess innocence and claim that his Government is fighting for peace. Wherever there is violence, instability and bloodshed in the region, Iran can be found fanning the flames. The regime fuels the Houthis' violence by providing funds, weapons, training and encouragement. It is Tehran that is intent upon undermining the work of Special Envoy Griffiths and the Security Council by making a political solution to this conflict less achievable. Just weeks ago, the Iranian regime dispatched a member of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, Hassan Irloo, to Sana'a, where Irloo called himself Iran's "Ambassador" to the Houthis. These acts demonstrate that Iran and the Houthis are not serious about a political resolution to the conflict in Yemen. We once again call on Iran to halt its support for terror, end its destabilizing actions across the region and respect the human rights and needs of all its people, its own people. On the humanitarian front, I thank Mr. Beasley for his powerful and sobering update on Yemen's food insecurity. I congratulate him, as we all have done today, and the World Food Programme (WFP), for its well-deserved and well-earned recognition by the Nobel Committee. The United States is a proud supporter of the WFP's global activities, providing more than 40 per cent of its resources. Despite that generosity, the World Food Programme urgently needs more nations to come to its aid in order to address the growing food security needs around the globe. We share Mr. Lowcock's concern that, despite recent additional contributions, Yemen's humanitarian response plan remains woefully underfunded. As we have done for months, the United States encourages all donors to provide resources immediately so as to help prevent further suffering. In addition, all parties to the conflict must support the delivery of critical life-saving assistance. The Houthis must end their interference in humanitarian efforts right now and take specific actions to show their readiness to cooperate. Specifically, they must immediately permit the World Food Programme to complete its biometric targeting and registration system across all districts, allow third-party monitoring and provide travel authorizations to humanitarian staff. As David Beasley mentioned, household food insecurity levels rose between May and September in areas where the World Food Programme had to reduce its distributions due to obstruction by the Houthis. Just last week UNICEF announced that the acute malnutrition rates among children under the age of 5 were the highest rates among children ever recorded in certain parts of Yemen. The sinister political manoeuvring that impedes humanitarian access must stop before a generation of Yemeni children suffers permanent developmental damage. The United States also reiterates its call for the Houthis to release Yemeni citizen Levi Musa Merhavi from custody immediately. Mr. Merhavi remains wrongfully detained despite a Houthi so-called court ordering his release in September 2019. We call on the Houthis to respect religious freedom, stop oppressing Yemen's Jewish population and release Mr. Merhavi immediately. Regarding the FSO SAFER tanker, it is unconscionable that month after month the reality remains the same. The Houthis continue to withhold the final approval of the United Nations mission's plan for an assessment and initial repairs of this corroding vessel. The United States reiterates the urgent need for the Houthis to cease exploiting the threat of environmental and economic disaster simply to gain political leverage. We must avoid a devastating "we told you so" moment that can happen any day now. The Houthis need to take responsibility by providing their final agreement without further delay. As this harsh winter approaches, I quote my fellow Kentuckian statesman Henry Clay: "The time will come when winter will ask you what you were you doing all summer."
