Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report of
5 October on the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2017/840) and the Special
Representative, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her briefing.

Uruguay associates itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Peru on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Haiti.

As we are only three days away from the closure
of MINUSTAH, I would like to thank all those who
in one way or other have participated in the Mission.
Men and women of various nationalities, military and
police officers as well as civilians have since 2004 all
been serving the same cause: that of bringing peace
and stability to the people of Haiti. Many of them have
done this at the risk of their own lives. We remember
all of them without exception and pay them heartfelt
tribute. We regularly refer to them - from Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Representative
Hedi Annabi to Principal Deputy Representative Luiz
Carlos da Costa and the dozens of other members of the
Mission - but very rarely give their names.

Today I would like to mention by name the eight
Uruguayans who lost their lives serving in Haiti:
Corporal Leandro Acosta, Air Force Captain Jose
Ignacio Larrosa, First Lieutenant Santiago Hernandez,
aviation engineers Jose Pastor, Enrique Montiel, Nestor
Morales and Gigi Medina, and Lieutenant Colonel
Gonzalo Martinere.

I would also like to express my most sincere thanks
to Ms. Honore for her leadership as Head ofMINUSTAH
and for her outstanding and tireless efforts to bring
about stability in Haiti, thanks that I wish to extend to
all those who preceded her in that post.

The closure of MINUSTAH provides us with the
opportunity to reflect on the manner in which it was
managed. As with all human endeavours, there have
been positives and negatives. In the 13 years since
2004, MINUSTAH helped to ensure the conditions
necessary to enable Haiti to return to democracy;
addressed the difficult humanitarian situations brought
on by natural disasters; worked with the Government
to strengthen its institutions; and helped to strengthen
and professionalize the Haitian National Police and
to restore and maintain the rule of law, including
through the promotion and protection of human rights.
Uruguay participated in these efforts from the outset,
in 2004, up until 15 April, the date on which its troops
ceased operations.

Today we can see the results of this joint effort, as
MINUSTAH is leaving the country in a much better
condition than it was when the Mission arrived. We can
say, therefore, that the balance sheet is a positive one
and that the people and the Government of Haiti have
benefited from the presence of MINUSTAH over these
13 years.

However, we would have liked the current situation
in the country to be more encouraging. Despite the
efforts made by the Haitian authorities to consolidate
democracy and stability in the country; despite the
commitment of President Jovenel Moise to making
progress in priority areas, as reflected in his Caravan
of Change initiative; and notwithstanding the progress
made in increasing the capacity and enhancing the
professionalism of the Haitian National Police, a
number of areas of concern remain.

The socioeconomic situation in the country
continues to be fragile, and the population remains
vulnerable. Progress in the areas of the rule of law
and human rights is very slow. In the judicial field,
progress has been limited. We continue to see long-term
preventive detentions, and the prisons are overcrowded.
The level of the protection and promotion of the human
rights of women is far from satisfactory. Transparency
International's 2016 Corruption Perceptions Index
places Haiti 159th of the 176 countries on the list.

Despite the progress that has been made in fighting
the cholera epidemic, cholera-related deaths continue,
and the percentage of the population with access to
drinking water and sanitation systems remains very low.

We share the concern of various sectors of Haitian
society - parliamentarians, leaders of political parties,
defenders of human rights and security experts - about
the process of remobilizing the armed forces. We
believe that Haiti should concentrate all of its efforts
and resources on areas of priority development and on
those initiatives that will generate direct benefits for
the Haitian population and strengthen the institutional
structure of the country.

We cannot overlook the expenses involved in the
return of the armed forces in terms of investment and
operational costs, at a time when the country has so
many pressing needs and the risk of external aggression
seems low.

We believe that efforts should be focused on
continuing to strengthen and train the Haitian National
Police, so that it is able to fully meet its commitment
to ensure national security. National and international
efforts have so far been geared to this end, and this is
how we should continue in future, so as not tojeopardize
the achievements made in the area of security in the
13 years of MINUSTAH's presence.

We are pleased that, with the help of MINUSTAH,
the Haitian National Police has continued to build its
capacity to ensure public order and provide security
to the population and that the security situation in the
country is relatively stable and has not been affected by
the withdrawal of MINUSTAH.

We believe that Haiti still needs the support and
assistance of the United Nations and the international
community. However, we also believe that those efforts
should focus on areas that are key to strengthening the
country's institutions, so that Haiti can make progress
on the road to development and prosperity and leave
behind its need for constant assistance, which tends to
perpetuate itself. In that regard, we believe that the role
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) will be essential. With the joint
transition plan of MINUSTAH and the United Nations
country team, MINUJUSTH should be able to help
the Government strengthen its rule-of-law institutions
while continuing to provide support to the Haitian
National Police and promote the development of law
enforcement. It should also participate in monitoring,
reporting on and analysing the human rights situation,
in accordance with its mandate. For that it will need to
count on firm political will and a commitment to action
on the part of the Haitian authorities. We hope that will
be the case to the benefit of the people of Haiti, who
deserve that commitment from their leadership.

