The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Sweden.

Let me start by stating that Sweden fully endorses
the statement that will be delivered later today by the
representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union. I would also at the outset like to express my
Government's high appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General and of the presentation by the Deputy
Secretary-General earlier this morning.

The report confirms that violations of international
humanitarian, refugee and human rights law jeopardize
international peace and security. Concern for victims of
armed conflict and efforts to assist them have therefore
become a major aspect of the work of the Security
Council.

Refugee flows and displacements of people are both
consequences of and contributing factors to instability.
Armed groups often mix with civilians and use them as
human shields in violation of humanitarian law. Not only
are civilians in this way deprived of the protection to
which they are entitled, but their lives and livelihoods are
further threatened. This tendency is alarming, both
because of the human suffering it causes and for the
effect it has on peace and security.

Sweden condemns all attacks against innocent
civilians and against personnel of the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations. In this context, my
Government welcomes the provisions of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court which state that attacks

 

against humanitarian personnel constitute war crimes. This
is a major step towards breaking the culture of impunity for
such acts and ensuring that the culprits are held personally
responsible.

The Security Council has a responsibility, together
with the Secretary-General and the United Nations system
at large, to address the security and safety of humanitarian
assistance to all those in need. The objective must be to
prevent humanitarian crises by providing early and viable
solutions to their root causes. Regular briefings to the
Council by key humanitarian actors are important to ensure
a comprehensive approach to complex humanitarian
emergencies. Last week's Security Council resolution on
Kosovo is, to our mind, a good example of a strong
political response to an increasingly acute humanitarian
situation.

Sweden welcomes the Secretary-General's efforts to
build closer coordination between the various responsible
United Nations entities, inter alia, through joint meetings
with the Executive Committees on Humanitarian Affairs
and on Peace and Security, as well as the United Nations
Development Group.

The report of the Secretary-General reviews the past
experience of a variety of arrangements to enhance the
safety of humanitarian operations. As always, clear
mandates are essential. The mutually supportive relations
between the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General and the Humanitarian Coordinators should be
further enhanced. There are also important lessons to be
drawn from the United Nations guards in northern Iraq and
from the more recent international monitoring presence in
Bosnia and in Kosovo.

We need to continue to develop mechanisms to ensure
humanitarian security without necessarily relying on
military deployment. Important steps are also being taken
by the humanitarian community itself to address these
1ssues.

Many of the recommendations of the report are closely
related to recommendations in the Secretary-General's
Africa report. Clear links exist between the follow-up to the
two reports. This is, for example, the case when it comes
to creating an effective international mechanism for security
in refugee camps.

Today's meeting is another step in the Council's
efforts to strengthen its role in supporting humanitarian
action. It is the second time in two years that we have had
a wide-ranging debate on this topic in this Chamber. The
report should be thoroughly and promptly reviewed,
taking into consideration our discussion here today.
Concrete conclusions must be drawn on actions to be
taken to ensure effective protection of humanitarian
assistance. Such conclusions must also be drawn
concerning the responsibilities of the Security Council in
this field.

My delegation looks forward to discussing the
concrete proposals for further action presented here today
by the delegation of the United States.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Republic of Korea. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

