Ms. Edjang Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zerrougui and Special Envoy
Djinnit for their leadership, dedication and outstanding
briefings on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region.

First and foremost, we would like to express our
concern for, and encouragement to, our sisterly country
the Democratic Republic of the Congo following the
most recent Ebola outbreak.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea attaches the
utmost importance to the events unfolding in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Given our strong
bonds of sisterhood and friendship and the fact that we
are members of the same subregional institutions, we
view its problems as though they were our own. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo has made efforts
to become stable and has embarked upon a process
of reconstruction. We commend those efforts. We
understand that the country is at a key juncture in its
history, and we are hopeful about the situation.

Positive developments ahead of the upcoming trio
of presidential, legislative and provincial elections on
23 December are key to future lasting stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard, it is
worth noting that considerable progress has been made
in the electoral process with regard to preparations, as
stipulated by the electoral calendar, the publication of
the electoral roll in line with legislation, the easing of
political tensions and dialogue among all parties on
the use of voting machines, among other things. It is
for those reasons that we encourage the Government
and the Independent National Electoral Commission,
political parties, civil society and all the national
stakeholders concerned to continue strengthening the
process so as to ensure that all citizens can exercise
their right to vote in the best conditions, while raising
people's awareness about how to exercise that right.

We encourage all Congolese actors to create
the conditions necessary for the holding of peaceful
elections and do everything possible to ensure that the
ballot on 23 December is credible, transparent, inclusive
and held in a calm environment. Full compliance with
the Saint-Sylvestre agreement of 31 December 2016
is the best guarantee for the holding of satisfactory
elections and for a subsequent peaceful transfer of
power. Those are key aspects in ensuring the legitimacy
of elected authorities and, in particular, the stability of
the country and the region. Easing political tensions,
implementing the recommendations of the International
Organization of la Francophonie and ensuring dialogue
among all parties on the use ofvoting machines are also
key factors. In that regard, we welcome as a positive
step the meeting of the various political parties that
took place on 29 September.

One ofthe lessons learned from the most recent visit
by the Security Council to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is that for upcoming elections to be a
resounding success and viewed as a step forward for the
Congolese people, all possible post-election scenarios
must be analysed with a view to taking measures that
guarantee the building and strengthening of lasting
peace in the country.

We welcome the public statement on the state of the
nation made by President Joseph Kabila Kabange on
19 July before a joint session of the National Assembly
and the Senate. The President reiterated his intention to
respect the country's Constitution and underscored that
his Government remained firmly committed to fully
shouldering its responsibility to fund the presidential,
legislative and provincial elections. He also stressed that
he did not intend to stand as a candidate in the presidential
elections. In a legitimate exercise of sovereignty and
independence, the President's announcement illustrates
his determination and commitment to the country. The
international community must continue to support the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in its electoral process, while respecting
the principle of non-interference in its internal
affairs, as well as its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

With regard to the security situation, challenges
remain in the east of the country, as demonstrated by
violence between the Allied Democratic Forces and
the Forces armees de la Republique Democratique
du Congo, in particular around Beni. We therefore
encourage the Government to continue taking measures
to address the security situation and the activities of
armed groups in various provinces and protect civilians,
with the support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). We also urge all the parties
concerned to act responsibly so as to promote social
cohesion, in particular during the electoral period, as
well as a cessation of hostilities by the armed groups.
We also encourage the Congolese authorities to remain
committed to ensuring that those responsible for crimes
and gross violations of human rights and humanitarian
law are brought to justice.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea condemns
the pillaging and exploitation in conflict zones and
the transfer of raw materials to other regions, which
serve to underscore the double standards observed
during conflicts and, at times, explain the reasons for
them. Without a definitive solution to the problem, the
possibilities for successfully resolving the issue ofpeace
and security in the region will remain distant. The illegal
exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo produces considerable economic
benefits that do not go to benefit the Congolese people,
but other actors instead. It is therefore important to take
steps to put an end to that situation and, if necessary,
impose sanctions on those who do not comply with
international standards in that regard.

Equatorial Guinea believes that the assistance
provided by various international organizations,
including the United Nations, in close collaboration
with the European Union, the African Union, countries
of the region, the Southern African Development
Community, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Economic Community of Central
African States, is essential in the quest for a lasting
solution to the political situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. To that end, Equatorial Guinea
would like to echo the call made by the African Union
Peace and Security Council to establish a coordination
mechanism that includes all of the actors I mentioned,
with a view to ensuring effective and consistent support
for the country. Equatorial Guinea also calls for the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, signed on 24 February 2013 in Addis
Ababa. We urge its signatories and guarantors to take
the necessary steps and redouble efforts to ensure its
full and effective implementation. It is therefore crucial
to neutralize the armed groups operating in the east of
the country.

The recent and well-deserved recognition of
the excellent work of Dr. Denis Mukwege and his
colleagues, at both the Panzi Hospital and Foundation,
as well as the resilience ofthe victims of sexual violence
in conflict situations in the Congo, is an example of
the commitment and personal investment of Congolese
brothers and sisters in the development of their country
and in the well-being of its people. It is that spirit of
triumph and solidarity that we need on the continent,
and it must be encouraged.

Let me therefore conclude by inviting all the parties
involved in the process to continue along the path of
internal inclusive dialogue and avoid any violent acts
that could lead to a disruption of the process. We
also take this opportunity to call on the international
community to fully support the Government,
MONUSCO, the Independent National Electoral
Commission and other parties directly concerned in the
process to foster confidence-building measures so as to
ensure an environment that is conducive to the holding
of peaceful elections, commitment to a road map and
the peaceful transfer of power in an environment of
peace and national harmony.
