Mr. Helg (Switzerland) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Egeland for his excellent
presentation and notes with satisfaction the high
quality of the report submitted by the Secretary-
General. That document contains specific and realistic
proposals which, if implemented, could decisively
improve the level of protection for civilian populations
in the 10 priority areas identified by the Emergency
Relief Coordinator. While recognizing that all these
challenges are priority issues, permit me to deal in
greater detail only with some of them here.

First of all, the importance of respect for law
needs to be stressed. Protection of the civilian population
- whether it be in armed conflicts, in transitional
situations or in the fight against terrorism - is based
primarily on respect for international humanitarian law,
human rights law and refugee law. Respecting those
laws and ensuring that they are respected involves
informing the different actors, raising their awareness
and making them responsible. Those actors include
States - particularly their armed forces and police -
but also non-State armed groups. Switzerland must also
reiterate that the fundamental humanitarian principles
of impartiality, neutrality and independence apply in all
circumstances. Respect for those principles is an
essential condition for guaranteeing sufficient scope for
humanitarian action, both within and outside the
United Nations system.

The second challenge is the need to fight
impunity at both the national and international levels.
In that context, Switzerland emphasizes the importance
of the International Criminal Court and invites the
Security Council to strengthen its commitment in that
area by following up on the proposals formulated by
the Secretary-General. Furthermore, in order to prevent
crisis situations, Switzerland invites the Security
Council to make greater use of the tools of observation
and fact-finding missions.

The third challenge is the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons and its effects on civilian
populations. Today, the Open-ended Working Group to
Negotiate an International Instrument to Identify and
Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small
Arms and Light Weapons began its first substantive
session. Switzerland, as Chair of the Working Group,
encourages all United Nations Members to participate
constructively in the elaboration of a new international
instrument to identify and trace small arms and light
weapons in a timely and reliable manner. Such an
instrument would enable States to fight the illicit trade
in such weapons and thus help to improve the
protection of civilian populations.

Fourthly, the effects of armed conflicts on
women - particularly the use of sexual violence as a
military weapon - deserve greater attention on the
part of the international community. Although
significant efforts have already been undertaken, we
need to develop additional protective measures.
Moreover, we believe it is essential to strengthen the
role of women in the search for and implementation of
peaceful solutions to conflicts. Switzerland plans to
hold an international conference on that subject in
Geneva in November 2004 with the objective of
effectively supporting the strengthening of civil society
networks and initiatives, which we know to be essential
for the success of peace processes.

Fifthly, Switzerland is convinced of the relevance
of the concept of human security, which aims to make
human beings and their dignity the central focus of the
international community. That concept has the merit of
bringing together different approaches and thus enables
us to define multidimensional protection strategies.

In conclusion, Switzerland reaffirms its resolve to
work for the protection of civilian populations. We
shall continue our close cooperation with United
Nations emergency relief mechanisms, particularly by
making our expertise available. In addition, we support
the efforts of the United Nations Emergency Relief
Coordinator to improve the collection, handling and
dissemination of data on the effects of conflicts on the
protection of civilians. We look forward to hearing
more about the enhanced framework announced in the
report of the Secretary-General.

