Ms. Qadeem: It is an honour to be here in the
Security Council today. I thank the United Kingdom
for giving me the opportunity to address this important
topic. I would like to focus my intervention on the role
of women in mediation.

As Council members all know, for 18 years, as
women peace practitioners and strategists working on
the front lines oftoday's most complex global conflicts,
we have called for, advocated and demanded recognition
and inclusion in peace processes and at the peace tables
that world Powers sponsor and facilitate. But despite
the rhetoric of support and even the resolutions and
national action plans that States have adopted, we as
women remain largely on the outside. Why is that?
I would like to start by addressing some common
misconceptions. So often we hear that women's
exclusion is cultural and that they cannot play a
mediation role in a particular conflict because of local
cultural factors. However, if that were the case, surely
there would be vast differences between, for example,
Nepal and Colombia. They hardly share the same
culture. Women's exclusion is not about culture; it is
about power. Or we hear the integrity or legitimacy of
women's peace coalitions being questioned. Frankly, as
suggested by the Better Peace Tool, one of the booklets
developed by the International Civil Society Action
Network (ICAN), we should reframe the question. Why
should wielding weapons and threatening violence be
the only ticket to peace talks? If we are serious about
achieving peace, we also need peace actors, such as
civil society and relief workers. Everywhere we look
at the local level, we see women doing the majority of
that work.

Perhaps it is because we think of a mediator as
having power and gravitas - terms that are inherently
masculine - with the ability to knock heads or
press for compromises. If the wars and conflicts we
experience today were similar to those ofthe nineteenth
or twentieth century, perhaps that form of high-power
mediation would be the only solution. But today's
conflicts are different. There is a proliferation of actors,
who are often highly localized. So many of the key
players are often hidden and, frankly, unreachable by
United Nations envoys. If the Council is serious about
ending wars, then acknowledging their complexity
is a critical first step bcause it can lead to designing
mediation processes that address that complexity by
drawing on the vast resources we have as local actors,
and especially as women.

Perhaps some are now sceptical and wondering
how women can talk to violent extremism groups,
such as Boko Haram, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam (LTTE) or the Taliban, who are typical actors
in the wars of our time. Years ago, our sister Visaka
of Sri Lanka took seven other mothers of missing
soldiers, like her, to meet the Tamil Tigers. And after
convincing the LTTE, she successfully mediated a
ceasefire, followed by peace talks between the LTTE
and the Government of Sri Lanka. In Hudaydah,
Yemeni women are saving lives on the front lines of
a devastating war where people are completely under
siege. Food for Humanity, an organization led by a
woman and a partner of our coalition, the Women's
Alliance for Security Leadership, was able to mediate
and convince conflicting parties to allow people to
leave the area. It also provided humanitarian aid after
the Red Cross pulled out in early June.

Let me share my own experience in Pakistan. In
one of the areas hardest hit by violent extremism and
the military's responses to it, there, where no one would
dare stand up to the Taliban, out of necessity I had a
dialogue with their leaders. For us working and living
at the local level, there is no other option. I found the
courage, not only to speak with and persuade them to
release my staff members, whom they had captured
because they were carrying out health and education
projects, but also to take the chance to seek support
for the implementation of the same projects. That is
mediation. I have found that in mediation, it is essential
to speak to each person's core humanity. Believe me,
it breaks down barriers and works miracles. I am not
essentializing women or claiming that all women can
do it. I am speaking specifically about women, such as
the members of the Women's Alliance, who have the
extraordinary vision, courage and skill to engage in
such deeply dangerous work.

Often the barrier-question posed is: Who are the
right women for the job? Again, ICAN's Better Peace
Tool provides the answer: women's organizations
with certain core values; women with the skills and
knowledge relevant to the negotiations and agenda;
women who understand the art of crafting the
storytelling process in order to humanize potential;
women who employ imaginative thinking to create new
possibilities within cultural realities; women with the
ability to draft an effective agreement; women who are
self-assured and persevering; women with leadership
qualities and lack of ego.

Lastly, I would like to set out some lessons I have
drawn from my own experiences of mediation and from
examples of many women mediators and peacebuilders
around the world. In spite of all of the institutional,
cultural and structural barriers, women's mediatory
roles at the informal levels have often served as
blueprints for negotiations. One reason for that is that
women have a different connection to communities,
families and households that can be particularly helpful
in localized peacebuilding.

Women also place greater relative weight on
interaction-specific aspects of mediation than
men do and often perceive most negotiations to
include a relationship dimension, even in the most
challenging environment. From intervention with
family members who may be fighting with armed
groups, to advocacy for referendums associated
with peace agreements, to serving as a part of early
warning systems for conflict prevention, women
provide a grass-roots underpinning to peacebuilding
processes. In the context of international conflicts,
we all know that emphasis on relational aspects and
fairness in distribution are valuable traits for achieving
lasting peace.

Women should be involved in mediation and peace
processes because, at a basic level, their participation
is a question of equity and equality. It matters
because peace negotiations and the agreements they
generate set the structure and design for post-conflict
reconstruction and politics, as just mentioned by the
Secretary-General, which affect the lives of not only
women but the whole of society. Women mediators
can ensure that processes and agreements are more
gender-sensitive and thus more comprehensive and
legitimate. For example, women can demand language
on violence against women and on women's citizenship
rights or women's participation in transitional and
implementation bodies.

Women's engagement is particularly important in
mediating track-two and track-three processes. Women
effectively use soft power and the humanization of
communication to create more open and flexible
processes. Women's bridging capabilities and future
orientation can help parties find common cause in
reaching agreement for the civic good.

It is usually assumed that women only represent
women and that they do not bring experience or
expertise on other issues to the table. That has the
effect of sidelining women and seeking their views
only on soft, social or community issues. That is
not correct. My experience from the platform of the
Women's Alliance for Security Leadership, while
interacting with women peacemakers, reveals that
women mediators strategically start with the softer
issue-that is, the common societal issues -by seeking
consensus and then take on the hard-core issues, such
as de-weaponization and de-escalation, to completely
transform radical youth and women. Women must be
included in track-one mediation processes to achieve
a greater degree of gender equality in society and its
institutions, and to improve the durability of peace for
everyone - men, women and children, and States and
citizens alike.

I believe that women have skills and experience at
all levels of mediation and peacebuilding, but qualified
women are not being used to engage in mediation work.
I believe that the recently established Commonwealth
Women Mediators Network will provide the much-
needed system of patronage and structural support
to women to provide them with opportunities of
mentoring, advice provision and access to new
practice-based experience that will help them increase
their competitiveness, confidence and capacity to take
on advanced leadership roles and upper-level positions.

We are seeing conflicts become more protracted
and metastasize across borders and continents. I have a
question. How much longer can the world really afford
to exclude those of us who are making peace at the
front lines?

In ideal conditions, peace processes would be
between two major parties - for instance, two nations,
with one mediator. Ceasefire lines could be drawn and
fighters could go home to their own communities. But
we do not live in the realm of fantasy. Our wars are
complex and multifaceted. Our peace processes must be
rooted in that reality. It is time to value, recognize and
seek the advice of women who are already mediating
on the ground and who have access to and the trust
of the parties - whether in Pakistan, Afghanistan,
Yemen or Syria. Only together can we foster just and
sustainable peace.

