Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): The
State of Qatar believes that Iran has the right to nuclear
energy research and production for peaceful purposes.
That is an inalienable right of Iran under articles I and
II of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, that no one can deny. We do not doubt Iran's
genuine intentions as regards the peaceful purposes of
its nuclear programme.

We are deeply saddened that the Security Council
is being forced to impose new sanctions on the Islamic
Republic of Iran. We do not view sanctions as an
appropriate means of pressure. On the contrary,
sanctions can sometimes complicate matters and, in our
opinion, signal another failure at diplomatic efforts.
Continued pressure does not help to build confidence,
which is already lost between the two parties; rather, it
can sometimes have serious consequences, given the
already volatile situation in that region of the world.
The dead end that has been reached in the negotiations
between the countries concerned and Iran makes it
necessary for us to seek new prospects and to explore
all possible means that could pave the way to a
peaceful solution to this impasse through diplomatic
means.

The State of Qatar is keen to see all States adhere
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. We believe that to be a bedrock principle
from which we cannot deviate. Even as we voted
against resolution 1696 (2006), we were absolutely
clear that we were not expressing an opinion opposed
to that principle; rather, we wanted to allow Iran more
time to study the offer put to it by the group of six
countries. We look forward to seeing specific proposals
from both parties that can contribute to revitalizing the
prospects for a diplomatic solution.

Addressing non-proliferation issues, which is the
basis for the positive vote to be cast by the State of
Qatar, should not be done selectively. We do not see
the Council dealing with those issues with different
criteria. In our view, the Council is required to follow
the same approach towards countries that do not
comply with their obligations under the NPT, as well as
towards those that do not respect it in the first place.
That is why we introduced a clear and direct proposal
regarding the draft resolution on the establishment in
the Middle East of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
their means of delivery. We regret that the sponsors of
that draft resolution did not take that proposal on
board.
07-28152

