Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to express
my appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General Michele
Coninsx for their briefings on the seventh report
(S/2018/770) of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/ Da'esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat. We found the report
very comprehensive and informative. We also thank the
Secretary-General for making counter-terrorism one of
his priorities. I would also like to thank Ms. Cook for
her contribution.

As we have been discussing in the Security
Council, military pressure has resulted in strategic
setbacks for ISIL on the main battleground, and the
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/770) rightly states
that, starting at the end of 2017, ISIL was defeated in
Iraq and was in a headlong retreat in the Syrian Arab
Republic. As a result, the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters towards ISIL in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic has essentially come to a halt. That has
obviously damaged its global propaganda machinery
and slowed its sources of revenue. These points have
also been rightly underlined by the briefers.

Nonetheless, we feel it is only wise not to go
overboard and declare victory over terror. The threat
posed by terrorism will continue to be a big challenge
in the light of what is stated in the report and what we
have just heard from the briefings. The report rightly
states that the ongoing transformation of ISIL from a
territorial entity to a covert network, the activities of
its regional affiliates and the threat posed by returning
and relocating foreign terrorist fighters remain
huge challenges.
Obviously, returnees and relocated fighters from
the conflict zones to other regions now present a
considerable threat to international security. These
examples show that, although notable progress has been
made in defeating ISIL on the battle field, significant
challenges to countering existing threats persist. All
of those challenges require the proper implementation
of United Nations resolutions and, more important,
collaboration and cooperation at all levels among States
and non-State entities.

We also note from the report the ever-growing
threat posed by ISIL and its affiliated fighters and
sympathizers and foreign terrorist fighters in the
Middle East, Africa, Europe, Central and South Asia,
and South-East Asia. In that context, the response ofthe
United Nations, Member States and other stakeholders
to the evolving threats in the areas of countering
terrorist financing, ensuring border management
and law enforcement, securing international
judicial cooperation, prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration, countering terrorist narratives and
engaging communities are all very important.

Africa remains highly affected by terrorism and
violent extremism. We are seeing what is happening
in North and West Africa, the Sahel region and East
Africa, where ISIL and Al-Qaida affiliates and
sympathizers continue to pose serious threats to peace
and security. With regard to East Africa, Al-Shabaab,
an Al-Qaida affiliate, remains a potent threat to peace
and security in Somalia and the Horn of Africa. But
we are also seeing the emergence of ISIL affiliates
operating in Somalia that are controlled and directed
from the central command in Puntland, as indicated
in the Secretary-General's report. Reports by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development also
reinforce those findings and provide useful insights.

ISIL in Libya remains a threat to the country and
the wider region. Insecurity in the country creates
safe havens for terrorists, which, in turn, affects
neighbouring countries. According to the report,
and despite the lack of concrete evidence, there is a
possibility that terrorists in North Africa are directly
involved in trafficking in drugs or persons. If proved
true, this issue will indeed remain a huge concern. In
West Africa, groups such as the Islamic State in Greater
Sahara and Islamic State's West African Province, or
Boko Haram, are active, while the threat posed by ISIL-
related groups and Al-Qaida affiliates in the region
continues to be a big challenge.

We would like to reiterate that restoring peace and
stability in Libya, Mali and the Lake Chad basin is
indeed critical to denying terrorist groups safe haven.
Enhancing the capacity of countries members of the
Group of Five for the Sahel and of the Lake Chad
region will continue to be very important in countering
terrorists operating in the wider region. That is also why
it is so critical that we get the management of security
right in Somalia as we embark upon the transition
from the African Union Military Observer Mission in
Somalia to Somali security forces.

The enormous challenge we face in the fight
against terrorism should compel us to forge meaningful
cooperation at all levels. The full implementation of
existing international legal frameworks against ISIL
and foreign terrorist fighters by all Member States is
vital to strengthening international cooperation. In
that regard, we would like to reiterate that developing
countries will continue to face huge difficulties
to properly implementing those legal frameworks
because of limitations of capacity in various areas.
Shortcomings that might be observed are not, by and
large, the result of a lack of commitment but rather a
lack of the required resources and technical and other
related capacities - too many to recount here.

Therefore, in addition to forging the necessary
cooperation at all levels, the delivery of capacity-
building and technical assistance will be critical for the
effective implementation of those legal frameworks.
We also agree on the need for enhanced coordination
between the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, as well as among all relevant
bodies mandated by the Security Council and the
General Assembly in their efforts to support Member
States in countering the threats posed by terrorism and
violent extremism.

