Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania):
We, too, join in thanking Chairman Volcker and his
team for the report before us, as well as the Secretary-
General for his statement.

As others have said, the oil-for-food programme
is a programme that should never have been
undertaken by the United Nations. We agree. It is a
programme that has given rise to questionable practices
that have largely only served to taint the Organization
and undermine its international confidence. To a large
extent, that is unfair. The oil-for-food programme did
not and could not have run for years without the
influence and oversight of Member States. This was
not and is not a case of the Secretariat run amok
without Member States' supervision. Chairman Volcker
has made that patently clear in his introductory
remarks. Whatever happened did so under the
collective watch of the Council. As we receive this
report, the need for balance must prevail, both in
assessing what the Secretariat could have done better
and what Member States ought to have done better.
The Secretary-General has put it succinctly and well:
there are lessons for all of us to learn.

We do not belittle the reported allegations of
corruption. Corruption is a menace that must be fought
at all costs. It raises transaction costs and, in the end,
renders all of us victims. Any such allegations must be
investigated, as has been done, and those responsible
brought to answer to the law. Nonetheless, what was
disconcerting for many of us was to witness, while the
investigation was under way, a concerted campaign to
paint the Organization, with one broad brush, as being
inherently corrupt, incompetent and out of tune with
current demands. That is deeply regrettable and
incorrect. Corruption is not the preserve of any
country, nor is it the preserve of public organizations
alone. It can be found everywhere, including at the
United Nations.

The report must not be taken to be an indictment
of the vision, ideals and aspirations of the United
Nations. Those lofty goals remain above reproach. We
have an undertaking and an obligation to preserve them
and to protect them. We have to make this
Organization, and especially the Secretariat, better at
serving those objectives. That is the challenge that
faces us as we receive the report and as this Council
and, especially, the General Assembly embark on
examining its implications in an attempt to make this
institution a better Organization.

