Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): We meet today, just
days after the first-ever bilateral ceasefire between the
Government and the Ejercito de Liberacio'n Nacional
(ELN). For the first time in over half a century, the
guns between those two once-warring sides have fallen
silent. That creates yet another historic opportunity for
peace for the people of Colombia.
It is testament to our unity of purpose on that issue
that, in the brief time that has elapsed, the Council
has come together to adopt resolution 2381 (2017),
authorizing the United Nations Verification Mission
to support the monitoring of that ceasefire. In doing
so, the Council has once again shown that it is ready
to respond swiftly, positively and unanimously in
support of peace in Colombia. As the penholder on
the resolution, I want to offer my thanks to all Council
members for their support in making it possible.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his recommendations, which outlined an effective
and appropriate response to the ceasefire through the
existing Verification Mission. I am also grateful to
Special Representative Arnault and his staff for their
quick work after the announcement on 4 September and
during a complex phase of transition for the Verification
Mission.

We know that this is just the start and we recognize
the challenges faced by the parties just to reach this
crucial point after months of talks in Quito. if that
peace is to be built and sustained, all oftheir efforts will
need to continue. Both parties share a responsibility
for ensuring that the ceasefire improves the safety and
security of all Colombians. It is vital that they seize
the opportunity that this ceasefire presents. We may not
see another opportunity like it for both sides to work
towards a lasting peace. Therefore, let us do all we can
to support the Government of Colombia and the ELN
in that effort.

We can be proud today that the United Nations has
been able to respond positively to the request of the
parties. Through this adoption, we have again shown
that the United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, stand ready to support Colombia on the
journey towards peace.

