Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank both Ms. Kang and Mr. Guterres for
their briefings. The work they are undertaking, together
with the humanitarian personnel of the United Nations
and other organizations, with a view to alleviating the
suffering of the Syrian population is remarkable and
worthy of our respect, admiration and appreciation.

Since 2011, 72 humanitarian personnel working
in Syria have died, including 17 United Nations staff
members. We believe that we owe them, their loved
ones and all the victims of this conflict more than
words. We are determined to ensure that their sacrifice
will not have been in vain and that it serves to bring
peace to Syria.

All Council members know that the solution to
the Syrian conflict is a political rather than military
one. We all know that humanitarian assistance and
protection for victims are a moral, legal imperative.
However, they are not enough to put an end to the
suffering of the civilian population. They will not be
enough until the parties involved cease to commit war
crimes, abuses and massive violations of human rights
and humanitarian law. In that regard, we will never tire
of saying that the primary responsibility to protect its
own population lies with the Syrian regime, and that
all parties are required to comply with the exigencies
of international humanitarian law. I believe that we all
recognize that the humanitarian dimension, which is
absolutely necessary, should not serve as a pretext to
Shirk or justify our collective failure to find a political
resolution to this crisis.

Having said all of this, and despite our limitations,
there are reasons for hope. Overcoming our differences
from last year, we have been able to reach agreement
on an essential issue, and have adopted resolution 2139
(2014). One of the objectives of that resolution was
that humanitarian aid should arrive as quickly and
efficiently as possible to those most in need. To that
end, the Security Council adopted resolutions 2165
(2014) and 2191 (2014) . The border crossings were
opened and, though limited, they have nevertheless
proven to be effective in helping difficult-to-access
areas and populations.

The aforementioned resolutions contain humanitarian
standards to which all parties to the Syrian conflict
must comply, and which the international community
is compelled to enforce. We know that this is not
happening. The successive reports of the Secretary-
General have duly and fairly recalled the repeated
failures to comply with these resolutions. If this type
of debate and such reports have a purpose, it is to
remind us of the obligations we have assumed. I am not
concerned by the fatigue that this could cause. It is a
fatigue that I am willing to take on, and that cannot be
compared to the suffering of the victims whom we are
unable to help.

What concerns me is that today, a year after the
adoption of resolution 2139 (2014), barrel bombs and
mortars continue to be used against civilian populations.
What concerns me is that there are still more than
200,000 individuals under siege and used as hostages in
Ghouta, Yarmouk, Nubul and Zahraa, and that access to
essential services, such as water, continues to be used
as a weapon of war. What concerns me is the continued
failure to respect the responsibility to protect schools
and hospitals, and that surgical and sanitary material
are unfairly removed from humanitarian convoys
before reaching their destination. I am concerned that
thousands of minors are being recruited to fight, and
that the rights of hundreds of thousands of women and
girls continue to be systematically violated.

What worries me the most is that the Security
Council is acting as a passive spectator ofthis situation.
In his report, the Secretary-General has said that "the
conflict has become business as usual" (S/2015/124, p. 10). It is terrifying to hear such a thing. We have the
responsibility to respond, and Spain will do all it can
to that end.

I should like to propose a pragmatic approach aimed
at ensuring that the Council's action has a real impact
on the ground, so that it can contribute, howsoever
minimally, to mitigating the desperation of 12 million
people. This approach has three phases that should be
rolled out simultaneously.

First, we must identify the instruments at the
Council's disposal to ensure that the parties to the
conflict comply with the exigencies of resolution 2139
(2014). Secondly, it is essential that we determine our
priorities. The Secretary-General lays out five areas
in which progress is urgently required. Spain believes
that those are indeed the areas on which the Council
should focus its efforts. Thirdly and lastly, we must
clearly state that the action of the Council and its good
offices should not only be extended to the parties to
the conflict, but to all actors, including Member States,
that can bring influence to bear on the parties.

I will conclude, but not without first calling
attention to the following point. Some time ago,
the Syrian conflict became a regional problem due,
among other reasons, to the enormous number of
Syrian refugees who spilled over the borders with
neighbouring countries. The United Nations system
must adapt its priorities. We are clearly facing a
humanitarian crisis that has a direct impact on the
development of the region as a whole. For that reason,
the agencies of the system should set aside business as
usual and rapidly adapt themselves to the new needs
of the communities and refugee-hosting countries.
Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon, Iraq and Egypt in particular
are making enormous efforts, for which we must thank
them. We must support them not merely in words, but
with deeds. The upcoming Kuwait conference, to be
held on 31 March, will offer an excellent opportunity
to do just that. Ensuring its success would be a way
to show that we mean what we say. We owe it to the
victims of the Syrian conflict and to the societies that
are hosting them at great sacrifice.

