The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
December, I should like to take the opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr.
Ismael Abraao Gaspar Martins, Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the
month of November 2003. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Mr. Ismael Abraao Gaspar Martins for
the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Cfite d'Ivoire

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Cote d'Ivoire, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-Bi
(cote d'lvoire), took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council declares that it is
gravely concerned at the attempts by armed
elements to cross the ceasefire line, which were
observed by the forces of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and the French forces on 29 and 30 November,

and at the serious consequences which might
ensue.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the ECOWAS and French forces and
commends them for the action they took to foil
such attempts, in accordance with Security
Council resolutions 1464 (2003) and 1498 (2003).

"The Security Council strongly underscores
to all the Ivorian parties their primary
responsibility for observing the ceasefire, in
accordance with the LinasMarcoussis Agreement.

"The Security Council firmly calls on all the
parties to refrain from any action that might
jeopardize observance of the ceasefire and
implementation of the LinasMarcoussis
Agreement, and from encouraging such acts.

"The Security Council reiterates that it is
absolutely essential for all the parties to make
every effort to expedite the implementation of the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. In that regard it
once again emphasizes the importance of having
the Forces nouvelles participate fully in the
Government of national reconciliation, of having
the entire Government meet immediately, and of
having it take the necessary measures to
implement all the provisions of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement. It also reaffirms the
urgency of carrying out operations to regroup the
opposing forces so that disarmament and
demobilization can begin, and of ensuring that
these operations are accompanied by measures of
reintegration into the regular army or into civilian
life.

"In this connection the Security Council
reiterates that it intends to consider the Secretary-
General's recommendations concerning ways to
facilitate peace and stability in Cote d'Ivoire.

"The Security Council welcomes the
commitments made by President Laurent Gbagbo
in his speech of 27 November, in which he
reaffirmed that he intended to implement the
provisions of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement
without further ado, and calls for the
implementation of these commitments.

"The Security Council calls on all the
parties in Cote d'Ivoire and the countries of the
region to guarantee the safety and access of the

staff of humanitarian agencies working in the The Security Council has thus concluded the
field during consolidation of the peace process." present stage of its consideration of the item on its

. . . a enda.
This statement Will be issued as a document of g

the Security Council under the symbol The meeting rose at 12.40 pm.
S/PRST/ZOOB/ZS.

