Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I should first like
to thank Mr. Ould Abdallah, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing and for his
patient efforts to bring peace and stability to Somalia
under very difficult circumstances. We are also grateful
for the briefing by Commissioner Lamamra and the
important message he brought us from the African
Union Commission. We are further grateful for the
briefing by Mr. Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia. It is useful and helpful to have him here again
to brief the members of the Council directly.

Austria wishes to reiterate its full support for the
Djibouti peace process and the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG). We welcome the continued efforts
to reach out to opposition groups. The Djibouti peace
agreement constitutes the only viable and legitimate
framework for achieving lasting peace in Somalia. We
therefore urge all parties in Somalia to join the
Djibouti process and its structures.

We condemn the attempts of extremists to
overthrow the TFG and the raiding and looting of
United Nations offices in Somalia. We are deeply
worried by reports of support to the insurgents from
outside Somalia, and wish once again to reiterate that,
from our point of view, this is also an issue in which
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) can play an important role.

We note the deep concern expressed by the heads
of State and Government of the African Union during
their recent summit in Sirte concerning arms supplies
to insurgent groups in Somalia. We believe that this is
an issue to which the Council should give careful
consideration.
We believe that three key elements are vital to the
stabilization of the situation in Somalia: support to the
TFG, support to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and support to the reconciliation process.
Uganda and Burundi, as countries contributing troops
to AMISOM, are a crucial factor in restoring stability
to Somalia. We are also grateful for the pledges that
have been made by other African countries, including
Sierra Leone and Malawi. It would seem that the
current mandate of AMISOM. allows sufficient
flexibility. However, AMISOM. needs to reach its
mandated strength, as well as better equipment.

In that context, on Monday members of the
European Union, including Austria, agreed at the
ministerial level to further step up the Union's
engagement in Somalia. The European Union will
increase its support to the TFG and AMISOM, and
explore additional support for the security sector and
regional maritime capabilities. An exploratory mission
will be going to Somalia in the middle of August.

Concerning piracy off the coast of Somalia,
Austria would like to underline that the efforts of a
great number of international actors, including the
European Union through its Operation Atalanta, to curb
piracy off the Horn of Africa cannot meet with lasting
success without addressing the root causes and the
issue of accountability. We are very grateful for the
efforts of the Secretariat and Under-Secretary-General
O'Brien to deal with the issue of accountability.

We condemn the widespread violations and abuses
by insurgents, extrajudicial and arbitrary executions,
arrests and torture as practised by Al-Shabaab. We are
particularly worried about reports of the use of
civilians as human shields and of indiscriminate attacks
that have led to numerous civilian casualties. As
pointed out by the Secretary-General, these abuses
might constitute war crimes, and those responsible
must be held to account.

We condemn the recruitment of children by
insurgent groups and demand their immediate release.
In this regard, we would like to recall the conclusions
concerning Somalia reached last year by the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. Among the recommendations presented in the
conclusions, we would like specifically to highlight the
encouragement to AMISOM. and the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia to incorporate child
protection advisers into their staff, and to the TFG to
consider ratifying the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflict.

We are very concerned about the dramatic
humanitarian situation in Somalia. We have seen a
surge in the numbers of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) over the past two months. More than 200,000
people have fled Mogadishu alone, increasing the
number of IDPs in the country to over 1.2 million. We
commend the United Nations intention to continue its
work in Somalia, notwithstanding the difficulties that it
has faced in very recent days.

I would ask the Special Representative to convey
our expressions of support and esteem to his staff, to
his partners outside the United Nations system, and to
all those who dedicate their work to achieving stability,
peace and security in Somalia.

