Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: I thank Council members
for the opportunity to brief the Council again on my
judicial activities. As in the past, I will endeavour to
provide as much clarity as possible on the steps
foreseen by my Office.

One year ago, in December 2007, I informed the
Council that my office would investigate who bears the
greatest responsibility for ongoing attacks against
civilians in Darfur, who maintains Minister Ahmad
Harun - a man indicted for war crimes and crimes
against humanity - in a position to commit crimes,
and who instructs Harun and others. I also informed
the Council that I was planning to investigate a third
case focusing on the attacks against African Union
peacekeepers.

Six months later, in June 2008, I informed the
Council about the details of those two cases. I
described the attacks against ethnic groups throughout
Darfur, in their villages and in the camps for displaced
persons, attacks which had been pursued over a period
of five years. Such acts required, I said at the time, the
sustained mobilization of the Sudanese State apparatus,
2

including the military, security and intelligence
services and including the integration of the militias
and J anjaweed into the reserve forces, the coordination
of the diplomatic and public information bureaucracies
and the control of the judiciary.

I indicated that the case would be presented to the
Judges by mid-July 2008. I also described the progress
of the investigation into the murderous attack by rebels
against peacekeepers in Haskanita in September 2007.
I reported again that the Sudanese Government had
taken no steps to arrest and surrender Ahmad Harun
and Ali Kushayb, against whom the Judges had issued
arrest warrants in April 2007.

Finally, I asked the Security Council to send a
strong message to the Government of the Sudan
requesting cooperation and compliance. Presidential
statement S/PRST/2008/21 of 16 June 2008 sent this
strong and united message:

"The Security Council takes note of the
efforts made by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court to bring to justice
the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Darfur ...,

and

"the Council urges the Government of Sudan and
all other parties to the conflict in Darfur to
cooperate fully with the Court, consistent with
resolution 1593 (2005), in order to put an end to
impunity for the crimes committed in Darfur."

Security Council resolution 1593 (2005) gave
jurisdiction to the Court. That presidential statement
confirmed the Council's support for the judicial work
of the Court.

As announced, on 14 July 2008, I requested
Pre-Trial Chamber I to issue an arrest warrant against
President Omar Al-Bashir on charges of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. The evidence
shows that in March 2003, President Al-Bashir ordered
the attacks against the Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa ethnic
groups. Stating, "I want no prisoners or wounded, only
scorched earth", he triggered brutal attacks in villages
and in camps for displaced persons. At least 35,000
persons have been killed; approximately 300,000
suffered a slow death; and thousands of women and
girls are the victims of rape. Today, the 2.5 million
people in the camps are being subjected to living
08-63120
conditions calculated to bring about their physical
destruction.

In response to the application, Presidential
Adviser Bona Malwal said on 25 July, "We are telling
the world that, with the indictment of our President
Al-Bashir, we cannot be responsible for the well-being
of foreign forces in Darfur"; Adam Hamid Musa,
recent Governor of South Darfur, threatened that there
would be "more genocide such as has never before
been seen by anyone" if President Al-Bashir were
indicted; and President Al-Bashir himself said, "We are
not looking for problems, but if they come to us, then
we will teach them a lesson that they will not forget."
Such statements inciting violence are threats against
the victims and against the men and women deployed
on the ground under the authority of the Council. Such
threats should be seen for what they are: a confirmation
of criminal intentions.

The judges will rule shortly on this application. It
is time to be prepared for their ruling.

On 20 November 2008, I presented to Pre-Trial
Chamber I the Haskanita case, against three rebel
commanders allegedly responsible for the war crimes
of directing attacks against peacekeepers, murder and
pillaging. Those commanders led forces of
approximately 1,000 men with heavy weapons to attack
peacekeepers of the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS). They killed 12 peacekeepers and
severely wounded 8 others. Such attacks against
peacekeeping operations constitute exceptionally
serious offences; they strike at the heart of the
international system established for the purpose of
maintaining peace and security; and they affect the
millions of civilians whom peacekeepers are mandated
to protect.

In response to my Office's application, there have
been reactions by five rebel groups, parties to the
conflict, stating that they are ready to collaborate with
the International Criminal Court (ICC) and to hand
over any member of their movement if so requested by
the Court. Such words must be followed by actions.
The individuals involved in the crimes will have to
come to The Hague and appear before the judges. No
one is above the law.

Over the past few months, the Government of the
Sudan has not heeded the Council's presidential
statement contained in document S/PRST/2008/21.
Genocide continues. Rapes in and around the camps
08-63120

continue. Humanitarian assistance is still hindered.
More than 5,000 displaced persons die each month. I
repeat: each month, more than 5 ,000 people die.

In Kalma camp on 25 August, Government forces
armed with guns attacked civilians - Furs - ho
sought to defend themselves with sticks and spears. At
least 31 were killed and more than 65 were wounded,
including women and children. On 10 September, my
Office sent a letter to the Government of the Sudan
requesting information on national investigations or
prosecutions planned or under way in relation to the
events of 25 August. There has been no response.

In camps all over Darfur, the Humanitarian Aid
Commission, within Minister Harun's remit, working
in close association with the intelligence and security
apparatus, is as active as ever. Significantly, the
Commission's most recent act was to put an end to
mental health care for the displaced. Day after day, the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and others tally the incidents of
rape perpetrated against women and girls. Yet, as
recently as 7 October, President Al-Bashir publicly
stated that "mass rape does not exist" in Darfur, adding
that "women make these claims because they are
relatives of the rebels". Villages continue to be
bombed, as evidenced by the recent air strikes on Dairi
Shagi and Oum Al-Wadi, in North Darfur. An
additional 300,000 people have been displaced since
the beginning of this year.

Complementarity is a cornerstone of the Rome
Statute. Complementarity is an opportunity for each
State to shoulder its own primary responsibility for
investigating and prosecuting crimes. As Ivo Sanader,
Prime Minister of Croatia, described in one concise
sentence in the General Assembly, "The ICC provides a
vital recourse to justice in situations where national
Governments cannot or will not address these issues
themselves" (A/63/PV.]2).

In the present case, applying the complementarity
test is a straightforward matter. There has been no
change since June. There are no national proceedings
in the Sudan in relation to the massive crimes being
investigated by the Court. The report of the
Government of the Sudan circulated to the African
Union and the United Nations on 17 September 2008
officially confirms that. As the report indicates, over
the past five years, the Sudan has tried and completed
only seven cases - I repeat, seven cases - that are
3
from the dockets of the ordinary courts and, more
important, have no connection to the campaign of
crimes coordinated by Ahmad Harun, perpetrated by
Ali Kushayb and others and, as the prosecution alleges,
ordered by President Al-Bashir. The gravest case
investigated by the Sudanese authorities is that of a
student killed during a demonstration. In spite of all
the statements about the work of the Special Courts
since 2005, and in spite of recent announcements and
appointments, nothing - nothing - has been done.

Rumours of an investigation of Ali Kushayb have
not materialized to date. And Ahmad Harun, as the
Council knows, is still the Minister of State for
Humanitarian Affairs of the Sudan, in charge of the
same people he has displaced. President Al-Bashir has
publicly declared that he would not hand over Minister
Harun to the International Criminal Court, because
Minister Harun was implementing his instructions. The
impunity afforded to Ahmad Harun is a direct message
to all perpetrators of crimes in Darfur that the President
will protect those who follow his orders. It is also a
threat to the victims, to the personnel which you,
members of the Security Council, mandated on the
ground, and a direct challenge to the authority of the
Council itself.

President Kikwete of the United Republic of
Tanzania, in his capacity as President of the African
Union, stated in the General Assembly that the most
urgent matter is to save lives in Darfur. His words were
wise words. These crimes must be stopped. For years,
the Security Council and Member States have warned
the Sudanese authorities about the illegality of
bombing schools and of the dangers posed by not
disarming the militia/Janjaweed.

This is a very important issue. The mobilization
of the militia/Janjaweed has allowed President
Al-Bashir to disguise the conflict for years as a tribal
one that had nothing to do with State forces. President
Al-Bashir created the illusion of militia/Janjaweed
autonomy, and this helped him to continue to carry out
the genocide in the face of international scrutiny.

In order to stop the crimes, this Council has
repeatedly formulated key recommendations - namely,
disarming the militia/Janjaweed; ending air strikes
against civilian targets; facilitating aid; and promoting
accountability. In response, the Government of the
Sudan has offered empty promises, which have been
contradicted by their actions.
As early as 19 June 2004, President Al-Bashir
ordered a complete mobilization to disarm all illegal
armed groups in the Darfur region, including the
Janjaweed, only to state the day after his pledge that
this applied only to the bandits, not to the Popular
Defence Forces, Popular Police or other tribesmen
armed by the State to fight the rebels. Again, on 3 July
2004, the Government of the Sudan issued a joint
communique with the United Nations in which the
Government promised to disarm the militias, bring the
perpetrators of human rights abuses to justice and
remove any obstacles to humanitarian access. The list
is endless.

In Italy, on 15 September 2007, President
Al-Bashir promised a ceasefire. Three weeks later,
Sudanese troops and their allied militias killed over 30
civilians in an attack on Muhagiriya in South Darfur.
On 19 December 2007, President Al-Bashir gave a
public address, stating the Government's unilateral
commitment to a ceasefire in Darfur. Aerial
bombardments of civilians ensued within a month, with
strikes against the villages of Abu Surouj, Sirba and
Suleia in January and February 2008. Recently, on
17 October 2008, the Secretary-General reported to the
Security Council that the Government of the Sudan had
yet to stop aerial bombardments; had yet to take steps
to disarm the militia/Janjaweed, and had yet to comply
with its obligations under humanitarian law to protect
civilians. On 12 November, President Al-Bashir
pledged once again to commit to a ceasefire and to
disarm the Janjaweed. On 19 November, one week
later, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said that the
United Nations was again looking into reports of
continuing aerial bombings on civilians in Darfur.

When it comes to justice, furthermore, only
words have been offered. Opening the Sudanese
People's Initiative one month ago, President Al-Bashir
said:

"Because we believe that justice is a paramount
value and is the foundation of good
governance, we announce our commitment to
establish the rule of law in all parts of Darfur in
order to do justice to the oppressed... I have
instructed all legal bodies to continue performing
their duties in Darfur without laxity, paying
special attention to acting on complaints and
finalizing legal procedures in the best possible
way in order to guarantee the conduct of fair
trials in total transparency."
Nevertheless, every day we hear of human rights
defenders being arrested and tortured in Khartoum.
Three were arrested last week and tortured on account
of giving information to the International Criminal
Court. So-called suspected ICC witnesses are being
arrested and tried for treason. Sudanese officials are
looking for possible witnesses in order to silence them.
This is not how evidence is collected; this is how
crimes are covered up. This is the "justice to the
oppressed" that President Al-Bashir is talking about.

All the partners of the Sudan have advised it that
the only way forward is to take concrete and concise
steps. The Sudanese authorities have not taken any.
President Al-Bashir could have disarmed the militia,
stopped attacks on civilians, returned land to the
displaced, arrested and surrendered Harun and
Kushayb to the ICC in The Hague. He has not done so.
He continues to implement his plan to destroy entire
ethnic groups. His criminal behaviour includes
providing immunity and concealing crimes. President
Al-Bashir is using the diplomatic apparatus and
campaigning against the ICC. President Al-Bashir is
trying to convince organizations and the Security
Council that they have to protect him. The international
community cannot be part of such a cover-up. Faced
with genocide and crimes against humanity, we know
that inaction and business as usual are part of the
crimes. The Victims are not afraid of justice.

The Council has identified four tracks for a
comprehensive solution in Darfur: peace, security,
humanitarian aid and justice. None can succeed in
isolation.

Peacekeepers and aid workers should not be
forced to work in an environment where the crimes
they are trying to prevent are ordered by President
Al-Bashir himself. In such an environment, their
efforts will never be enough. As long as the arsonists
are in charge, it does not matter how many firefighters
you send. There will never be enough.

The Security Council requested judicial
intervention. My Office investigated those bearing the
greatest responsibility. All the arrest warrants and all
the requests for arrest warrants have been made public.
There are no others. Ahmed Haroun and Ali Kushayb
must be surrendered to the Court. All parties to the
conflict must respect the law.
The decision on the request for an arrest warrant
against President Al-Bashir is now in the hands of the

judges. The Council must be prepared. If the judges
decide to issue an arrest warrant against President
Al-Bashir, there will be a need for united and
consistent action to ensure the execution of the arrest
warrant. President Al-Bashir will insist on denying his
crimes and will offer a few words. President Al-Bashir
will insist on getting the Council's protection.

The international community cannot conceal the
crimes. President Al-Bashir's criminal actions should
not be ignored. Statements of ceasefires followed by
bombings, denial of mass rapes or promises of justice
while torturing the witnesses should not be supported.
The international community cannot be part of any
cover-up of genocide or crimes against humanity.

As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica,
Bruno Stagno Ugarte, said in June (see S/PV.5905), all
we need is for the States members of the Security
Council to muster the political will necessary to
enforce full compliance with resolution 1593 (2005) by
the authorities in Khartoum. Enough appeasement: the
time has passed for continuing to accommodate evil.

