Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBoliVia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would
like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-

General for Peacekeeping Operations, for presenting
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
South Sudan (S/2018/609).

With regard to the latest developments in the
political arena, we highlight the rapprochement between
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar. The recent
meetings of the two leaders give hope to a people that
has been devastated by the conflict. Bolivia commends
the agreement that establishes a permanent ceasefire,
which should take effect in the coming hours. We call
for its implementation, and we hope that the parties
demonstrate a real commitment to peace and stability
in South Sudan.
The Khartoum agreement between the parties to
the South Sudan conflict addresses crucial elements,
such as the opening of humanitarian corridors, the
withdrawal of troops, the separation of forces and the
release of political prisoners, in addition to a 39-month
transition period in order to call national elections,
which need to be implemented promptly. On that last
point we welcome the fact that an agreement that gives
a reasonable time for the adequate preparation of such
elections has been reached.

However, despite those positive developments, it is
a reality that the situation in South Sudan remains one
of the most critical. The deterioration of the security
situation and the country's complex economic position
further aggravate the humanitarian crisis, which is
increasingly difficult to manage and affects more than
half of the South Sudanese population. The reports
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs show that there are 7 million people who require
humanitarian assistance and millions of internally
displaced persons and refugees in neighbouring
countries facing a lack of basic services and serious
food insecurity.

In addition to that, South Sudan has become one of
the most dangerous places for humanitarian workers.
We strongly condemn the attack against the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on 26 June,
which resulted in the death of a member of the Mission.
We express our condolences to his family. We call on
the parties to respect international humanitarian law, as
well as to ensure an optimal operational environment
for UNMISS.

Likewise, we commend the efforts of the United
Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS), together with
UNMISS, in the clearing and destruction of explosive

devices. That work will contribute to resettling the
displaced persons and to creating conditions favourable
to the provision of humanitarian assistance. We
regret the death of an UNMAS staff member While
carrying out his work. In the same way, we express our
condolences to his family.

Given such a complex outlook, we are aware that it
is very difficult to find immediate solutions. However,
the Khartoum agreement represents a response to the
current situation. In any case, progress cannot remain
as only an intention. We once again reiterate that
leadership and political will are necessary for the full
implementation of those agreements.

At the same time, this is an appropriate opportunity
to commend the work of regional organizations, the
effort and commitment of both the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union,
which, through constant mediation between the parties
and the Revitalization Forum, achieved an inclusive
dialogue and brought the parties to starting talks about
their main differences.

Likewise, based on the reports of the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism, we encourage regional organizations
to take measures against those that hinder the peace
process and do not implement the agreements achieved.

To conclude, we express our gratitude to the
members of UNMISS and to the entire United Nations
team for their commitment to the South Sudanese
people and for the work that they undertake in such a
difficult and complex security environment.

