Mr. Mansour (Palestine): On behalf of the State of
Palestine. I congratulate Peru on its presidency of the
Security Council and on its skilled leadership of the
Council at this critical time.

Today, I must also express sincere condolences to
the Council and to the Permanent Mission, Government
and people of C6te d'Ivoire, in particular, on the passing
of our dear colleague, Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-
Boutchoue. May he rest in eternal peace. He was truly
a kind and genuine diplomat. He will be greatly missed.

We thank Special Coordinator Nikolay Mladenov
for his briefing. We express our appreciation for
the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General and
Mr. Mladenov, including the recent statements made
in line with international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions. While such statements should be
considered standard, we are obliged to recognize them
in view of the constant harassment and intimidation to
which the United Nations and its representatives are
exposed every time they risk taking a public, principled
stand on our issue, as opposed to the artificial and so-
called balanced stand that Israel bullies States into
adopting, despite the complete lack of symmetry in the
abnormal and unjust situation.

Today, that extremely abnormal and unjust situation
is most starkly exemplified by the dire situation in the
Gaza Strip, where for more than a decade 2 million
Palestinians, the majority of whom are refugees, have
been subjected to an illegal Israeli land, sea and air
blockade. That has vastly compounded the misery and
suffering inflicted on the Palestinian people by the five
decades of Israeli military occupation since 1967 and
the seven decades of dispossession and denial of their
right to return to their homes and ancestral lands since
their ruthless uprooting in the Nakba of 1948.
Yet, as in all other areas of occupied Palestine
and in exile in the refugee camps in Jordan, Lebanon
and Syria, our people in Gaza have remained more
than patient. Despite the repeated upheavals, assaults,
crises, deep deprivation and marginalization, they
have remained steadfast, as is also reflected at this
time in the perseverance of the Palestinian refugees in
Syria, who face the extreme hardships and dangers of
war. That resilient and hopeful spirit is at the heart of
the Great March of Return, launched by Palestinians
in Gaza on 30 March, Land Day, and of the protests
carried out since then.

Contrary to Israeli propaganda, the protests
have been peaceful demonstrations by unarmed
and defenceless Palestinian civilians calling for
their rights, including to return, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III), and to self-
determination, and demanding an end to the Israeli
blockade that has collectively punished, impoverished
and disfigured the entire society. Exercising their right
to peaceful assembly, those men, women and young
people are protesting an oppression that can no longer
be endured, pleading for their voices to be heard.

The Palestinian people live under the longest
military occupation and most protracted refugee crisis
in modern history. They endure constant displacement,
colonization and demonization, all aimed at their denial.
Against that backdrop, the restraint should be seen as
extraordinary and such protests as a natural response
to the illegal and cruel occupation. Let us all here agree
that it is not a benign occupation. Even deeming it a
belligerent occupation is an understatement.

Why is the occupying Power therefore so surprised
that a people would rise up to demand its dignity and
freedom? Why is it so outrageous that a people would
use all possible peaceful means to bring an end to its
persecution? Why have Israeli officials commanded
their military forces to fire at peaceful protesters?
Why are civilians, including children, being targeted
with live ammunition in a blatant shoot-to-kill-and-
maim pattern, with at least 41 Palestinians killed by the
occupying forces and more than 5,000 injured, many
permanently disabled by the severity of their injuries,
since the protests began?

Where else in the world could an entire civilian
population, over half of them children, be imprisoned
and designated as a target, as is being done by Israeli
War Minister Avigdor Lieberman? Minister Lieberman
has openly declared that "there are no innocent civilians
in Gaza", meaning that the 2 million inhabitants of Gaza
are not innocent and a legitimate target. This same
Minister also declared, in referring to video footage
of an Israeli soldier deliberately shooting a Palestinian
man, that "the sniper deserves a promotion, whereas the
cameraman deserves a demotion". Such wilful targeting
of civilians is terrorism in every sense of the word. It
is a grave breach of international humanitarian, human
rights and criminal law and violates the obligation to
protect civilians.

The international community must demand answers
from Israel. The Security Council's failure to address
this situation cannot be justified. The Council must
speak with one voice to condemn these crimes, insist on
their cessation, including a full lifting of the blockade,
demand an investigation and ensure protection for the
Palestinian people based on international law.

We welcome the calls of the Secretary-General
and other leaders for an independent, transparent
investigation of the recent killings of Palestinian
civilians by Israeli occupying forces and urge its
swift launching via an international mechanism that
will ensure a legitimate investigation and not another
whitewash. But an investigation is not an end in itself;
rather, it must be part of broader efforts to ensure
accountability, end this entire travesty of justice and
make peace. In this regard, we thank the 14 members
of the Security Council that tried in the first and
second weeks, through the efforts of our brothers in
the delegation of Kuwait, to endorse the Secretary-
General's call for an independent and transparent
investigation. We all, unfortunately, know the reason
why such an investigation will not take place and why
the statement to the press was not endorsed.

The truth, however, is that Israel does not want
peace. Listen to official Israeli statements, including
the statement made by the Israeli representative in
this Chamber, who will no doubt again attack our
delegation for standing up for our rights and renew
Israel's attempt to shame Security Council members
for daring to call for respect of the Charter and United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
In this regard, it is totally illogical and absurd to reward
Israel's illegal behaviour with support for its brazen
candidacy to the Security Council, a body it has never
respected and constantly mocks, and whose credibility
it undermines. It is audacious for the Israelis to seek to
be a member of a club that they despise and disrespect,
and whose resolutions they refuse to implement.

If Israel had even remotely ever sought peace - as
opposed to using peace talks as a cover for its continued
land grab and de facto annexation schemes - then we
would not be in the dire situation we are in today. If
Israel truly sought peace, we would not be witness to
the brutal murders of young Palestinian boys, such
as Mohammed Ayyoub, age 15, who was savagely
shot in the head and killed by an Israeli soldier while
peacefully protesting with other civilians at the Gaza
border; or the killing of young photojournalist Yaser
Murtaja, age 30, shot while covering the protests,
despite wearing clearly marked press gear, ending
his life and his dream to travel out of Gaza one day, a
dream repeatedly denied by the Israeli blockade; or the
killing of a young deaf Palestinian, Tahrir Mahmoud
Wahba, age 18, who was shot by an Israeli soldier
during the 13 April protests and died this week of his
wounds; or the killing of so many other Palestinians in
recent weeks and the critical conditions of at least 100
persons suffering life-threatening injuries caused by
the deadly weaponry and munitions used against them
by the occupying forces.

Just like the thousands before them, they have been
killed for being Palestinians - for being non-Jews - in
an ongoing campaign of ethnic cleansing, colonization
and dehumanization of the Palestinian people. In this
context, we must refer to a recent declaration by the so-
called Justice Minister of Israel, who stated that "there
is a place to maintain a Jewish majority even at the
price of violation of rights".

On the eve of the seventieth anniversary of the
Nakba, it is a tragic fact that our Nakba continues, with
destructive and malicious crimes being perpetrated
against our people with absolute impunity. Before
the eyes of the world, young innocents are brutally
murdered; the lives of millions of families are destroyed;
our land is stolen and fragmented by Israeli settlements
and a medieval wall; the heart of our country, Jerusalem,
has been seized and isolated, and the sanctity and
historical status of its holy sites violated; our people in
Gaza are inhumanely besieged and blockaded; Israeli
settlers ruthlessly terrorize Palestinian civilians; and
thousands of Palestinians, including 350 children,
62 women and six parliamentarians, continue to be
imprisoned, detained and tortured for rejecting this
illegal occupation and its gross violation of their rights.

All ofthe foregoing is being committed deliberately,
in grave breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention
and in violation of the Charter and resolutions of the
United Nations and all human rights instruments to
which Israel is a signatory and claims to respect, which
amounts to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
And yet, despite all of this, the Palestinian people and
leadership remain committed to the pursuit of a just and
peaceful solution. We also continue to seek, despite all
the obstacles, the genuine resolution and reconciliation
so essential for fulfilling our national aspirations.

That is why President Mahmoud Abbas came
before the Security Council on 20 February, with due
respect for its authority (see S/PV.8183). We have again
made an appeal for our rights and extended our hand
in peace. This peace plan, centred on the established
international terms of reference and parameters for a
peaceful solution, in line with relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative, is a serious attempt to bring the situation
back from the brink.

We are grateful for the support given to this
plan, including by Security Council members and
other States, as well as by the recent League of Arab
States summit - the Jerusalem Summit, held in Saudi
Arabia - and by the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. We appeal today
for efforts to be made to back this plan and mobilize for
its implementation.

But no matter how many times we reaffirm our
commitment to peace, no matter the efforts exerted
over years of negotiations and the historic compromises
made to that end, Israel continues to respond with
aggression and contempt. At every juncture, the
Israeli Government has obstructed peace efforts and
ignored the international community's will, choosing
instead to escalate violence, incitement and hateful
rhetoric against our people, alongside its settlement and
annexation policies, destroying the two-State solution
on the 1967 borders and the potential for peace.

To this, we must say that peace cannot be realized in
the absence of respect for international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and its resolutions; nor can it be
realized absent the fulfilment of the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people, foremost among them the
right to self-determination, a right that no one on this
Earth would willingly forsake. Plans that disregard
those fundamentals will never bring peace.
That is why the United States decision on Jerusalem
and the impending transfer of its embassy, in violation
of Security Council resolutions, have so negatively
impacted the chances for resuming peace talks. As
with other key components, there can be no just and
sustainable solution without Jerusalem. East Jerusalem
remains an integral part of the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967 and is the capital of the State of
Palestine, regardless of the passage of time and of
Israel's measures aimed at forcibly and illegally altering
the city's legal status, character and demographics.

It is therefore extremely regrettable that, instead
of rejecting Israel's illegal actions, a few States
are emboldening its impunity. Recent decisions,
including by Guatemala, mirroring the United States
decision and flouting relevant resolutions - including
resolutions 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), which reaffirms
Jerusalem's status as occupied and calls on all States to
distinguish between Israel and the territory occupied
since 1967 - evoke complicity with Israel's violations
and should be rescinded immediately.

No action taken by Israel or any other State can
negate the applicability of international law to this
situation, including in regard to the prohibition of
acquisition of territory by force. Such actions have
zero legal effect and cannot negate Palestinian rights
or legitimate national aspirations. We stand firmly in
our conviction, and will continue using all peaceful,
diplomatic and legal means to protect our people,
uphold their rights and protect our land.

We reiterate our call on the international
community to also remain resolute in rejecting Israel's
illegal policies and practices. All States must demand a
complete halt to and disassociate themselves from such
violations in order to bring an end to the occupation
and enable the realization of justice and the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including to freedom
and independence.

Moreover, we urge the international community
to maintain its solidarity with and support to the
Palestinian people. Responsible humanitarian action,
including support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), has been a lifeline over the decades.
At this moment of the heightened vulnerability we
are witnessing - particularly these days - in Gaza
and in the light of the unprecedented financial crisis
faced by UNRWA, we appeal for enhanced support to
ensure the Agency's vital humanitarian, development
and protection assistance to our refugees and its crucial
contribution to regional stability.

In closing, we reiterate our call on the Security
Council to act now, in line with its Charter duties,
to de-escalate this dangerous situation, to deter the
occupying Power's crimes, to prevent further loss of
innocent lives and to salvage the prospects for a just
peace before it is too late and the consequences are too
grave - something not unimaginable in the current
international environment.

