Mr. Satoh (Japan): Mr. President, I would like to
express my appreciation to you for your initiative in
arranging today's meeting on this important issue. As
the comprehensive and well-argued second report of
the Secretary-General stresses, it is our urgent common
task to identify ways in which the international system
can be strengthened to help meet the growing needs of
civilians in war, and to act accordingly. Civilians have
become the principal victims of conflicts in recent
decades, and, indeed, it is in this context that we have
to address this task.

This is a very difficult task, of course. But it is
encouraging that the Security Council adopted its first
resolution on this issue a year ago, in response to the
first report of the Secretary-General.

We believe that each of the 14 recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his second report,
which is before us, is crucially important in order to
make tangible progress in coping with this difficult
task. We therefore urge the Security Council to give
those recommendations serious attention in its
consideration of any action to follow up the previous
resolution.

I would like to take this opportunity to underscore
some salient issues before us.

First, ensuring the safe and unimpeded access of
humanitarian personnel to civilian populations in need
is a prerequisite for the provision of meaningful
protection and assistance to civilians affected by
conflict. I would like, therefore, to urge the Security
Council to express a stronger-than-ever determination
to pursue safe access for humanitarian operations using
a combination of the ways suggested by the Secretary-
General in his report.

Secondly, it is of the utmost importance to
strengthen our efforts to ensure more broadly the safety
and security of United Nations personnel, particularly
humanitarian personnel, in the field. In this context, we
are pleased to note that the Trust Fund for Security of
United Nations Staff, to which Japan has contributed
$2 million since 1999, has been used to provide
training to enable such personnel to better protect
themselves in the field. We hope that other Member
States will make contributions to that Fund.

I would also like to point out that the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel contains a provision that could cover United
Nations and associated personnel engaged in
humanitarian operations. I would like to encourage the
Security Council to invoke that provision whenever it
deems it necessary.

Thirdly, the international community must
redouble its efforts to provide appropriate protection
and assistance to refugees and internally displaced
persons. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is playing a
vital role in easing the suffering of refugees in all parts
of the world, and Japan pays high tribute to it for its
efforts. At the same time, however, the international
community must help ease the plight of internally
displaced persons, whose numbers now exceed 20
million. Although the primary responsibility for
protecting internally displaced persons lies with the
authorities of the country in which they live, the
international community must provide appropriate
assistance to those who are suffering.

It is encouraging that the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement are being applied more
frequently, but much greater efforts are needed to
tackle this difficult problem. The importance of
enhancing the operational capacity of the United
Nations system and the need for it to take a more
coordinated approach in addressing the plight of
internally displaced persons cannot be overemphasized
in this context.

Japan has consistently stressed the importance of
focusing on the protection of the life and dignity of
peoples as the international community addresses the
broad spectrum of issues we face, ranging from poverty
and environmental degradation to conflicts, and from
terrorism to infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS.
Needless to say, civilians in armed conflict are the most
vulnerable in the context of human security. I would
therefore like to conclude my statement by assuring
you, Mr. President, that Japan is determined to make
the utmost effort to enhance the level of protection
given to them.

