Mr. Eitel (Germany): First of all, I welcome this
opportunity to have an open debate on the situation in
Liberia in general and on the role of the United Nations
there. We feel that the report of the Secretary-General is
a solid basis for this debate, and we are grateful for that
report. A debate of this kind can give valuable direction
for our further discussions in the Security Council, and
we support any measures, such as this, which increase
transparency.

Germany is extremely concerned at the lack of
progress in the implementation of the Abuja Peace
agreement. The parties in Liberia have fallen several
months behind schedule in meeting their obligations, a
development which is starting to affect seriously the
entire peace process in the country. We are particularly
concerned at the recent outbreak of fighting between
soldiers of General Roosevelt Johnson's wing of the
United Liberation Movement of Liberia for Democracy
(ULIMO-J) and Economic Community of West African
States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) troops, which is a
severe setback to efforts undertaken by the international
community to mediate in the Liberian conflict.

 

We welcome the fact, however, that the factions
represented in the State Council seem determined to adhere
to the Abuja peace Agreement, and we urge them to exert
control over their military forces so that they observe the
cease-fire and in order to bring about the disengagement of
troops, which are focal points of the peace plan and an
important element for progress towards security and
confidence-building in the country.

In this context, we would like to make it very clear
that the cessation of hostilities between the warring factions
and the restoration of security in Liberia is essential to any
measures of reconstruction and development that the
international community might consider to help Liberia and
its people overcome the devastating consequences of the
civil war. We welcome the statement by the Foreign
Minister of Liberia that we have just heard to the effect that
the civil war is practically over.
Germany would like to emphasize the important and
useful role that ECOMOG has been playing in Liberia, and
thanks the troop-contributing countries for their
commitment in Liberia. The wider deployment of
ECOMOG to several other regions of the country will be
an important stabilizing factor for the country as a whole,
despite any initial difficulties that may arise, as in the case
of Tubmanburg.

The work of ECOMOG in Liberia is an important
example of a successful African peace-keeping mission in
which African countries have assumed a great share of
responsibility for the re-establishment of peace and stability
in one of the countries of their continent, and thus for the
stabilization of the region as a whole. Furthermore, the
cooperation between ECOMOG and the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) demonstrates that
cooperation and a division of labour between the United
Nations and regional organizations is a feasible model. In
this context, Germany supports the initiatives by the
Secretary-General to develop coordination and cooperation
with regional organizations.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the
African States can play an important role in conflict
resolution in Africa. Germany therefore also welcomes and
supports the continuing efforts of the OAU and the African
States to strengthen their capacity with regard to preventive
diplomacy, conflict management and peace-keeping.

Despite the difficulties we are presently witnessing in
the Liberian peace process, and of which we have just
heard a pertinent and vivid assessment by the representative
of the United States, the German Government believes
that the parties in the State Council remain committed to
a timely implementation of the Abuja peace plan. We
therefore support the Secretary-General's proposal to
extend the mandate of UNOMIL for another four months.

However, during this period, the political will of the
parties to achieve tangible progress, and practical
evidence of that progress, will have to be monitored very
carefully. If there is no Visible progress soon with regard
to maintaining the cease-fire, the disengagement of troops
and disarmament, we would have difficulties in
supporting a further extension of UNOMIL's mandate.

