I would like to begin by thanking Germany and the Dominican Republic for convening this important high-level open debate on conflict-related sexual violence. I also wish to extend my appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report on this issue (S/2020/487). We will not tolerate any sexual violence in conflict. With that firm belief, Japan has been working closely with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and in partnership with other relevant organizations. First, since 2014, Japan has been providing financial assistance to the work of the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic, Somalia and Iraq, which is mandated to support the investigation, prosecution, legislative reform and capacity-building of judicial and security authorities, in close cooperation with respective Governments, as well as United Nations missions and country teams. Their work in the Central African Republic, for example, resulted in the bringing of 22 cases of conflict-related sexual violence to the criminal court in Bangui in December. Japan will continue to support the Team of Experts to ensure accountability for perpetrators and to bring justice to survivors, both of which are key to preventing and deterring future crimes. Secondly, Japan is committed to addressing the needs of survivors of conflict- related sexual violence and empowering them, which is indispensable to ensuring a people-centred response. In that regard, Japan has provided assistance to United Nations action projects, such as one in Iraq to help children born of rape and their mothers, and another in Somalia that provides mental health and psychosocial services to women victims. Thirdly, Japan contributed €2 million this year to the Global Fund for Survivors of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence. As a Fund board member, Japan will continue to be actively engaged in its effective management. Lastly, Japan contributed $4.5 million to UN-Women to support its coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic response through four regional projects, which include activities to prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based violence. In the midst of this unprecedented human security crisis caused by COVID-19, we must work together to minimize its impact and build back a more resilient and inclusive society where all individuals, in particular the most vulnerable people and those most affected by conflict, are able to live in dignity and are duly protected and empowered. In this landmark year for women's agendas, Japan reaffirms its unwavering commitment to redouble its efforts to end sexual violence in conflict. We look forward to working closely with the United Nations in that joint endeavour.
