Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I wish
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on having convened
this meeting to consider the situation in the Balkan
region. I also wish to address thanks to Mr. Carl Bildt,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Balkans, for his full and informative briefing. I wish to
express to Mr. Solana my Government's appreciation
for the commitment shown by the European Union in
that part of the world and in many other regions in
order to restore peace and stability.

Aware of the specific characteristics of each
country of the region, we think that a joint,
comprehensive and targeted initiative is the way to
move towards the restoration and consolidation of
peace in the Balkan region. Indeed, the problems in the
Balkan region are to a certain extent similar and are
closely linked. Any solution advocated here can
succeed only if we take into consideration the general
environment, and it would run the risk of practical
difficulties of implementation. Geographical unity, the
human component and the common past ofthe Balkans
militate in favour of a comprehensive approach. The
fragile yet stable situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as the passing of the urgency phase in Kosovo,
are positive signs that give hope for the future
prosperity of the entire region.

There are several problems seriously affecting
peace and stability in the region that could be resolved
by taking a joint approach. I refer in particular to the
question of refugees and displaced persons, which,
because of its transnational nature, requires the
cooperation of all the parties concerned.

The same goes for economic matters. We think
that increasing economic contacts between the Balkan
countries is not only a factor for prosperity and
stability, but it is also a way to strengthen confidence
among the peoples of the region. Interregional
cooperation could also be extended in order to combat
illegal activities in the region that imperil the security
and well-being of citizens.

In order to obtain the cooperation of all parties
concerned, we think it is necessary to offer all the
countries in the Balkans a grand plan in a regional
context. That is why we think the Stability Pact for
South-East Europe, proposed by the European Union,
is an opportunity for the Balkan region to promote
peace and security. This is an appropriate framework
that should be implemented promptly so that it can be
manifested in real terms through the promotion of
political and economic reform and the strengthening of
regional security. The adoption of the Charter on good
neighbourly relations, stability, security and
cooperation in South-East Europe, adopted by the
summit of South-East European countries on 12
February 2000, as well as the new regional integration
process, the Adriatic-Ionian initiative, launched
recently in Italy, are actions that attest to the
commitment of the parties to respond positively to the
international community's efforts to restore confidence
to the region.

