Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Mexican presidency for having
organized this open meeting.

I need hardly reiterate the usefulness of these
thematic meetings to discuss substantive matters.
France fully associates itself with the statement made
this morning by Mr. Ioannis Magriotis on behalf of the
European Union. He mentioned, inter alia, the role of
Europe in the area of international peace and security,
in particular in the Balkans and in Afghanistan.

Let me recall that Europe is acquiring a security
and defence policy, proposed jointly by France and
Great Britain - a policy which, it is hoped, will be
able to contribute to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We welcome the fact that appropriate
contacts have already been established between the two
organizations. We believe that they should be expanded
in future.

Before reacting to the statement made by Mr.
Mohamed Ibn Chambas, I should like to make a
general comment on the relationship between the
Security Council and the regional organizations. I
believe that we need to ensure that our cooperation
abides by the principle of complementarity. Each
organization should intervene first and foremost in the
area where it can provide real added value.
Accordingly, I believe that one of the priorities for the
future should be further to increase coordination
between the Security Council and the regional
organizations.

We must interact more, as we are indeed doing
today, and we must inform each other about the work
we are doing. We should not forget, however, that not
all parts of the world are structured in the same way
nor to the same degree with respect to regional
organizations. We in the Security Council must deal
with this lack of uniformity, which means that there is
no single recipe that could be applied everywhere. We
believe that, on the contrary, there should be as many
modes of interaction as there are specific regional
situations. We need to be flexible and inventive.

The most active regional organizations in the
areas that we are dealing with today are in Europe and
in Africa. In Africa, the involvement of heads of State
and Government in resolving regional crises is
absolutely crucial. Mr. Chambas mentioned Cote
d'Ivoire earlier, noting that, with respect to the work
done prior to the Linas Marcoussis agreements, in the
framework of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), and all of the work done
subsequently, we need to pay tribute to the work done
by the President of Ghana in particular in
implementing the Linas Marcoussis agreements. These
agreements have enabled significant progress to be
made, in cooperation with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and his representative, who had a very
important role to play in the implementation of these
agreements.

I wish now to respond specifically to what was
said by Mr. Chambas. France has particular sympathy
for ECOWAS, primarily because that organization is
playing a crucial role in a region that is important to us,
but also because it has followed the same path as ours
did in Europe. ECOWAS was first an economic
organization, before it acquired a political identity,
supplementing it later with a political-military
dimension.

I will not go into the role ECOWAS played in the
1990s in Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and Liberia.
Today, in C6te d'Ivoire, its role - as I said earlier -
is an indispensable element of the international
community's commitment. Here I very much welcome
the fact that this is taking place with full transparency
and in harmony with the United Nations.

The Security Council, on the basis of the Linas
Marcoussis agreements, endorsed the mandate given to
ECOWAS's forces. The work done by ECOWAS is
particularly noteworthy, since it is taking place both in
the area of political mediation, particularly through the
facilitation role played by its Chairman and Executive
Secretary, and in the area of the deployment of
interpositional and peacekeeping forces. I think that
this record attests not only to the maturity of the
organization but also to the West Africans' awareness
of the crises in that part of the continent and the
challenges to regional stability.

I believe that this is a sterling example of what
the relationship between the United Nations and the
regional organizations could be.

In order effectively to face up to the new
challenges to international peace and security, we must
increase our cooperation in several areas. I wish to take
the opportunity of this dialogue with ECOWAS to
suggest two avenues.

First, we believe that it would be in our best
interests to strengthen cooperation between the
regional organizations and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). We have seen that,
in addition to the very valuable advice that can be
provided by the DPKO, African organizations
sometimes have trouble moving from the stage of
sending observers to the stage of deploying
peacekeeping operations. This is due to financial,
logistical and planning requirements. Very often,
before donors' promises are fulfilled, crises on the
ground intensify.

It is important today, therefore, for donors to live
up to their commitments and to pay the money pledged
to ECOWAS at a time when ECOWAS is significantly
stepping up its efforts in Cote d'Ivoire.

The draft resolution on Cote d'Ivoire that is being
drafted in the Security Council is encouraging in this
respect.

Secondly, I think that it might be useful to
increase our cooperation in areas such as the combat
against mercenarism and small arms. This is a core
theme which was, quite wisely, highlighted by the
Guinean presidency last month. I believe that the
problem of mercenarism, which is fuelling and
exacerbating so many conflicts in the world, can be
better overcome through - as is occurring - global
action in the Security Council, which is responsible for
laying down norms and prohibitions, in conjunction
with regional actions aimed at strengthening border
controls.

These are these two avenues that I wanted to
mention.

