Mr. Cannon (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada, like a number of other members of the
international community, is making considerable
sacrifices and mobilizing significant resources in the
pursuit of a more stable and secure Afghanistan. The
ongoing attention of the Security Council is critical to
achieving this objective.

Canada welcomes the most recent report of the
Secretary General on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2009/323). It is a thoughtful report that reflects the
complex realities we - the Afghans and the
international community - confront in promoting
security, good governance and development for all
Afghans. As the report makes clear, the Afghan
Government, the United Nations and the international
community are investing considerable energy and
resources in assist in the holding of truly democratic
elections.

Elections in Afghanistan represent an important
milestone in the country's ongoing democratic
transition. Across the country, the Afghan people are
mobilizing in the millions to organize these elections,
to secure these elections, to campaign in these
elections, and to vote in these elections. These
elections help to meet the aspirations of the Afghan
people to exercise increasing influence over the
decisions that affect their lives.

Canada is proud to be playing a supporting role,
alongside our international partners, in this historic
process. We have committed $35 million over three
years to support Afghanistan's 2009-2010 elections,
including a $25 million contribution to the multidonor
programme on enhancing legal and electoral capacity
for tomorrow (UNDP/ELECT). We are also paying
particular attention to maximizing the participation of
women in the electoral process as voters, candidates
and observers.

Canadian officials in Kabul and Kandahar are
working around the clock to support these efforts. We
have also deployed a technical expert to support the
work of the Independent Election Commission.
Moreover, we hope to deploy election observers as part
of multilateral election observation efforts.

We continue to call on the Afghan Government to
take all necessary measures to ensure the credibility of
the electoral process. In this regard, we welcome
efforts to ensure a level playing field for all candidates.

Canada is also working with the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community to ensure
that these elections take place in the safest environment
possible. In Kandahar, for example, Canadian armed
forces personnel and civilian police are mentoring the
Afghan National Security Forces to provide security
throughout the elections process, and the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) has also indicated
that it stands ready to provide third-line security.

Canada is committed to strengthening the
capacity of the Afghan National Security Forces to
ensure security throughout the elections process and to
promote the rule of law in the future. As the last report
of the Secretary General notes, the security situation
remains extremely challenging, especially in the south
and in Kandahar, which is why one of Canada's key
priorities in Afghanistan is to train, develop and mentor
Afghan security forces. And we are making progress,
as our latest quarterly report to the Canadian
Parliament shows. More and more police officers and
soldiers are being trained, and some units are now
capable of planning, executing and sustaining
operations in Kandahar.

All of us agree that the Afghan National Police
constitutes the first line of defence in protecting
Afghan voters and safeguarding the Afghan electoral
process. It constitutes the most visible face of the
Afghan Government in the country's districts.

In this context, Canada welcomes the Afghan
Government's recent decision to increase the capacity
of Afghan National Police by recruiting up to 15,000
new officers in the most insecure areas of the country.

(spoke in English)

During my last visit to Afghanistan, I had the
privilege of announcing a new Canadian contribution
of $21 million to support the rule of law in
Afghanistan. Of this contribution $20 million supports
the Law and Order Trust Fund to help pay the salaries
of police and correctional officers.

Moreover, Canada has recently announced an
additional contribution of $12 million to the Law and
Order Trust Fund to help pay the salaries of new police
recruits. Canadian civilian and military police officers
will continue to assist in training and mentoring the
Afghan National Police in Kandahar.

Strengthening the rule of law in Afghanistan will
be a long and hard road, and the choices and decisions
that have been made this year are important steps in
this journey. Canada continues to work closely with
our Afghan and international partners to coordinate our
efforts and build the capacity of the Afghan National
Police to provide security to the Afghan population.

The security Afghans seek is akin to the safety we
all have come to expect - the simple ability to move
freely, for children, including girls, to go to school, for
farmers to take their products to market, for families to
visit their relatives in neighbouring villages. This
security also includes being able to campaign in
support of a candidate's platform or to cast a ballot in a
remote district. Canada will continue to support
legitimate Afghan aspirations in this regard.

The Afghan elections are an Afghan undertaking -
elections by the Afghan people for the Afghan people.
We encourage our Afghan friends to elect the leaders
who best represent their values and their vision. And
we encourage Afghanistan's leaders to engage in a fair
and transparent debate. In return, we, Canada, pledge
our continued support and our neutrality.

We continue to look to the United Nations to
reinforce the international community's impartiality in
these elections. I would like to salute the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Kai Eide,
tireless worker in this regard. Under his leadership, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has begun to address critical human
resource, budgetary and other challenges. UNAMA is
clearly stronger this year than last. We commend those
efforts. However, there is more we all can do.

Like Kai Eide, I recently returned from very
constructive meetings in Trieste, which were organized
by Italy under the auspices of the G-8. Nearly 50 States
and international organizations actively participated,
including Afghanistan's neighbours and the United
Nations, again demonstrating the depth of international
resolve on this issue. We spoke specifically in Trieste
on how to support efforts towards better border
management.

Canada has considerable experience on that issue.
We share one of the longest borders in the world with
the United States, nearly 9,000 kilometres long. While
border management will always depend on the regional
context, similar interests of security and prosperity for
Afghanistan, Pakistan and the broader region underpin
our collective interests. We need to continue to be
responsive to Afghan and Pakistani needs. Moreover,
we need to prepare to deliver meaningfully, in a way
that resonates locally. Indeed, Canada's engagement
seeks to do just that.

We continue to learn, adjust and improve the
delivery of our assistance to Afghanistan. That includes
the elaboration of clear time-bound priorities,
benchmarks, targets and indicators to guide our work
nationally and in Kandahar. It also includes a
strengthened civilian presence in Kandahar and a focus
on the humanitarian situation confronting the Afghan
people.

As we deploy those new resources, we view the
role of the United Nations in Kandahar and throughout
the country as fundamental. The United Nations needs
to play the same coordinating and leadership role in the
provinces as it plays in Kabul. Moreover, its regional
presence, which extends our reach and attracts growing
numbers of partners, is critical to our shared success.

We similarly look forward to the results of
UNAMA's efforts to articulate benchmarks. We
encourage ongoing efforts to continue to reduce
UNAMA's vacancy rate, and we warmly welcome
plans to establish a presence for the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in southern
Afghanistan. Taken together, those steps will no doubt
strengthen the United Nations ability to help Afghans
meet their own aspirations for their country.

As I stated earlier, Afghanistan's future is
ultimately in the hands of Afghans, where it should be.
Canada remains committed to supporting the Afghan
people as they continue to move forward.

