Mr. Djinnit: I would like to thank the Security
Council for the opportunity to brief it on the progress
on the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, and on the challenges to it.

I would like to begin by highlighting some of
the progress that has been made in implementing
the Framework during the period under review. On
26 October, as a result of the successful reform of the
governing structures of the Framework initiated by
my Office with the support of the other guarantors,
Angola hosted the seventh Summit of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism in Luanda, the first meeting of
the Mechanism to take place in a signatory country
since the Framework agreement was signed four
years ago. The Summit generated renewed ownership
and commitment by the leaders of the region to the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. I am pleased to report that other countries,
including the Republic of the Congo and Uganda
have offered to host future summits of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism.

The persistent activities of the illegal armed groups
remain one of the main threats to the security of the
populations and to the stability of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. We should
therefore continue to beef up efforts aimed at
neutralizing the illegal armed groups, including the
Forces de'mocratiques de liberation du Rwanda, the
Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and others, building
on the progress made so far by the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the support of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
In that regard, it is important to further strengthen
the cooperation between the two forces. It is equally
important, as stressed in resolution 2348 (2017), that
the Force Intervention Brigade, with the support of
MONUSCO as a whole, enhance its offensive operations
targeting the armed groups.

I welcome the launching on 18 February by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Tanzania
and Uganda of the Joint Follow-up Mechanism to
address the growing threat posed by the ADF. I call
on the participating countries to contribute actively
to that Mechanism and provide it with the necessary
resources to allow it to effectively perform its mission.
Against that background, the recent incursion into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by the elements of
the former Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) rebel group,
previously cantoned in Uganda, was a setback to the
commendable efforts deployed by the leaders of the
region to address that recurrent problem in the east
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, through the
signing of the famous Nairobi Declarations in 2013.

Following that incident, I engaged together with
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Sidikou and authorities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Uganda to encourage an early resumption
of the joint consultations, which we facilitated last
year - as the United Nations, together with the
guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework - between Government officials and ex-
M-23 representatives on the implementation of the
Nairobi Declarations. We shall pursue those efforts.

We have also been assisting the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan to
address the issue of the presence of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition elements in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Similarly, we
will continue to work closely with the other guarantors
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework,
the countries of the region and partners to tackle the
daunting challenge of the repatriation of disarmed
foreign combatants in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and neighbouring countries.

Although relations between countries of the region
have been affected by the activities of illegal armed
groups, which have generated suspicion and mistrust,
the reporting period witnessed promising steps towards
the strengthening of economic cooperation. I encourage
the signatory countries of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework to continue to engage in
joint development projects that contribute to further
enhancing regional integration and stability.

During the reporting period, my office, together
with country teams and the other United Nations
entities in the region, has continued to support efforts
to address the root causes of conflict in the region, in
line with that mandate. In addition to ongoing efforts
to support the empowerment of women in the region,
we are currently promoting initiatives on displacement,
illicit exploitation of natural resources, youth
unemployment and fighting impunity. jointly with the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and other partners.

(spoke in French)

I have continued to support the inter-Burundian
dialogue by being in direct contact with the Facilitator,
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and by encouraging increased
commitment from leaders in the region. In that regard,
the next summit of the Community of East African
States will certainly provide an opportunity for Heads
of State in the region to reiterate their support for the
Facilitator's efforts and to show greater commitment to
Burundian stakeholders in the quest for a consensus-
based solution to the issues the country faces. In close
collaboration with my colleague, Mr. Maman Sidikou,
I will also continue to encourage inter-Congolese
dialogue, which was facilitated by the Conference
episcopale nationale du Congo (CENCO) and led to the
signing of the comprehensive and inclusive political
agreement on 31 December 2016 and to the subsequent
negotiations on the specific arrangements.

I take this opportunity to commend CENCO's
laudable work. When it concluded its mediation on
27 March, CENCO called for the personal involvement
of and accountability from the Head of State, as the
nation's guarantor of the swift implementation of the
31 December 2016 agreement. Since then, President
Joseph Kabila has appointed a Prime Minister.
That appointment was met with opposition from
the Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales
de la Republique de'mocratique du Congo acquises
au changement, headed by Felix Tshisekedi and
Pierre Lumbi.

I call on the parties to strictly implement the
31 December 2016 agreement, in order to create the
conditions for the holding of transparent, inclusive and
peaceful elections, through dialogue and an ongoing
quest for consensus. I implore them to refrain from
engaging in any action that could spark violence.
I reiterate the United Nations readiness to support
and assist the Congolese parties in implementing the
31 December 2016 agreement, in accordance with
resolution 2348 (2017). In that regard, it is important
for the United Nations, the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, as guarantor
of the framework agreement to continue to work
closely and coordinate their actions to facilitate the
implementation of the 31 December 2016 agreement.

I would like to recall that, apart from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola, Kenya and Rwanda will
also hold elections in the coming months. I encourage
all stakeholders in those countries to create conditions
that are conducive to the holding of transparent,
inclusive and peaceful elections.

(spoke in English)

In conclusion, Iwish to commend the leaders and the
people of the Great Lakes region for their monumental
achievements in overcoming the tragedies and conflicts
of the past and for charting the way forward towards
shared peace and prosperity. I encourage them to
pursue their efforts through decisive steps to address
the outstanding issue of the illegal armed groups. I
also encourage the leaders of the region to remain
committed to assisting Burundi, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan to address the persistent crisis in those
countries. In their efforts, the countries of the region
can count on the continued support of the United
Nations, working closely with the African Union and
subregional organizations.

