Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Madam
President, I wish to begin by congratulating you and
your colleagues at the Permanent Mission of Lebanon
on your country's assumption of the Council's
presidency for the month of May, and to thank you for
convening this open debate on the work of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council on terrorism.
I would also like to thank the Ambassadors of Turkey,
Mexico and Austria for their informative briefings on
the activities of their respective Committees.

The United Nations has made considerable
progress both in standard-setting and in the
implementation of counter-terrorism measures. Despite
all these efforts and activities, however, we have
unfortunately witnessed the escalation of terrorist
attacks in many parts of the world. Addressing the
global threat posed by terrorism requires an integrated
and comprehensive approach, taking into account the
variety of underlying causes that may lead to terrorist
acts and violence, as well as other contributing factors
which provide a breeding ground in which terrorist
groups can take hold and operate.

Eliminating terrorism requires that all States
manifest their political will by avoiding double
standards and organizing themselves under the
auspices of the United Nations and in full conformity
with the United Nations Charter, international law,
international human rights and humanitarian law.
Fighting terrorism should not be carried out at the
expense of the principles of the United Nations
Charter, in particular the sanctity of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
States. The application of double standards in dealing
with terrorism and terrorist groups is a matter of grave
concern and seriously undermines the international
community's collective fight against terrorism.
The Islamic Republic of Iran condemns all acts of
terrorism, including those committed by States against
innocent people and those under occupation. As a
victim of terrorism, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
spared no effort to fight this threat and continues to do
so. My country has taken far-reaching measures in
implementing Security Council resolutions on
terrorism, including resolution 1373 (2001). We have
presented six national reports on the measures taken to
implement that resolution. In those reports, we have
elaborated the concrete steps that the Islamic Republic
of Iran has taken to implement the provisions of that
and other relevant resolutions, including the
intensification of border controls and security and
surveillance measures at the points of entry and exit at
border checkpoints. Moreover, we continue to counter
drug trafficking assiduously, given the fact that drug
trafficking has proved to provide important financial
resources for certain terrorist groups in the region. Iran
has shouldered this burden almost single-handed.

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we believe that the
work of the Committee should not have operative
impact on the rights enshrined in internationally
negotiated instruments such as the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological and Toxin
Weapons Convention, as well as the Statute of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.

The Islamic Republic of Iran also believes that
any emphasis on the concept of prohibiting access of
non-State actors to weapons of mass destruction and
nuclear materials should be balanced by the
commitment of Member States to nuclear disarmament,
as this issue is also currently gaining momentum in the
current Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT
taking place here in New York. In this regard, it is
important to emphasize that the fight against nuclear
terrorism should not be carried out as a justification for
the maintenance and operation of nuclear arsenals.

Delegations have been informed of the arrest of
Abdulmalik Rigi, a terrorist and gang leader of the so-
called Jundallah, which has operated over the past few
years along Iran's south-east borders and conducted
armed robberies and terrorist acts in which more than
140 innocent Iranians, including women and children,
have been killed in the most horrific manner and over
260 wounded. There is irrefutable evidence, including
the terrorist's own confession, that he enjoyed
extensive support from certain States that have a
military presence in countries neighbouring ours. This
issue was clearly set forth in the letter sent by the
President of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the
Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that we
should all strengthen our cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. In this regard, I would like to inform
the Council that my country is going to host an
international conference on the fight against terrorism
in September this year. The conference will be in line
with the international efforts in this area, as we believe
that only by adopting a coordinated and comprehensive
approach can the international community's fight
against terrorism yield lasting results.

