Mr. Kabat: I have the honour to brief the Council
today on behalf of the Secretary-General of the World
Meteorological Organization (WMO), the United
Nations system's authoritative voice on weather,
climate and water. The WMO has 192 member States
and territories, with representatives of national
meteorological and hydrological services around
the world.

As already pointed out by my colleague Achim
Steiner, the World Economic Forum, which is taking
place in Davos this week, has just published its annual
Global Risks Report 2019. The report indicates once
again that extreme weather, natural disasters, climate
change and water crises are the top four issues on the
list of existential threats of the global risk landscape.
These show significant interconnections with the
other shocks and impacts to peace and security and
sustainable development.

This survey highlights yet again the critical
importance of the WMO's core business, and early
warnings are at the heart ofthat business: early warnings
to prevent natural hazards from becoming disasters, and
early warnings about our changing climate, which were
issued a full 40 years ago, at the First World Climate
Conference, organized by the WMO in 1979.

Global average greenhouse-gas concentrations of
carbon dioxide reached 405 parts per million in 2017
and are continuing to rise to record levels in 2018-
2019. The last time our Earth experienced a comparable
concentration of carbon dioxide was 3 to 5 million years
ago, when the temperature was about 2 to 3 degrees
warmer and the sea level was 10 to 20 metres higher
than it is now. The WMO's provisional statement on
the state of the climate in 2018 showed that the past
four years have been the warmest on record, with many
high-impact weather events that bear the hallmarks
of climate change. The 20 warmest years on record
have occurred in the past 22 years. The global average
temperature is nearly 1 degree higher than it was in the
pre-industrial era.

On extreme weather threats, 2017 was the most
impactful and costliest Atlantic hurricane season in
observable history, with losses exceeding $282 billion
and significant social economic and gross domestic
product (GDP) impacts on small island developing
States in the Caribbean from major hurricanes such as
Maria, Irma and Harvey. The World Bank estimates
the total damage and losses to Dominica island from
Hurricane Maria at $1.3 billion, or 224 per cent of its
GDP. Approximately 99.7 per cent of the damage done
during the season was due to three of the season's
major hurricanes - Harvey, Irma, and Maria. Another
notable hurricane, Nate, was the worst natural disaster
in Costa Rican history. That season was also one of
only six years on record to feature multiple Category
5 hurricanes.

In August 2018, the south-western Indian state of
Kerala suffered the worst flooding since the 19205,
displacing more than 1.4 million people from their
homes and affecting more than 5.4 million. Large
parts of western Japan experienced destructive
flooding in late June and early July, killing at least
230 people and destroying thousands of homes.
Flooding affected many parts of East Africa in March
and April, including Kenya and Somalia, which had
previously been suffering from severe drought, as well
as Ethiopia and northern and central Tanzania. Of
the 17.7 million internally displaced persons tracked
by the International Organization for Migration,
2.3 million had been displaced due to disasters linked
to weather and climate events as of September 2018.
In Somalia, some 642,000 new internal displacements
were recorded between January and July 2018 by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), with flooding the primary reason
for displacement, followed by drought and conflict.

Research by the WMO and its partners and network
of scientists shows that sea-level rise is accelerating, as
is the melting of polar ice sheets, posing an increasing
existential threat to small island developing States.
The shrinking of Arctic sea ice not only affects the
local environment and indigenous peoples, but also
influences weather patterns in the world's populated
regions. Glacier melt continues unchecked, with short-
term impacts that include increased flooding and a
long-term threat to water supplies for many millions
of people. Ocean heat content is also at record levels,
with far-reaching, lasting consequences for marine life,
coral reefs and food security.
Climate change has a multitude of security impacts:
rolling back the gains made in nutrition and access to
food; heightening the risk of wildfires and exacerbating
air-quality challenges; and increasing the potential for
water conflict, leading to more internal displacement
and migration. It is therefore increasingly regarded as a
national security threat.

Today is the first time in history that the WMO,
as a United Nations agency, has officially briefed
the Security Council in the Chamber on climate and
extreme weather issues. We hope that this will foster
closer collaboration and establish mechanisms for
future briefings between Security Council members
and the United Nations system agencies, including
the WMO, which will make it possible to provide
authoritative information for decision-making and
support the diplomatic business of the Council in areas
appropriate to the understanding and analysis of peace
and security threats.

The WMO is stepping up its support for the
United Nations Operations and Crisis Centre through
a dedicated coordination officer at United Nations
Headquarters to provide expert information and to
assist United Nations leadership in making informed
strategic decisions. This is vital given that extreme
weather and climate events such as floods, drought and
tropical cyclones are undercutting progress towards the
Sustainable Development Goals, as we are repeatedly
seeing, with tragic consequences.

The WMO is committed to providing cutting-edge
science to the United Nations Secretary-General's
Climate Summit in September and to supporting
Member States in evidence-based climate action.
In order to meet the challenges and promote the
international agenda, there is a need for a new political
and investment paradigm to build a new generation
of hydroclimate forecasting and early-warning
services. This should become a component of the
basic infrastructure of a country, comparable to roads
and bridges. We must see this is a must-have, not just
something nice to have.

The WMO is honoured to support Member States
and the Security Council in the provision of top-
quality information on weather-, climate-, water- and
environment-related threats to peace and security. We
thank once again the Dominican Republic presidency
of the Security Council for its Vision in organizing this
debate and for the opportunity to address the Council in
the Chamber this morning.

