Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): It is good to see His
Excellency the Foreign Minister Diop of Mali joining
us in New York once more. We look forward to hearing
from him, given how much is at stake in his country.

The death of a French soldier yesterday is another
stark reminder of how dangerous this environment is,
and I pay tribute to him for his sacrifice.

I also want to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his very clear briefing. And I would like
to welcome him. We really look forward to working
closely with him as he takes up his critical job.

We are encouraged by recent moves in Mali to
implement the terms of the Peace Agreement. As the
French Permanent Representative and others have just
said, the establishment of interim authorities in three
of the five northern regions is a positive step, as is the
launching of some mixed patrols that include northern
groups and the Malian armed forces. It is also welcome
that the National Reconciliation Conference has taken
place, which reflected the healthy cross-section of civil
society in Mali, including women's organizations, youth
groups, non-governmental organizations, business
leaders and former combatants. The United Kingdom
has consistently pushed for better inclusion of women
in the peace process, which, as the representative of
Sweden already pointed out, is a critical driver for
success. It is therefore good that debate was inclusive,
positive and focused on the future of the country.

Nevertheless, I think I should be as frank in public
as we are in private consultations. We remain seriously
concerned about the apparent lack of political will
among the signatories to really implement the Algiers

peace accord. Progress is too slow. It is unpredictable
and it is slender. Now is the opportunity to change that.
It is in that context that the human rights situation
in Mali needs close attention. The Secretary-General's
latest report (S/2017/27l) details consistent human
rights violations, including summary executions and
enforced disappearances by members of the Malian
defence and security forces and the Platform and the
Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad. There
cannot be an excuse for such actions, and perpetrators
of those abuses must be held accountable. Addressing
impunity is an essential component of reconciliation
and of peace. In that regard, I also think that, more
broadly, the link between human rights and peace and
security could not be more clear or stark, as we will be
debating in this Chamber next week.

With regard to security, that continues to be a
significant concern. Despite some improvements,
there is a real danger of reversing previous gains.
The challenges facing the country are numerous and
clear. The secretary General's latest report details the
porous nature of Mali's borders and indicates that both
violent extremist groups and organized criminal gangs
continue to exploit the ungoverned space of the country.

To add to the historic presence of Al-Qaida-
aligned organizations in Mali, there is now a new threat
from Islamic State-affiliated groups along the border
between Mali and the Niger, which is fuelled by the lack
of a State presence. Both the representatives of France
and Italy have already set out the strategic context of
the threat. Should it continue unchecked, the impact on
Mali and the wider region could be grave.

I would like to pay tribute to the ongoing work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
Mali, Mr. Annadif. Both the military and the civilian
components of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
are operating in challenging circumstances. The threat
to United Nations personnel from spoilers intent
on disrupting the peace process continues to grow.
Nevertheless, the staff of MINUSMA and the French
forces of Operation Barkhane continue to do their
utmost for the people of Mali and the region in general.

As others have mentioned, that task is made more
difficult by the continued shortfall of troop numbers
and equipment. It is clear that air cover, reconnaissance
capability and armoured personnel carriers in particular
are urgently required. We therefore call on potential
contributing countries to follow up on the offers
that they made to join the Mission, and we welcome
Senegal's substantial offer of helicopters.

As I said at the beginning of my statement,
political reform is the key to halting the instability.
It is unacceptable that MINUSMA should work hard,
at a great cost in terms of human life and financial
commitment, to maintain a stable environment in which
peace can take root if the parties to the Agreement do
not take advantage of that and deliver on their promises.
Our central message therefore - to be absolutely
clear - is that we urge the Government of Mali and
opposition groups to seize the opportunities, build on
recent progress and press on with implementing the
Peace Agreement. MINUSMA is helping to establish
the conditions for peace, the only people who can make
that peace are the parties themselves.

