The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I would like to join other in thanking Ambassador
Quinlan for his briefing as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and for
his leadership of the Committee.

Iran's long-standing violations of its obligations
with regard to the nuclear programme are irrefutable.
As we heard last month from Director General Amano
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
Iran has not shown a serious willingness to address the
demands of the Agency and the Council on the nuclear
front. The latest report (GOV/2013/27) of the Director
General again shows Iran moving full speed ahead with
its prohibited activities.

Iran has now accumulated a stockpile of over
6,300 kilograms of uranium hexafluoride, enriched to
3.5 per cent, and 182 kilograms enriched to 20 per cent.
Hundreds of advanced centrifuges have been installed
at its facilities. Instead of finding ways to lower tensions
and build confidence, Iran announced plans to build
additional nuclear plants and enrichment facilities. The
Director General now tells us that it is essential and
urgent that Iran engage substantively with the Agency
regarding a possibility military dimension to its nuclear
programme. Yet Iran refuses to respond to the IAEA's
valid requests for further information.

In light of these developments, the Iran
sanctions Committee must carry out its efforts with
increased vigour. The Committee should accelerate
implementation of recommendations made by the Panel
of Experts in its final report (see S/2013/331, annex).
The Committee should also address the steady flow of
Iranian arms, military support, advisors and training
to groups in Syria, Lebanon, Gaza, Yemen, Iraq and
beyond. Just last January, Iran was caught sending
shoulder-launched anti-aircraft missiles, high-grade
explosive and other arms to Yemen. This was more than
just a sanctions violation; it was an aggressive act to
undermine Yemen's transition. The Committee and the
Security Council must take action in response.

Tehran has long supplied weapons to the Al-Assad
Government knowing they would be used to massacre
the Syrian people. Iran is also sending increasingly
sophisticated arms and other material to Hizbullah,
its long-standing partner in terrorism, which has
publicly intervened in Syria's internal conflict, and to
other deadly groups, such as Al-Jaysh Al-Sha'bi. The
Council must tackle with renewed urgency Iranian
military assistance to Hizbullah and other armed
terrorist groups, and should also consider the impact of
Iran's actions on the sovereign rights of other countries,
especially Lebanon.

Iran has also launched ballistic missiles in clear
violation of resolution 1929 (2010). So long as doubts
remain about Iran's nuclear intentions, Iran must comply
with all of its obligations under Council resolutions,
including the unambiguous ban imposed by resolution
1929 (2010) on such missile launches. In short, the
Committee cannot afford business as usual. Iran's
violations must be treated with the gravest concern if
we hope to find durable solutions to conflicts affecting
the Middle East.

As the Council seeks to address Iran's many
violations, the United States remains convinced that
principled diplomacy is the best tool to achieve a
comprehensive and peaceful solution to the challenges
Iran posed to international peace and security. The onus
is on Iran to demonstrate its good faith. After months
of delays, we call on Iran to take serious credible steps
to engage constructively. Until Iran is prepared to
address substantively all aspects of the proposals put
forward by the five permanent members of the Security
Council and Germany, we remain committed to steadily
increasing isolation and pressure. Fully implementing
the sanctions can show Iran the cost of refusing to
uphold its international obligations and illustrate that
another, more constructive path is clearly available to
its leaders.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.35 pm.
