Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council has just unanimously
adopted a new resolution that tightens the international
sanctions regime against the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea (resolution 2270 (2016)). This
resolution resulted from the fact that over the past two
months the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
has undertaken banned military activity in the form
of conducting a nuclear-weapons test and launching
a ballistic missile, thereby raising tensions on the
Korean peninsula and in the region as a whole. The
Russian Federation strongly condemns the violation by
Pyongyang of resolutions of the Security Council.

Today it is important to focus on what happens
after the adoption of the resolution. The set of sanctions
envisioned is quite harsh. However, the document does
leave open the possibility for the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to return to the Six-Party process,
which should be urgently resumed. Sanctions in this
case are not an end in themselves, but rather a means.
By shutting down the financing of nuclear and ballistic-
missile programmes as much as possible, we intend to
ensure a return to the negotiating table to take up all
issues of concern to all the interested parties.

The Russian Federation remains convinced that
there is no alternative to a political and diplomatic
solution to the issue of the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. Russia is very seriously worried
about the negative trends and the way the situation in
North-East Asia has been developing. We are concerned
about attempts to use the actions of Pyongyang as
a justification for military build-up in the region,
including of offensive weapons and the Terminal High
Altitude Area Defence anti-missile system.

The resolution we have adopted today should not
be used to choke off the North Korean economy. In that
regard, we are concerned about the hasty introduction,
even before today's resolution was adopted, ofunilateral
sanctions against the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, which could have very negative humanitarian
consequences for the many millions of inhabitants of
the country, especially those who are most vulnerable.
The international community, and first and foremost
those humanitarian organizations that are providing
assistance and technical support to Pyongyang, should
pay special attention to this aspect.
The events of the past year show that even the most
complex international crisis situations can be resolved
through cooperation and dialogue and when there is
political will by all parties to find mutually acceptable
solutions. We call on all participants of the Six-Party
Talks to resume the talks as soon as possible. Russia is
ready to engage in this kind of cooperation.

