Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): First of all, let me extend to
you, Sir, my congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. We are confident that your presidency will ensure
a successful outcome of the Council's work.

I also wish to thank the President of the Security
Council for the month of September, Ambassador Cabral,
for his substantial contribution to the work of the Council.

This is not the first time that the Polish delegation is
joining other speakers to express our deepest concern at
what is going on in Angola. As on previous occasions, we
wish to make it absolutely clear that we are not satisfied
with the current situation in this country. We continue to
think that the parties to the conflict could and should do
better.

The report of the Secretary-General, for which we are
very grateful and highly appreciative, draws a very clear
picture of the situation in Angola. With the military aspects
of the Lusaka Protocol largely unfulfilled by the UNITA
leadership, the parties in Angola are still far from taking
substantial steps towards political normalization, as
stipulated in the agreements they signed almost two years
ago. I would refrain from referring in detail to all of the
frequent cases of UNITA's non-compliance with its
obligations. But some elements need to be mentioned in
this context because they raise doubts about the intentions
of UNITA with regard to the process of national
reconciliation.

The delayed arrival in Luanda of all UNITA generals
assigned to the Angolan Armed Forces; problems with the
selection of UNITA soldiers for incorporation into these

 

Forces; the high level of desertions from the quartering
areas; and the poor quality of arms handed over to the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) cannot but arouse our concern. It is also regrettable
that the UNITA leader, Mr. Savimbi, refused to accept
the post of Vice-President and failed to attend the recent
summit of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC). In our view such an approach further
undermines confidence, which is already in short supply
in Angola. All of this, aside from exposing the country to
enormous risks, may also lead the international
community to revise its multidimensional involvement in
the peace process in Angola.

By extending in the past the mandate of UNAVEM
III by short increments of time, the Security Council
made it clear over and over again that the patience of the
international community is not inexhaustible. Having
examined the report of the Secretary-General, I cannot but
conclude that these signals continue to be largely ignored.
Having said this, my delegation also wishes to stress that
there are circumstances which, in our opinion, make
further decisive progress in the Angolan peace process
still possible. I am referring in the first place to the
parties' apparent willingness to follow the political path
of resolving the conflict and their intentions to continue
negotiations.

I would also like to refer to the activities of the
SADC countries and their involvement in the Angolan
peace process. We consider them to be a very positive
indication of growing regional engagement in the
promotion of peace and national reconciliation in
countries seized by internal conflicts. I would like to take
this opportunity to welcome the Foreign Ministers of
Zimbabwe, Angola, Botswana and Mozambique and to
tell them how much my delegation appreciates their views
and in-depth analyses of the situation in Angola.

In a matter of hours, the Security Council will
decide on the extension of the UNAVEM. III mandate.
My delegation is inclined to agree with the proposal to
extend the operation's mandate by another two months on
the assumption that the UNITA leadership will
demonstrate its sincerity about the peace process by
fulfilling its long overdue obligations concerning the
military aspects of the Lusaka Protocol.

We remain optimistic. My delegation believes that
the UNITA leadership will not fail to understand the
message we are about to send. We consider this to be
their obligation not only to the international community

 

but also, and above all, to the people of Angola and the
whole region.

