Mr. Kerim (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): Thank you, Sir, for giving me the
opportunity to address the Security Council. At the
same time, I would like to express my appreciation for
the introductory remarks and evaluations made by
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno. Allow me also to
join those who associated themselves with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Belgium on behalf of the presidency of the European
Union.

It is of vital importance for the Republic of
Macedonia, as an immediate neighbour of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, to have a stable and
transparent northern border, including with Kosovo.
The Macedonian Government therefore gives full
support to the efforts and measures undertaken in
Kosovo by the authorities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to consolidate the
situation by building a multi-ethnic society,
strengthening the rule of law and building democratic
institutions, which are prerequisites for the success of
this complex mission of regional importance.

The Republic of Macedonia welcomes the
strengthening of cooperation between UNMIK and the
authorities in Belgrade to address issues of mutual
concern, including conditions for fair participation by
Serbs in the forthcoming Kosovo-wide elections. The
success of the elections, in our view, will be an
important step towards resolving the future status of
Kosovo, taking fully into account the regional aspect of
this issue and its implications for the other countries of
the region. In that context, we consider indispensable
the dialogue among the democratically elected
representatives of Kosovo's self-government, the
Serbian and Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
authorities, and those of Montenegro.

Within the context of today's debate on Kosovo,
allow me to make some comments regarding the
situation in my country, the Republic of Macedonia.
The signing of the Framework Agreement by political
leaders under the auspices of President Trajkovski was
welcomed by the Security Council as a significant step
towards a peaceful outcome of the political and
security crisis. In addition to that, the Secretary-
General, Mr. Annan, in his letter of response to the
Macedonian leadership, underlined the readiness of the
United Nations to offer its full support and assistance
to implement the Framework Agreement in good faith.

In stressing the relevance of these messages, I
would like to draw the attention of the Council to some
aspects of the security dimension of the
implementation of the Framework Agreement that are
directly or indirectly related to the developments in
Kosovo.
The recent activities of UNMIK and KFOR
authorities in Kosovo aimed at strengthening control of
the border and minimizing the number of illegal border
crossings and of incursions by armed extremist groups
are certainly contributing to more efficient control of
infiltration and illegal traffic along the border zone
with Kosovo, as called for in resolution 1345 (2001).
However, for the security component of the Framework
Agreement to be fully effective, it is essential to ensure
a complete cessation of the activities of the ethnic
Albanian insurgency's instigators and supporters from
Kosovo, including members of the Kosovo Protection
Corps (KPC).

We support the lifting of the arms embargo
imposed by resolution 1160 (1998), as mentioned today
in the debate, and we urge UNMIK and KFOR
authorities in Kosovo to undertake the necessary
measures against any possible abuse. In that regard, let
me reiterate the expectations of the President and the
Government of the Republic of Macedonia that
UNMIK and KFOR authorities will stop the infiltration
from Kosovo into the Republic of Macedonia of armed
terrorist groups and logistical support; and that they
will prevent all mobilization activities by former KPC
fighters, as well as their joining the ranks of the
National Liberation Army, as it is called today - or
whatever may be the name of tomorrow's terrorist
organization.

This is also of particular importance for the
success of the operation being conducted by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in Macedonia to
disarm ethnic Albanian armed groups and to ensure
their complete, voluntary disbandment. The
effectiveness of that operation should not be measured
solely by the quantity of arms collected, but also by the
creation of conditions for the cessation of hostilities
and the establishment of a lasting peaceful environment
for the implementation of the Framework Agreement.

In conclusion, let me recall that the Framework
Agreement is based, inter alia, on the principles that
the use of violence in pursuit of political aims is
rejected completely and unconditionally; that there are
no territorial solutions to ethnic issues; and that there
should be closer and more integrated relations with the
Euro-Atlantic community. Those values are common to
the whole region, including Kosovo. That is why we
have to join our efforts in pursuing their
implementation.

