Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by welcoming Mr. Romano Prodi,
Chairman of the African Union-United Nations panel
on modalities for support to African Union (AU)
peacekeeping operations, and to thank him and the
panel members for their efforts in preparing the report
(S/2008/813) that we are considering today in the
context of efforts to invigorate partnership between the
United Nations and the AU, pursuant to Chapter VIII
of the Charter and the Constitutive Act of the African
Union.

There is no doubt that the enormous growth and
evolution of activities related to the maintenance of
international peace and security at the level of the
United Nations and regional organizations, especially
in Africa, highlights the importance of exploring ways
to support regional efforts in that field within a
comprehensive system that functions consistent with
the purposes and principles of the Charter and
contributes to advancing the efforts of regional
organizations to peacefully resolve conflicts in a
geographical context, in cooperation and coordination
with the United Nations, which has the primary
responsibility to respond to conflicts and to maintain
international peace and security.
My delegation therefore followed with interest
the work of the joint panel and carefully studied its

report. We welcome it as a step towards enhancing
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations and towards supporting African
peacekeeping activities, particularly in the light of the
efforts of the AU to build its institutional capacity in
that regard and to enhance its capability to respond to
crises and emergency situations and achieve long-term
stability on our African continent.

It must be noted that the need for peacekeeping
operations is increasing in Africa and that the success
of such operations depends to a large extent on the
availability of resources and equipment, as
demonstrated by the experience of the African Union
Mission in Sudan before it was transformed into a
hybrid mission and of the African Union Mission in
Somalia.

In the light of predictions that a decrease in the
demand for peacekeeping operations in the near future
is unlikely, and until a decrease in the number of
conflicts is achieved through intensified efforts to
improve mediation and conflict prevention, the need
for peacekeeping operations will continue to increase
in the future. That increase would have a negative
impact on United Nations peacekeeping activities, both
in terms of unprecedented and growing budget
requirements that overwhelm the budgets of Member
States and by making countries reluctant to contribute
the required troops at appropriate times to achieve the
objectives of peacekeeping and by hampering their
ability to provide equipment. All of those issues
underline the importance of invigorating the role of
regional organizations, especially by providing
essential financial resources and enhancing their
institutional capacities in peacekeeping.

Here we call upon the United Nations and donor
countries and organizations to support the AU, by
providing necessary financial resources, as called for in
resolution 1809 (2008), addressing the lack of
equipment and insufficient logistical support, and
responding to the specific challenges faced by the AU
due to the complexity of the conflict environment and
the lack of capacities necessary, including financial
capacities, to achieve a rapid response in some cases
and to strengthen peace, stability and development on
the African continent.

All of those goals require joint coordination at
three levels. The first is between the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council; the second is

between the United Nations Secretariat peacekeeping
bodies and their AU counterparts; the third is between
the Peacebuilding Commission and the AU Peace and
Security Council consistent with the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter. Here, and to enhance the
possibility of implementing the report of the joint
panel, I wish to highlight a few points mentioned in the
report's recommendations as the main pillars for
supporting the peacekeeping capacity of the African
Union.

First is the need to enhance and develop the
institutional capacity of the AU, strengthen its ability
to respond to crises and promote a sustainable African
capacity that can help achieve the long-term stability of
the continent and address, consistent with the Charter,
situations that breach peace and security.

Secondly, it is necessary to establish a strategic
and more effective partnership between the Security
Council and the AAU Peace and the Security Council,
on the one hand, and between the United Nations
Secretariat and the AU Commission on the other, in
order to achieve long-term success and ensure a joint
vision of the two organizations on how to address
peacekeeping in Africa by enhancing the ability of the
AU to provide a rapid response and bolster the United
Nations capacity to guarantee sustained operations.

Third is the need to expand and establish joint
working modalities between the United Nations, the
AU and other organizations, in particular in
maintaining international peace and security, based on
the model of the Steering Committee established in that
regard between the European Union and the United
Nations, including the exchange of staff and the
promotion of expertise, capacity-building and other
relevant issues, in particular in the field of logistics and
financing.

Fourth is support for training programmes to
develop African peacekeeping capacities, including
regional training centres in Africa, while keeping in
mind the fact that such centres are fundamental to
building capacities and responding to needs at the
regional and subregional levels, as well as those of
Member States.

In conclusion, Egypt supports the proposal of the
panel to establish two new financial mechanisms, as
stated in the report. I will not go into detail, but I will
affirm Egypt's strong support for those
recommendations. We hope that their implementation
in the medium and long terms will bring about a
decrease in conflicts in Africa and put the continent on
the path towards peace and development.

