The Russian Federation voted in favour of the draft resolution on "Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts", submitted by Indonesia (S/2020/852). In doing so, we were guided by the necessity to maintain the unity and effectiveness of the Security Council when it comes to addressing the pressing challenges posed by terrorism, particularly the activities of foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs). Allow me to express our appreciation to our Indonesian colleagues for their efforts to ensure the added value of a new decision of the Security Council dedicated to the issues of the prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration (PRR) of FTFs and their family members. Although the Security Council, in its resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017), already provided detailed recommendations to Member States on the development of national PRR strategies, we agreed to elaborate on those provisions with a view to ensuring accountability for terrorists and strengthening international cooperation in that regard. Unfortunately, this endeavour did not prove to be as successful as we had hoped. Most important, the present draft resolution (S/2020/852) fails to recognize the primary importance of measures aimed at repatriating FTFs from conflict zones, namely, in Syria and in Iraq. We call on all Member States to enhance efforts aimed at returning their nationals, whether involved in terrorist activities or accompanying terrorists, and to abide by their obligations to bring these individuals to justice. For these purposes, it is absolutely crucial to utilize the existing treaties on mutual legal assistance and extradition more effectively and introduce expedited and simplified procedures for the transfer of terrorists while adhering to the principle "extradite or prosecute" and ensuring the inevitability of punishment. It is worth underlining in this regard that the principle of the inevitability of punishment must be also applied to the family members of FTFs whenever there is sufficient proof of their guilt. Respective penal measures cannot be substituted for by non-custodial rehabilitation and reintegration programmes. All such efforts should be undertaken in prisons. It is true that many States face challenges in obtaining admissible evidence from conflict zones, which may be instrumental in securing convictions that duly reflect the seriousness of offences. The present draft resolution reflects on this issue in general terms. However, we wish to specifically stress several fundamental principles that must be fully observed when States consider the involvement of the military in the process of the collection, sharing and use of evidence. First and foremost, based on the principles of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the authority to collect information and evidence under these exceptional circumstances cannot be delegated to any military personnel in areas of armed conflict. The deployment of a military contingent must be supported by clear legal authorities and regulations. A troop-sending State must receive explicit consent from a troop-receiving State for these purposes. Otherwise, there should be an international legal mandate, namely, on the basis of a Security Council decision. Moreover, the collection of evidence by the military should be in line with national legislation and international law, while the authority to engage in the aforementioned activities should be specifically stated in the mandate provided to them.
