Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for
his briefing. I also thank you, Mr. President, for your
work as Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) and for your exemplary energy and that
of your team on this matter this year. I also thank the
United States of America, Japan and the Republic
of Korea for requesting this meeting following the
announcement of a missile ballistic missile launch by
North Korea.

France, in a statement by President Macron, has
condemned the launch in the strongest terms, and I
would like to once again reiterate, as did our Minister
for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean Yves Le
Drian, the full solidarity of France with Japan and the
Republic of Korea, which are in the front lines in facing
this threat. Allow me to focus on the three main criteria
that guide French policy on this important issue.

The first requirement is the need to be clear-
eyed as the threat before us evolves. Let us make no
mistake. After the intercontinental ballistic launches of
this summer and the nuclear test of an unprecedented
scale on 3 September, the threat has changed in scale
and character. From a regional threat, it has become a
global threat. From a virtual threat, it has become an
immediate threat. In other words, it is of unprecedented
gravity. This threat affects all of us because it weighs
on all of us.

After this latest launch of an intercontinental
ballistic missile yesterday, North Korea has resumed
its irresponsible race towards escalation. This new
provocation reminds us above all how dangerously the
situation has evolved. The methodical progress made
in the fields of nuclear and ballistic capabilities - of
which this launch is a further illustration - has led
to the immediate and global threat to which I have
referred. Through the accumulation of increasingly
offensive provocations, North Korea continues to
threaten regional and international peace and security.

The second requirement that we must prioritize
today is that of firmness. Faced with the regime's
headlong and irresponsible acivities and flouting of its
international obligations, we must now more than ever
act swiftly, in unity and with resolve. We must respond
as one to this attack on peace and security and the
system oflaw on which they are built. Let us be clear that
it is the international nuclear non-proliferation regime
itself that is being tested by the North Korean nuclear
and ballistic programme. Weakness and inaction are
not options.

In that context, our priority is to exert maximum
pressure on the North Korean regime through a
sound combination of two axes of action. The first,
indispensable axis is to strengthen and accelerate the
strict and comprehensive implementation of sanctions
already in place. We still have significant options in
that regard. The activities of the Committee pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), supported by the Panel of
Experts - as reflected in the very enlightening briefing
we received today - are essential in this respect. We
particularly welcome indications of the growing number
of national implementation reports and ongoing work to
make the sanctions stick. We must pursue and intensify
these efforts. We must also remain especially vigilant
against North Korea's ever-changing efforts to evade
sanctions. Faced with its inventiveness, let us be even
more inventive.

But the rapid exacerbation of the threat requires
us to go further still. That is why France favours a
strengthening of sanctions. We know that only strong
sanctions are capable of influencing the North Korean
regime's strategy. France is therefore ready to get
straight to work to that end, alongside all its partners
on the Security Council. The European Union is also
contributing to those efforts. Last month, it adopted
new autonomous measures, beyond the transposition of
United Nations sanctions.

The firm and united response so ardently sought
by France has a twofold objective. First, we must
react to Pyongyang's unjustifiable attitude and avoid
sending any message of impunity for the flagrant
Violation of our decisions. Secondly, as I have said, we
must maximise pressure on the North Korean regime
to meet its obligations and return to reason. In that
context, the third requirement - both logically and
chronologically - is diplomacy, the path to which will
be opened only by firm action. France is convinced that
maximum firmness today, in the form of strengthened
sanctions, is our best leverage for promoting a political
settlement tomorrow. Conversely, anything that could
be seen by the North Korean regime as an expression
of weakness or internal division would encourage it to
pursue its provocations and objectively heighten the
threat of resort to extreme measures.

To put it simply, the supremely firm attitude that
France urges the Security Council to adopt is our best
antidote to the threat of confrontation and war and our
best way to open the path to a political solution, which
we believe must be based on the complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
We do not close the door to dialogue and have never
closed it. It is the North Korean regime that insists,
through its irresponsible and unacceptable attitude, on
rejecting it. So long as North Korea remains deaf to our
demands and continues to underline its threats with one
provocation after another, we will have no choice but
to raise the pressure in response. That is the only way
to bring North Korea back to the negotiating table and
open the path to the necessary political and diplomatic
solution that we seek.

These are France's three complementary priorities
that must guide us: a clear-eyed understanding of the
unprecedented gravity of the threat, maximum firmness
in response, and diplomacy in the service of a political
resolution to the North Korean nuclear crisis. While
our collective security is at stake, and with it the future
of the entire non-proliferation regime that serves as its
backbone, France calls on all stakeholders to take this
demanding journey together.

