Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Special Representative
Keating, Special Representative of the African Union
Commission Chairperson for Somalia Madeira and
Executive-Director Mlambo-Ngcuka for their briefings
this morning. Their remarks and the report of the
Secretary-General(S/2018/800)underlinethesignificant
political progress that has been made in Somalia and
the region during the reporting period. The past few
months have seen positive regional developments
take place at an astonishing pace, mainly driven by
the rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea. The
tripartite summit in Eritrea and last week's high-level
meeting in Djibouti among the Foreign Ministers of
the region hold out the prospect of true change and a
possibility to end the instability that has plagued the
Horn of Africa for far too long.

I will take this opportunity to welcome, as others
have done, our new colleague from Ethiopia, and repeat
how important it is that, we, the Security Council
recognize and acknowledge the historic significance
of the decisions taken, not least by Ethiopia, and the
positive momentum that those decisions have had
for the entire region and how such leadership should
serve as a model for so many other situations that are
frequently on our agenda.

It is imperative, in that light, that Somali actors seize
this opportunity for historic and significant change and
continue the positive trajectory in addressing their own
internal conflicts, not least the aggravated situation

between Somaliland and Puntland. We strongly
welcome the Federal Government's positive agenda and
the high goals that it has set for Somalia.

It is important that a constructive and inclusive
political dialogue continue at all levels, while taking
on the challenging tasks that lie ahead, not least, with
regard to the constitutional review, the strengthening
of federalism and preparing for the 2020-2021 general
elections, which will be the true peace accord for
Somalia. The recent deterioration of relations between
the federal member states and the Federal Government
are of great concern in that regard. We urge all
stakeholders to promptly meet in the National Security
Council to address current grievances through mutually
respectful dialogue. Functioning collaboration between
the Government and the member states is a precondition
for moving forward the Government's ambitious reform
agenda and for Somalia's aspiration towards debt relief
and advancing economic development.

We welcomed the successful outcome of the
Somalia Partnership Forum in July, co-hosted by my
Government, Somalia and the European Union, as it
was an important opportunity to take stock of progress
made and setting subsequent priorities. Active support
from the international community for Somalia's
development remains crucial. We commend the Federal
Government's ambitious and successful economic
reforms. Continued reforms are central for the overall
State-building process in Somalia and for restoring
trust in the Government. It is important that efforts
now be geared towards the implementation of more
demanding reforms.

We also commend the steps taken by the
Government and the federal member states in security
sector reform. The adopted transition plan needs to
be swiftly and successfully implemented. To that end,
strong commitment by Somali actors, as well as by
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), its
troop-contributing countries and other partners, will be
vital. Improved coordination of international support
will also be crucial. We need to acknowledge, however,
that the build-up of security in Somalia will take
time. We must therefore also continue to address the
challenges to AMISOM's efforts, including by ensuring
adequate, predictable and sustainable funding.

We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) to engage
women and its efforts to increase their political
representation. The Executive Director's briefing
shows how gender issues are central to peace and
security in Somalia. The Council needs to stand with
the Federal and state Governments in their efforts
to advance gender equality. Dedicated support for
women's participation is needed, not just regarding
elections, electoral reforms and the constitutional
review process, but also for efforts to advance national
and local reconciliation, prevent violent extremism and
reform the security sector. In that regard, Sweden is
working to create a women's network for mediation in
Somalia. We commend the reporting on gender equality
and women's empowerment in order to better follow up
on those issues. We would welcome the use of gender-
disaggregated data in future reports.

We also welcome the reporting with respect to
climate-related security risks, as there is no doubt
that they have a direct impact on the stability and
security of the country. We look forward to receiving
further information and risk analysis to that end. We
also welcome the resilience and recovery framework
launched by the Government at the Somalia Partnership
Forum, which will help us be proactive instead of
reactive in the face of climate-related threats.

In conclusion, I should like to thank once again
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Michael Keating for his relentless engagement and
valuable work with regard to Somalia's development.
We welcome his reform of UNSOM. and the introduction
of the comprehensive approach to security, which
paved the way for a more effective approach of the
international communities' efforts in Somalia. We are
also highly appreciative of the good cooperation that
we have enjoyed with him and his staff in Somalia and
wish him every success in his next assignment.

