Mr. Karsgaard (Canada) (interpretation from French): As this is my first opportunity to address the
Security Council during the month of April, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your conduct of the
Council's affairs. We are convinced that thanks to your
skilful leadership, the Council will perform its duties in a
fruitful and effective manner. Allow me also to extend my
congratulations to the representative of Botswana,
Ambassador Legwaila, on the way in which he conducted
the deliberations of the Council during the month of March.

(spoke in English)

Canada speaks today under distressing circumstances.
We deeply regret the loss of civilian lives in Lebanon
resulting from the attacks today, and we convey our
heartfelt condolences to those who have suffered in these
tragic events.

Canada joins with others in calling for an immediate
cease-fire. We offer our strong support to those diplomatic
initiatives that are under way in the region and hope that
the parties will come to a negotiated agreement as soon as
possible.

Beyond the terrible human suffering wrought by
today's attacks, we must also look to the state of the
Middle East peace process. Just a few months ago, the
elections in the West Bank and Gaza seemed to augur well
for peace and development in the Middle East.

We were appalled by the recent bomb attacks in Israel.
The task of countries dedicated to peace, Canada included,
has been made even more difficult by the escalation of
hostilities in southern Lebanon and northern Israel. Canada
firmly believes that the peace process is the best way of
resolving the conflict that has gripped the Middle Eastern
region. We call on all parties to resume negotiations
towards a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
settlement.

In supporting the peace process, Canada has always
considered that certain fundamental principles need to be
respected. One of these is Israel's need for security and
well-being. At the same time, we believe that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon is a
central part of the peace process, and we have
continuously upheld that principle. The implementation of
Security Council resolution 425 (1978), which could be
achieved through the peace process, is also crucially
important.

Finally, as a significant troop contributor to United
Nations missions around the world, in which Canadians
have risked, and some have lost, their lives, Canada
deplores the endangering of the Fijian battalion in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). The
safety of peace-keepers is an essential condition to the
United Nations ability to carry out its peace-keeping
responsibilities.

We are pleased that the Security Council was able to
agree on the text adopted this evening. It is important that
all parties cease military activities and come to a
negotiated agreement to bring peace to the region.

