Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank you and your delegation,
Mr. President, for having organized this timely debate
on the Sudan, which is undoubtedly one of the most
sensitive topics on the agenda of the Security Council.
We thank the Secretary-General and former President
Thabo Mbeki for the information they presented to us
today. We also welcome the presence of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, Mr. Ali Ahmed Karti,
and the Secretary General of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement, Mr. Pagan Amum, and thank
them for their statements.

By signing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
in 2005, the Sudanese mapped out the road that would
lead their country to a new stage of stability and
political dialogue. That commitment was only achieved
after more than two decades, the loss of more than
2 million lives and the suffering of hundreds of
thousands of people, who urged their political leaders
to bring the armed conflict to a definitive end.

Today, we are meeting to ensure that this
commitment to dialogue and coexistence continues to be
respected by its signatories. Only weeks away from the
date set for one of the key elements of the Agreement to
be met - the holding of the referendum - the situation
constitutes an immense challenge not only for the Sudan
but also for the international community, which has a
responsibility to facilitate the political process and
avoid a reversal of progress, which would mean nothing
other than a return to violence and war.

The future of the Sudan will depend on the acuity
and effectiveness of the decisions that its leaders will
take in the coming days. Mexico therefore reiterates its
call to them to overcome their gaps in trust and to
conclude as soon as possible solutions to the
outstanding issues of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, including the status of Abyei. The progress
described by President Mbeki is encouraging in this
regard. We reiterate our full support for his work and
that of those directly involved in the negotiations.

At the same time, there is a need to speed up the
preparations for the holding of the referendum in
keeping with the dates agreed by the parties. The
delays observed need to be overcome as soon as
possible, including the release of funds to the
Referendum Commission. The launching of voter
registration efforts, which has already been mentioned,
is a step in the right direction towards a process that
needs to credibly reflect the will of the population of
the south of Sudan.

Without a doubt, the role of the United Nations in
this context is of vital importance. We are pleased to
note that the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) continues to extend its capabilities to provide
assistance in the political process and in logistical
preparations for and security during the voting. At the
same time, while we are fully aware of the physical
limitations of the Mission, we would like to underscore
the importance of the protection of civilians and
unrestricted access for humanitarian assistance.

The objectives of protecting the civilian
population and meeting the needs of thousands of
people, especially women and children, must never be
overlooked for any reason. In this context, we request
UNMIS not to neglect its work in that area. We urge
the parties to remove all restrictions on the freedom of
movement of United Nations missions and
humanitarian organizations present in the country.

At the same time, we reiterate that the
Organization and the international community must be
fully prepared to respond swiftly to any scenario. The
United Nations must be equipped with the appropriate
tools to face any eventuality. Mexico expresses its
readiness to consider any relevant action by the
Security Council over the coming weeks that could
make a contribution in this regard.

Nor should we forget the situation in Darfur,
which is linked to the overall national situation. The
violence there is unacceptable and the security
conditions continue to be cause for concern, which
underlines the urgent need to bring hostilities to an end
and for all parties to the conflict to return to the
negotiating table.
We cannot dodge the need to tackle impunity in
the region. Those who perpetrate crimes against the
civilian population and the personnel of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur must
face appropriate punishment. Mexico would therefore
once again recall the international obligations of the
Government of the Sudan in this respect, including the
provisions contained in resolution 1593 (2005) related
to cooperation with the International Criminal Court.
Peace and justice must go hand in hand if we want to
promote a bright future for the region.

The main message being sent by the Security
Council today through its political statement is simple:
a return to armed conflict is not an option. Given the
difficulties that will crop up over the coming weeks,
we must reiterate our call on the parties to fulfil their
responsibilities as the only option for bringing about
the stability and peace that the people of the Sudan
demanded five years ago and that they are demanding
today with equal determination.

