Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the
Ethiopian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this important meeting with the View to
bringing greater coherence and focus to the issue. I
wish to take this opportunity to commend Ambassador
Aboulatta, Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
to welcome Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Head
of the newly established Office of Counter-Terrorism,
and to thank Mr. Scharia for his briefing.

As others have reminded us, on this very day
16 years ago, in the aftermath of the attacks against the
United States, the Security Council took an important
step in addressing the scourge of terrorism by adopting
resolution 1373 (2001), a text that still represents a
milestone in the international community's efforts in
tackling the terrorist threat. Since then, Member States
have been confronted with new challenges, including the
increasing flows of foreign terrorist fighters travelling
to, or returning from, conflict zones the misuse of the
Internet and social media by terrorists and entities, as
well as the exploitation of trafficking by criminals and
terrorist networks.

In the years since the adoption of this important
resolution, its call on Member States to refrain from
providing any form of support to entities or persons
involved in terrorist acts, as well as its call on Member
States to strengthen their legal and institutional
capabilities to counter terrorism, could not be more
timely or valid. In that framework, we are strongly
committed to contributing to international efforts. In
particular, with respect to the anti-Da'esh coalition,
Italy co-chairs the working group on countering the
financing of terrorism. We are providing the second
contingent of the anti-Da'esh coalition, which provides
daily support to Iraqi authorities by training security
personnel in various fields, such as intelligence, law
enforcement, border patrol and street policing.

Italy recognizes the relevance of the ongoing work of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) - concerning the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities - and
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).
We particularly appreciate efforts of CTED to assist
Member States in achieving the full implementation
of the relevant resolutions. We attribute great value to
the assessment visits of CTED to Member States. They
are vital tools for the identification of, inter alia, gaps,
challenges, good practices and general trends. All of
that knowledge should be made available to the relevant
United Nations bodies and should be instrumental in
prioritizing technical assistance interventions.

We also welcome the initiative undertaken by
CTED to update the 2009 Technical Guide in order to
reflect the requirements set by relevant resolutions of
the Council and provide Member States with a practical
reference tool that helps ensure the consistent analysis
of their implementation efforts. While acknowledging
the key role played by CTED in the counter-terrorism
framework of the United Nations, and in View of the
renewal of its mandate, it is our hope that the Directorate
will be provided with the necessary resources to
continue its important work.

A comprehensive approach to violent extremism
and terrorism is critical. The recent event mentioned by
other colleagues on preventing the use of the Internet
by terrorists, which was hosted by France, Italy and
the United Kingdom on the sidelines of the General
Assembly on 20 Septmber, can provide important
input for the strengthening of cooperation between
Governments and private companies. Italy is playing a
leading role in the fight against terrorism by focusing on
training and countering all forms of financial support
to terrorist groups, as well as through a strong response
to human trafficking, trafficking in cultural property
and illegal financial flows and money-laundering. That
is because terrorism and violent extremism cannot
be defeated through solely military means. We must
also consider and address the underlying forces that
facilitate violent extremism and the spread of messages
of hate. Therefore, we are committed to support any
intiatives that address the root causes of extremism,
focusing on, inter alia, countering radicalization in jails
and supporting youth programmes through the Office
of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth.

In that wider framework, Italy has fully supported
the process undertaken by the General Assembly
to further enhance the existing counter-terrorism
architecture and ensure the balanced implementation of
the four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy through the establishment of the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, which
is headed by Under-Secretary-General Voronkov. We
think that the new body will provide a very important
added value, both in the prevention of, and in the
fight against, violent extremism. It is our hope that
the Counter-Terrorism Office will play a key role in
coordinating the several entities involved in the field of
counter-terrorism by contributing to the identification
of priority areas of intervention, as well as by taking
a proactive approach. At the same time, it should aim
to avoid task duplication and anything that might
significantly impact the mandate of other bodies.

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine) I thank Under-Secretary-
General Vladimir Voronkov and other briefers for their
inputs to today's discussion. We welcome the Under-
Secretary-General and wish him the best in his highly
responsible work.

The past decades have been marked by the spread
of violent extremist ideologies and the emergence of
terrorist groups that are fuelled by them. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida, the Taliban,
Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and other groups have
grown from being regional menaces to global threats
to international peace and security. Over the past
years, Ukraine has also accrued bitter experiences of
countering terrorist threats that have been fuelled by
external support for terrorist groups and organizations
in the east of my country.

The fight against terrorism has now firmly become
a key priority of the United Nations, leading to the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and subsequent
fundamental resolutions, as well as the adoption of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in
2006. That also resulted in the establishment of key
Security Council and General Assembly bodies, such the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
as well as the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force. Although initially they had different mandates,
later development of the counter-terrorism norms of
the United Nations led to an overlap in the activities
of those bodies, as well as competition for resources,
influence and project ownership. Therefore, ensuring
mutually re-enforcing cooperation and avoiding
duplication of effort among United Nations bodies that
work on counter-terrorism-related issues remains an
ongoing challenge for the United Nations.

Ukraine has consistently supported the need
to enhance coherence and leadership of the United
Nations system in dealing with terrorist threats,
including by conducting a reform of the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture. Therefore, the creation
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
is a welcome step in that direction. We expect that it
will mainstream counter-terrorism efforts within the
United Nations system and contribute to the proper
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, as well as to the Secretary-General's
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.

In order to ensure that the stance of the United
Nations regarding countering terrorism remains strong,
we expect the new office to deliver the following: first,
show strategic leadership and commitment to action,
while addressing the conditions conducive to the spread
ofterrorism on the basis ofan all-Organization approach;
secondly, ensure appropriate resources and expertise
to provide policy advice on counter-terrorism and the
prevention of violent extremism; thirdly, strengthen its
strategic policy and programme guidance to Member
States through close cooperation with the relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations
and forums; and, fourthly, enhance collaboration

among all United Nations entities operating in the field
and conduct outreach to civil society actors.

We recognize the central role of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee in overseeing the implementation
of specific counter-terrorism measures established by
the Security Council, monitoring the compliance of
States with their respective obligations and promoting
international cooperation in the field. We would like to
commend the work of CTED, which conducts country
Visits on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
in order to assess the implementation of resolutions
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2178). It also
detects possible gaps in the existing regulations using
a detailed survey tool, identifies the assistance needs
of States and facilitates the delivery of respective aid
by engaging in dialogue with prospective multilateral
and bilateral donors. In particular, we take positive
note of the recent update of the Technical Guide to
assist countries in their implementation efforts. That
work is vital for fostering the development of national
legislation and practices in criminal justice matters,
international cooperation, financial intelligence, border
security and law enforcement.

We have a very good experience of cooperation with
the Executive Directorate, which Visited Ukraine in
2013. I would like to take this opportunity to underline
that we expect CTED to conduct a follow-up mission
to Ukraine in November, based on the CTC-approved
plan of visits for the period of 2014-2017. On our side,
we are keen to provide any necessary assistance in
its preparation.

Let me also touch upon the issue of the upcoming
revision of CTED's mandate. We are pleased that
the CTEC programme of work of duly reflects all
of the new topics identified by the Council in its
recent resolutions. Yesterday, on aviation security
(see S/PV.8057), we discussed international judicial
cooperation, protection of critical infrastructure and
cultural property, countering terrorist narratives and
curbing the weapons supply to terrorists, all of which
are of particular importance to our common efforts.
New challenges may also arise that will require the
Council's close attention.

However, given the drastic expansion of the
mandate of CTED, there is a need to ensure that its
planned activities are performed timely and that
Member States can fully benefit from its expertise.
CTED should therefore be provided with adequate
capacities and resources. In that regard, Ukraine is ready
to provide its own contribution to the improvement of
the functioning of CTED, in particular through the
nomination of qualified experts for professional posts
to the enlarged entity. My delegation stands ready to
engage constructively in the process of the renewal of
the mandate of the Directorate at the end of the year.

