Mr. Prosor (Israel): Ambassador Mehdiyev, I
would like to personally congratulate you on your
presidency of the Security Council this month and to
thank you for convening this very important meeting. I
would also like to express my appreciation to the
Chairs of the counter-terrorism Committees for their
briefings this morning and their continued efforts to
strengthen the United Nations response to terrorism.

We have been discussing the issue of terrorism in
this Chamber for decades, yet States still speak out
about this challenge as if they were discussing a
lightning strike. For too many, terrorism is abstract and
remote until it finally strikes them. Allow me to
assume the role of forecaster. Nearly every State in the
Chamber will be affected by terrorism. And one thing
is clear - the less we do to prevent terrorism today,
the more we will face its deadly consequences
tomorrow.

I would like to lend Israel's support to several
positive developments within the United Nations
system. It happens, sometimes. The Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism indicated in its 2012
work programme that it would update the format of the
preliminary implementation assessments. Any move to
improve the quality of assessments is commendable.
Israel believes that the role of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) in
facilitating technical assistance is especially important.
All opportunities to match donors with recipient States
should be vigorously explored.

In his recent report on the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy (A/66/762), the Secretary-
General identified border control as an issue of critical
concern. Israel agrees wholeheartedly. In that context, I
would like to voice our support for the Council's
presidential statement of 25 April on illicit cross-
border flows (S/PRST/2012/l 6).

The close cooperation between the
Ombudsperson and the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities has
brought about greater transparency and fairness in the
sanctions regime. The improved procedures facilitate
compliance with the regime. Israel appreciates the
Ombudsperson's briefings to States on the activities of
her office in the spirit of transparency and ongoing
dialogue.

Finally, I wish to reiterate Israel's strong support
for resolution 1540 (2004) and the Committee
established to carry out its mandate. The international
community has a clear duty to do whatever it takes to
keep the world's most dangerous weapons out of the
hands of the world's most dangerous terrorists and
regimes.

Israel is proud to share its unique expertise with
others in the global fight against terrorism. We are
closely engaged in capacity-building initiatives with a
number of States and regional organizations in Africa,
South America and Asia. We are also working closely
with the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Our collaborative
efforts span a range of issues, from money-laundering
to terrorist financing and from aviation security to
border protection.

People do not become terrorists in a vacuum.
They are taught to hate and they learn to kill. We see
this clearly in the Middle East today, where State-
sponsored incitement fills schools, mosques and the
media. Across the region, terrorism and martyrdom are
being taught and glorified to the next generation.
The prevalence of incitement around the world
calls for the international community's immediate
action. Countering incitement and radicalization is one
of the most effective counter-terrorism tools at our
disposal. We must promote education that teaches
peace instead of hate, tolerance instead of violence and
mutual understanding instead of martyrdom.

Recent United Nations reports show how far we
have to go on this issue. CTED revealed disturbing
gaps in its recent global survey on the implementation
of resolution 1624 (2005) (see S/2012/16). For
example, it noted that relatively little attention is being
paid to "preventing the subversion of educational,
cultural, and religious institutions by terrorists and
their supporters", as called for in paragraph 3 of that
resolution (5/2012/16, para. 7). States must act to
stamp out institutionalized messages of hate.

The growing nexus between terrorism and
transnational criminal networks presents another acute
challenge. Hezbollah's activities offer one example of
that disturbing trend. That terrorist organization has
established itself as a major player in the global
narcotics market, operating a network that spans from
West Africa to the Middle East to Latin America.
Hezbollah uses its global network to fund its terrorist
activities and to provide the logistical support to carry
them out. It is clear that today a straight line runs from
picturesque fields of opium poppies to the pictures of
bombs exploding in city centres.

The misuse of cyberspace is another area of
growing concern. Increasingly, the web has become a
central hub for spreading incitement and glorifying
terrorism. It is also used for terrorist recruitment,
instruction and financing. States must look for new tools
to prevent such abuse. I would like to take this
opportunity to invite all members of the Security
Council to join us next month in Israel for a major
conference on cybersecurity. It will take place on 6 June
at Tel Aviv University, under the auspices of the Yuval
Ne'eman Workshop for Science, Technology and
Security.

In the midst of technical discussions like this, we
must never forget that each victim of terrorism has a
face and a family, a name and a story. Two months ago,
an Israeli diplomat named Tal Yehoshua Koren left our
Embassy in New Delhi to pick up her children from
school. An Iranian terrorist sped up beside her and
attached a bomb to her car. It exploded, seriously
injuring that innocent mother of two.

That same morning, the same network - and the
same Government - attempted similar attacks on
Israeli diplomats in Bangkok and Tbilisi. Many other
plots by Iranian networks have been foiled, from
Washington to Baku to Bangkok. We also see grave
cause for concern in Syria, where Al-Assad terrorizes
his own people, as he spreads terrorism around the
world.

Each act of terrorism holds the potential for
serious consequences that extend well beyond the
borders of any particular nation. We see that today in
southern Israel, where terrorists from Gaza -
sponsored by Iran - continue to rain down rockets on
1 million Israeli civilians, day in and day out. One
rocket that explodes in the wrong place at the wrong
time could ignite a dangerous escalation in our region.
Yet the Council has not condemned the rocket fire. It
has not uttered a single word. It is time for all in this
Chamber to finally wake up to that dangerous reality. I
have said it before and I will say it again: today's
silence is tomorrow's tragedy.

Terrorism is a changing and growing threat.
Increasingly, terrorists are sponsored, funded and
directed by Governments and working with criminals.
In a world that has never been more connected, those
networks have never had greater opportunities to cause
devastating damage. The international community must
stay one step ahead. The world does not have the
luxury to stand idle. Complacency will breed
catastrophe, and we will all bear the consequences.

History shows us that terrorism can strike anyone
and anywhere. It could be me. It could be anyone here.
It could be our families or our communities. Every
State Member of this Organization should be clear
about its choices. To turn a blind eye to terrorists is to
choose terrorism. Overlooking incitement is choosing
to educate the next generation of terrorists.

For the sake of our children, our nations and our
common future, we must drain the swamps of hate and
lawlessness that spawn terror - and hold all those
accountable who support it.

