We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis- Plasschaert for her briefing. We closely monitor the situation in Iraq. We welcome the Government's intention to hold free, equitable and fair elections on 6 June 2021. We hope that the Iraqi authorities will reach an agreement on the details of the electoral law in the near future. Ensuring consensus among the leading political forces on the matter remains an important part of the process. Demonstrations demanding political and socioeconomic change are ongoing in Iraq. We commend the efforts of Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi aimed at overcoming existing challenges, including the mobilization of resources to find a solution to the economic crisis, countering corruption, conducting administrative reforms, launching national dialogue at all levels and combating the coronavirus disease pandemic. We are convinced that inclusive dialogue will help render it possible to find solutions to the remaining internal problems. In our contacts with all of Iraq's political forces, we have encouraged the search for compromise solutions. Against that backdrop, we urge all external players with interests in stabilizing the domestic situation in Iraq to refrain from taking steps that could negatively impact that process. Countering terrorism is key to stabilizing the situation in the country. Despite Iraq's progress on the counter-terrorist front, the security situation in the country remains fragile. It is vital that all those involved in the fight against terrorism in Iraq remain committed to respecting the sovereignty of the Iraqi State and coordinate their actions with Baghdad. We firmly believe that, if Baghdad and Erbil further improve their relations, Iraq will be better able to strengthen security and effectively harness its economic potential in the interests of the entire nation. We support the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. Its activities can have a positive impact on the reconciliation processes while supporting and respecting Iraq's sovereignty. The efforts of Baghdad and Kuwait City to promptly resolve all outstanding issues in relation to the Iraqi-Kuwaiti file deserve our comprehensive support. Their commitment has been demonstrated by recent progress on both sides regarding the search and repatriation of the remains of Kuwaiti citizens. We reiterate our coherent approach, according to which Iraq must not become an arena for regional confrontation. The country has the right to develop mutually beneficial relations with its neighbours. We commend Baghdad's fundamental position in favour of building good-neighbourly relations and its readiness to promote de-escalation in the region, which was clearly articulated during the Council meeting on the situation in the Persian Gulf region on 20 October (see S/2020/1037). We call on the international community to engage in constructive cooperation in the interest of promoting peace and stability in the entire Middle East region, including on the basis of resolution 598 (1987). We believe that the Russian concept for security in the Persian Gulf, which proposes a collective approach to resolving issues in the region, remains pertinent.
