Mr. Macieira (Portugal): We are grateful to you
for convening this open meeting of the Security
Council to examine the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor, covering the first five months since the
independence of Timor-Leste.

The representative of Denmark has already
spoken on behalf of the European Union and, of
course, of Portugal. I would like to take the opportunity
to add a few words on certain issues of particular
concern to my delegation.

Portugal extends its strong support to the
important efforts and activities of the United Nations
under the engaged leadership of Special Representative
Kamalesh Sharma, assisting the authorities of Timor-
Leste at every level, particularly its emerging
institutions, and ensuring sustained momentum in the
development and strengthening of infrastructures,
public administration, and law enforcement
capabilities.

We welcome the well-structured and balanced
report of the Secretary-General on the three areas
mandated by the Security Council in resolution 1410
(2002). Particularly noteworthy is the focus of the
report on the activities undertaken by the Government
of Timor-Leste in seeking to promote a broad-based
democracy and meet the demands of its citizens by
gradually adopting the necessary legal framework and
institutionalizing the protection of human rights.

These are important developments,
notwithstanding some difficulties still being
experienced in the functioning of Timor-Leste's
judicial system. Some of these difficulties arise from a
lack of crucial financial and human resources for
capacity building. These needs are being addressed
constructively, by order of priority and with the
assistance of the United Nations, in a Government plan
to enhance the justice sector in accordance with the
legitimate options of language and legal system
established under the constitution of Timor-Leste.

Another issue to be highly commended is the
speedy progress on the part of Timor-Leste to ensure
good-neighbourly relations with other States of the
region, with particular emphasis on the relations with
Indonesia.

Timor-Leste has moved quickly towards
becoming a member of international organizations,
such as the World Bank, the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries and the Asian Development Bank.
This is a further illustration of its efforts to overcome
economic difficulties and begin laying foundations for
the future management of its natural resources, that
will allow it to produce sufficient revenue to meet its
developmental needs in the future.

Until the day that Timor-Leste can rely largely on
its own resources, the international community must
stay involved, particularly in the areas identified for
support, such as stability, democracy and justice, as
well as public security, law enforcement, external
security and border control. The downsizing of
UNMISET must, therefore, proceed accordingly and
with extreme caution in order to ensure the
consolidation of results already achieved.

Portugal's commitment to Timor-Leste has been
and will remain central to our foreign and development
aid policies. Our bilateral direct assistance to Timor-
Leste totalled $57 million in 2000, $65 million in 2001
and $23 million this year. On the multilateral front, we
pledged a total of $50 million at the Tokyo Donors
Conference, of which $15 million was disbursed in
2000 and $15 million in April 2002. Another $10
million should be disbursed this year. Last May we
pledged an additional $9 million specifically for budget
deficit support.

The total involvement is far from exclusively
financial. To the contrary, thousands of Portuguese
have taken part in UNMISET, and before that, in
UNTAET - from peacekeepers and civilian peace
observers as the leading troop contributors, to civil
servants and simple volunteers from all walks of life
contributing what they know to help the people of East
Timor help themselves. That commitment of Portugal
will continue.

