Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller for their briefings.

China supports Special Envoy Griffiths in his
efforts to advance the political process in Yemen and
commends the untiring efforts of the United Nations
and the relevant agencies to improve the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. Recently there have been signs that
the situation in Yemen is easing. The United Nations
and countries of the region should seize this opportunity
and further encourage the Yemeni parties to bridge
their differences and strive for an early resumption of
the comprehensive political settlement process.

China welcomes the fact that the Yemeni
Government and the Southern Transitional Council
formally signed the Riyadh agreement recently. We
commend Saudi Arabia and the other countries involved
for the positive role they played in this respect. We hope
that this will serve as a good example of negotiated
solutions achieved through dialogue.

China supports Special Envoy Griffiths in his
preparations for a new round ofpeace talks. The Yemeni
parties should refrain from any action that could lead
to an escalation of tensions and keep the momentum
towards a political solution going.

Since it was concluded nearly a year ago, the
Stockholm Agreement has been instrumental in
improving the situation in Al-Hudaydah and advancing
the political process in Yemen. We also can see that
right now the situation in Al-Hudaydah remains
tense. Nevertheless, the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) and the
Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC) have
overcome all difficulties and eased the situation there.
China appreciates this. It would behove the Yemeni
parties to demonstrate political will, stop violating the
ceasefire agreement and ensure that the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement is fully implemented.

China supports the prisoner-exchange committee
and encourages it to keep up its effective work in
effectively implementing existing agreements. That
will also help the parties have greater confidence in
each other and pave the weight for comprehensive
political negotiations. The Council should remain united
on this matter, firmly support Yemen's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territory integrity and provide
political support for the diplomatic efforts of the United
Nations and countries of the region.

Recently the Ambassadors of the permanent
members of the Council to Yemen held a meeting in
Riyadh with Special Envoy Griffiths and General
Guha, Chair of the RCC, and reiterated their support
for its work. All members of the Council should work
in synergy with the Special Envoy, UNMHA, the RCC
and the countries of the region to contribute to the early
restoration of peace and order in Yemen.

The international community should provide
assistance tailored to improving the living conditions
of the Yemeni people. The Yemeni parties should fully
cooperate with the humanitarian operations of the
United Nations and other relevant agencies. Current
efforts should be focused on easing Yemen's oil
crisis, stabilizing the Yemeni rial and prices, curbing
the cholera epidemic, supporting development and
reconstruction projects and increasing employment.

China has long been working to provide assistance
to the Yemeni people. Recently, through bilateral
channels, we once again provided assistance to Yemen;
in particular, we provided a gift of sporting goods to
Yemeni youth. On 31 October, China and the Yemeni
Government signed an economic and technical
cooperation agreement whereby Yemen will receive
100 million yuan renminbi, or $40 million, worth of
aid to improve Yemen's economic and humanitarian
situation. It is China's consistent position that
development is an effective pathway to peace and
stability in countries in conflict.

China stands ready to carry out further practical
work for the benefit of the Yemeni people, participate
in the economic reconstruction of Yemen, bolster
the Yemeni people's confidence in their future and
contribute constructively to the early achievement of
lasting peace and stability in Yemen.

