Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (Spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank China for having convened
this very important debate at a time when the world
and humankind as a whole are facing the very serious
challenge posed by the threat of abject terrorism.

Egypt has had broad experience in fighting
terrorism since the 1920s, and we therefore reiterate
the importance of adopting a global approach to that
struggle. We must address all the causes of terrorism
and extremism that unleash violence. These causes may
be political, economic, social or ideological, including
Islamophobia, or linked to policies that exacerbate
marginalization, race-based discrimination and ethnic
alienation in certain countries. Another cause is the
ongoing foreign occupation that violates human rights,
annexes territory and tramples upon the dignity of
people living under occupation. Other issues remain
unresolved.
Furthermore, a global approach also encompasses
the fight against all terrorist organizations or groups,
wherever they may be, without distinction and within
the framework of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. We have to bear
in mind that those terrorist groups adopted the same
ideology and approach, based on the use of force and
violence, in order to achieve their ends. Given such
a vision, we have seen the development of the tools
used by terrorist groups to propagate their ideas and
crimes, recruit their affiliates and obtain financing.
Furthermore, those terrorist groups work very quickly
and have an unprecedented ability to manoeuvre,
and, in the future, we will have to concentrate on the
following points.

First, we must make sure that the resolutions and
recommendations adopted at the United Nations are
reflected in concrete measures that will have an impact
on the ground. We also have to implement projects
aimed at strengthening the capabilities in several
countries, while still observing the principle of national
ownership.

Secondly, we have to fight globally against the
messages and ideology of terrorist organizations, in
particular Da'esh, Al-Qaida and all other affiliated
terrorists groups.

Thirdly, we have to fully implement the resolutions
of the Security Council with regard to the financing of
terrorism. We need the political will on the part of the
international community to force countries that finance
and support terrorism to stop such activities and to help
countries strengthen their capabilities, so that they are
able to fulfil their obligations within the framework of
those resolutions.

Fourthly, the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters is one of the most serious dimensions of the
terrorist threat. It is a multifaceted threat and can
be attributed to several causes and is an example of
the problems that we need to resolve. Efforts at the
national level, as well as joint efforts and coordination,
are therefore important. In that connection, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2178 (2014), the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
published several relevant reports, and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) adopted guidelines for combatting the
phenomenon in July 2015. Despite all ofthose efforts, the
most important component remains the implementation
of all of the relevant instruments. That must also be
accompanied by a political will focused on ending the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters in conflict zones and
the adoption of a firm stand against enabling parties.

Fifthly, the international community is trying
to deal with a major problem, while at the same time
stressing the need to respect the principle ofthe freedom
of expression. The Internet and social media have
become some of the most sought-after means used by
terrorist organizations, including Da'esh and Al-Qaida,
for the very purpose of terrorism. The international
community cannot remain indifferent and silent in the
light of that problem, given the differences between
domestic laws and the criteria in other countries.
We must reach a common understanding in order to
confront that dangerous problem, without undermining
the principle of the freedom of expression.

Sixthly, it is important that the United Nations
fulfil the role expected of it in confronting terrorism,
given that the Organization is the framework within
which work in that area is to be undertaken. That role
will be discussed in full detail at the fifth review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I
would like to say that among the most important points
in that the area is the improvement of coordination
among United Nations entities involved in the fight
against terrorism and the coordination between the
United Nations and regional organizations, as well as
efforts agreed upon outside of the framework of United
Nations to share experiences and avoid countervailing
or redundant efforts. That must also be mirrored in the
structure and responsibilities of the Secretariat. It is
also essential to mobilize the necessary resources to
finance capacity-building projects within States aimed
at fighting terrorism and the violent extremism that
leads to terrorism.

Finally, I reiterate that ending terrorism first
requires political will and respect for international law
with a view to achieving effective implementation ofthe
resolutions of the Security Council and the promotion,
coordination and mobilization of the necessary
financial resources. Within that framework, Egypt,
in its functions as Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, is working to achieve tangible results to
the extent possible with regard to all aspects involved
in fighting terrorism. As an example, I will mention
some extremely useful and valuable meetings that were
held to achieve that goal, such as the joint meeting that
was just held and those that will be organized with the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities, and the meeting held in order to obtain
adequate support for implementing technical capacity-
building in the area of counter-terrorism in Iraq.

