Mr. Miyet: I will start my presentation with the
military and security situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The military and security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has seriously
deteriorated since the Security Council was last briefed, on
18 November. A Democratic Republic of the Congo
Government offensive launched from Mbandaka against
territory controlled by the Movement for the Liberation of
the Congo (MLC) in Equateur province has triggered an
MLC counter-attack. On 2 December, MLC forces seized
Basankusu, and fighting in the area appears to be
continuing. The MLC has accused the Government of
bombarding Makanza and Libanda with mortar fire and
launching airborne attacks on Basankusu on 2, 3, 5 and 9
December. The MLC also alleges that the Government has
concentrated a brigade in Lulonga with the aim of
recapturing Basankusu.

At the same time, a group of about 700 Democratic
Republic of the Congo-allied forces composed of
Congolese, Zimbabwean and Namibian troops has been
encircled at Ikela by the rebels and their allies and is
running short of supplies. Agreement has been reached
between the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD)
(Goma) and the Zimbabwean forces that if military
activity aimed at relieving the encirclement ceased and
troops withdrew towards Boende, the RCD (Goma) would
then allow forces present in Ikela to be resupplied with
non-lethal supplies, to be verified by the Joint Military
Commission (JMC). The United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) is working closely with the JMC on the
implementation of this agreement.

Other clashes have taken place in the south-east of
the country, and fears have arisen of a major attack on
Bukavu and Uvira by the so-called negative forces which
are not party to the Ceasefire Agreement. These include
the former Rwandan Government forces and Interahamwe
militia, as well as Burundi extremists.

As far as the deployment of United Nations
personnel is concerned, on 11 December, Mr. Kamel
Morjane of Tunisia, the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, arrived in Kinshasa to assume his functions. Mr.
Morjane met with President Kabila and the Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as with the United States Ambassador to the United
Nations, Mr. Richard Holbrooke, during the latter's visit,
and I am pleased to see him back here among us.

MONUC has currently deployed 62 of the 90
military liaison officers authorized under Security Council
resolution 1258 (1999), of 6 August 1999. In addition to
Kinshasa, the site of the United Nations advance military
headquarters, they are located in the capitals of the
belligerent States, in Addis Ababa and in Bujumbura.

Teams of military liaison officers have also been
deployed in Goma, Kananga and Gbadolite following
visits made to those locations by the technical survey
team tasked with preparing for further deployments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and another
deployment to Kindu is scheduled to take place this week.
However, the RCD has yet to agree to the planned
positioning of another team in Kisangani, insisting that
the Government should first allow more MONUC
deployments in the area they control.

 

Until MONUC is guaranteed the full security and
freedom of movement it needs by both sides, it will not be
able to complete its technical survey of the country or to
station military liaison officers at the rear military
headquarters of the parties, as stipulated by the Council.
Until we have the information we need from the survey and
from the military headquarters of the belligerents, we will
not be in a position fully to assess the conditions of
security, access and freedom of movement and cooperation
on the part of the parties, or to develop a detailed and
comprehensive concept of operations to submit to the
Council, as called for in resolution 1279 (1999).

MONUC has also been assisting the JMC by
deploying some of the regional joint military commissions,
which have now been positioned in Lisala, Boende and
Kabinda. Another team is scheduled to be placed in Kabalo.
The regional joint military commissions are accompanied
by teams of military observers of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU).

In order to complete its survey of the country and the
deployment of the remaining military liaison officers,
MONUC - together with the JMC - has drawn up a
jointly agreed list of locations that includes the rear military
headquarters of the parties, as stipulated in resolution 1258
(1999). The JMC, in accordance with the role established
for it in the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, will be
responsible, in conjunction with MONUC, for obtaining the
consent of the parties for these deployments.

(spoke in French)

I would now like to take up the conclusions of the
meeting of the Joint Military Commission.

At its third session, which was held during the first
week of December at Harare, the JMC took up the reports
of four working groups - on the disengagement of forces,
humanitarian assistance, disarmament and the withdrawal of
forces from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
JMC also agreed that the Zambian Government would have
the task of leading a mediation group comprised of
representatives from MONUC, the OAU, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the RCD (Goma) to broker an
agreement on the disengagement of forces around Ikela, as
I previously indicated.

The next meeting of the JMC is scheduled to take
place on 20 January 2000. In the meantime, the MONUC
JMC support team will participate and assist in the
establishment of a 24-hour JMC secretariat and operations
room in Lusaka.

On 15 December 1999, the Secretary-General of the
OAU, Mr. Salim Salim, announced that the
representatives of the Government of Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the three rebel groups,
meeting in Addis Ababa, had agreed that the former
President of the Republic of Botswana, Sir Ketumile
Masire, should assume to role of the neutral facilitator for
the inter-Congolese political negotiations. Mr. Salim said
he would consult with the President of Botswana,
Mr. Festus Mogae, and with Sir Ketumile, and that he
remained confident that with this nomination it would be
possible to meet the challenges confronting the country.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, heavy
rains have caused numerous flooding problems in
Kinshasa over the past two weeks. Twenty thousand
persons are currently without shelter. A crisis committee
headed by the Minister of Health is addressing immediate
humanitarian needs. The threat of possible cholera
outbreaks is currently being monitored by local
authorities.

This situation has also resulted in food shortages in
urban areas. The prices of some food staples have risen
by more than 25 per cent in recent weeks. This has been
made considerably worse by Government-imposed
currency exchange controls, which have impeded imports,
particularly the import of foodstuffs. In addition, the
supply of foodstuffs has also been seriously affected in
recent weeks by rebel activity in food-producing areas, a
situation that has been compounded by the start of the
rainy season. Humanitarian agencies themselves are
currently having difficulties, particularly as a result of the
effect of the currency control regime on their operating
costs.

There has been in increase in the level of chronic
malnutrition in the districts of Bas-Congo, in the west of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
among children under the age of five years. The World
Food Programme has announced that while access to war-
affected populations has improved, humanitarian agencies
still have difficulty in reaching the interior of the country.
It has also stated that unless new funds are made
available immediately, 350,000 people already living
under very precarious conditions will have to struggle
even more to survive.

 

With regard to the next stages, in resolution 1279
(1999) the Security Council requested the Secretary-General
to report to it as soon as possible on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to submit his
recommendations on further deployment of United Nations
personnel in the country and on their protection. The
Council also requested the Secretary-General to take the
administrative steps necessary for the equipping of up to
500 United Nations military observers, with a view to
facilitating future rapid United Nations deployments as
authorized by the Council.

In view of the difficulties we have faced - as I have
said here - in gathering the necessary information to
present a concept of operations, we are not at this point in
a position to submit recommendations to the Security
Council. We intend to submit a further report on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in mid-
January, which, we anticipate, will contain options and
recommendations based on the situation as at that time.

Let me remind members that thanks to the resolution
adopted by the Security Council, the necessary
administrative measures have already been taken to
facilitate the future equipping of these 500 military
observers.

In the meantime, action must be taken to check and
reverse the degradation of the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Naturally, it is the parties
themselves who bear the primary responsibility for taking
this action. The recent agreement on the nomination of Sir
Ketumile Masire of Botswana is to be welcomed. An early
start to the national dialogue would be an important step
towards the resolution of the conflict.

The Government and the parties should also reaffirm
their full cooperation with MON UC in its efforts to
implement the resolutions adopted by the Security Council.
In this context, we believe that very strict adherence to the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement is essential.

The success of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic in supporting the stability of the
Central African Republic has given us a clear and positive
indication of the role the United Nations can play in the
creation and maintenance of conditions of security and
stability in that country. It is our hope that action by the
United Nations can have the same positive effect in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and thus contribute to
a general improvement in regional stability and cooperation.

