The President (interpretation from Spanish): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of December, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Qin
Huasun, Permanent Representative of China to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security Council
for the month of November 1997. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Qin for the great diplomatic
skill with which he conducted the Council's business last
month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

Letter dated 22 November 1997 from the Executive
Chairman of the Special Commission established
by the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 9
(b) (i) of Security Council resolution 687 (1991)
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1997/922)

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1997/922, which contains the text of a letter dated 22
November 1997 from the Executive Chairman of the
Special Commission established by the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 9 (b) (i) of Security Council
resolution 687 (1991) addressed to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting the report of the United
Nations Special Commission, established by the Secretary-
General pursuant to paragraph 9 (b) (i) of Security Council
resolution 687 (1991), on its emergency session.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council endorses the conclusions
and recommendations of the report of the emergency
session of the Special Commission (UNSCOM)
(S/1997/922) aimed at full and expeditious
implementation of the relevant resolutions and at
increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of
UNSCOM. work to this end.

"The Security Council reiterates its demand that
Iraq fulfil all its obligations as set out in all the
relevant resolutions, including resolution 1137
(1997), and cooperate fully with UNSCOM. and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
implementing their respective mandates. The Council
stresses that the effectiveness and speed with which
UNSCOM. may accomplish its responsibilities is,
above all, determined by the degree to which the
Government of Iraq cooperates in disclosing the full
extent and disposition of its proscribed programmes
and in granting UNSCOM. unimpeded access to all
sites, documents, records and individuals. The
Council acknowledges the conclusion of the
UNSCOM. report that UN SCOM. respects the
legitimate national security, sovereignty and dignity
concerns of Iraq in the context of the need for full
application of the mandate given to it by the
Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the progress
achieved by UNSCOM. and the IAEA in various
disarmament areas. The Council encourages
intensified efforts, in line with the conclusions and
recommendations of the emergency session of
UNSCOM, in order to implement fully the
UNSCOM. and IAEA mandates in each of their
respective disarmament areas. The Council
acknowledges that, as Iraq complies with its
obligations under the relevant resolutions, and
UNSCOM. and the IAEA so report and the Council
agrees, UNSCOM. and the IAEA would make the
transition from investigation to monitoring in their
respective areas, expanding the use of the ongoing
monitoring system functioning in Iraq.

"The Security Council urges Member States to
respond positively to the requests contained in the
report of the emergency session of UNSCOM, in
particular related to the provision of additional
personnel, equipment and information required by
UNSCOM. and the IAEA for more efficient and
effective implementation of their respective
mandates.
 

"The Security Council will remain seized ol' the
matter and will consider whether additional action
may be necessary,"

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/54.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.50 pm.

