Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. Your friendly and brotherly country, the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, plays a leading role in
building peace at the regional and international levels.
That means that we expect a great deal from you, Sir,
in your capacity as President of the Security Council.
I would like, through you, Sir, also congratulate the
other new members of the Council - Chad, brotherly
Nigeria, Chile and Lithuania, with whom we have a
great many ties. I would be remiss ifI did not thank
Mr. Herve' Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing, even though
we do not share all of his positions on all matters.

Among the main elements of the report that was
submitted for the Council's consideration (S/20l4/26),
paragraph 2 states that progress towards the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur has been made. How has it made progress? That
is the starting point of an assessment of the situation
in Darfur. Even though we recognize that, during the
period covered by the report, tribal clashes have taken
place, leading to very difficult humanitarian conditions
in a number of cases, tribal clashes are as ancient as
Darfur itself. Nature certainly plays a leading role in
those clashes and confrontations, which often take place
as a result of competition for natural resources - water,
pasture land and, recently, local gold mines. The clashes
are thus ancient ones.

The Government of the Sudan has undertaken a
great many initiatives aimed at reconciliation, which
have led to reconciliation agreements between the
various tribes, such as those that took place between
the Aballa and the Beni Hussein, between the Salamat
and the Misseriya, between the Ma'alia and the
Rezeigat, and between the Rezeigat and the Hamar.
The Government continues to attempt put an end to the
clashes and confrontations between the various tribes
in Darfur.

That having been said, the Council should not
forget that the implementation of the Doha Document
has made progress and continues along the agreed path,
despite, naturally, certain delays in a number of areas.
There are indeed some delays, but there are reasons for
that.

First, the loss of oil resources has had a great impact
on the Sudan, following South Sudan's independence.
Members of the Council should know that the loss of
those resources has had an impact on the economic
situation of the Sudan.
Secondly, the slow pace of the implementation of
the commitments undertaken by the various donors
during the Doha Conference is also a cause of delay.
That leads us to launch an international appeal from
this Chamber to ensure that commitments with respect
the Sudan be met and that sanctions be lifted in order
for the Government to be in a position to continue
its operations aimed at peace, development and
reconstruction in Darfur.

In that respect, I would also like to state that delays
in a number of areas of work also result partially from
the fact that a number of groups that had joined the
peace process have been targeted. Members of the
Council will recall that Mr. Mohammed Bashar and a
number of other leaders who hadjoined the Doha peace
process were killed last year, thus causing additional
delay in the implementation of the Doha Document.
Despite all of that, the Government is committed to
continuing the peace process.

In his statement, Mr. Ladsous referred to the
importance of arresting and bringing to justice those
who recently attacked the African Union/United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
However, pursuant to paragraph 4 of the report of the
Secretary-General, the Office ofthe Special Prosecutor
for Darfur - an office set up pursuant to the Doha
Document - has initiated a number of inquiries and
investigations into those incidents, including the most
recent attack, on 7 January, in the region of Gereida.
That is in addition to other existing inquiries. We had
already informed the Security Council of the rulings
of the Special Criminal Court on the Events in Darfur,
which included the imposition of the death penalty in
the case of the incident related to Abu Zerega, which
was referred to the penultimate report of the Secretary-
General (S/2013/607), together with 56 other inquiries
under way.

I would also like to report that the Sudanese
Government has invited the African Union (AU),
in cooperation with UNAMID, to have the AU send
experts to witness that judicial proceedings are in
line with international standards. That reaffirms the
effectiveness of Sudanese institutions, their impartiality
and their effective operational ability.

When it comes to the implementation of the
Darfur Development Strategy, in conformity with
paragraph 6 of report of the Secretary-General, a
number of commercial agreements were reached
between local contractors and the Darfur Regional
Authority to implement 315 projects of an overall
value of $82.5 million, in cooperation with the country
team, involving the construction or rehabilitation of
education, electricity, health-care and water services.

Members of the Council know that the
Implementation Follow-up Commission on the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur meets regularly, the
last meeting having taken place on 16 December in El
Fasher.

As to the political issues, we welcome the role
played by Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, African Union
and United Nations Joint Special Representative and
Joint Chief Mediator for Darfur, in bringing in those
movements that reject peace and the Doha Document.
What remains lacking in that regard is action by the
Security Council. I would like to refer in that respect
to Chad, a brotherly country, and the initiative of its
President, Mr. Idriss Deby Itno, aimed at gathering
various rebel groups in Um Jaras to ensure that the
movements join the peace process. What is lacking,
therefore, is the role to be played by the Security
Council.

Mr. Ladsous said quite clearly that the rebel groups
in Darfur were clashing even outside the borders of the
Sudan, including in a brotherly country where we would
prefer to see peace and stability prevail, namely, South
Sudan. As Mr. Ladsous said, those Darfur factions are
parties to the conflict in South Sudan. We had already
reiterated to the Council that dealing with those groups
in a flexible way - cutting them slack, as the saying
goes - gave them the impression, in fact, that they had
the green light to participate in clashes and conflict
beyond Darfur, including in the south of Kordofan and
in the north and east of Kordofan, at the very heart of
the Sudan.

The Security Council has heard the various
briefings, but it has not played the role it has been
assigned, namely, to exert the necessary pressure on
those groups and to support the efforts of Joint Special
Representative Chambas.

Mohamed Ibn Chambas was invited to Arusha and
held a technical workshop in Addis Ababa, as noted
by Mr. Ladsous, in which he invited the various rebel
groups to participate. However, those groups chose the
path of armed confrontation. The Security Council
must therefore exert pressure on those groups to join
the political process, sign the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur, end their procrastination and renounce all The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
of their impossible preconditions so that everyone can names inscribed on the list of speakers. 1 now invite
work together for the development, reconstruction and Council members to informal consultations to continue
revitalization of the Sudan. our discussion of the subject.

The meeting ruse ax 10.40 am.
