Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Representative Tanin and his team
for his statement and for their continued commitment to
Kosovo's development, as laid out in the comprehensive
report (S/2019/797) on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I would also like to thank Deputy Prime
Minister Ivica Daeic' and Ambassador Vlora Citaku for
their interventions this afternoon.

WewelcomethefocusinthereportontheGovernment
of Kosovo's commitment to respecting human rights,
ensuring equal access for minority communities,
improving transparency and strengthening the rule of
law. We take note of the progress made in this reporting
period, including the reopening of the Special Chamber
of the Supreme Court, efforts to standardize judicial
practice across Kosovo, progress in the prosecution
of war crimes, the return of displaced persons and the
identification of missing persons, the adoption of child
protection legislation and the first report on respect for
human rights.

There is still more to do, however. We urge Kosovo
to redouble its efforts to address the high levels of
corruption and organized crime and to work to strengthen
its judicial system. We welcome the important work of
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo to that end. As regards the fight against
crime, we agree that it is legitimate and necessary for
the Kosovan police to operate across Kosovo, including
in the northern municipalities, in accordance with
the law. The Council should welcome the arrests of
individuals suspected of involvement in smuggling or
organized crime, whether Kosovo Albanian or Kosovo
Serb, as was the case during the recent Kosovo police
operation. However, noting the concern expressed by the
Special Representative about the arrest of two UNMIK
officials during this operation, it is also important that
international personnel carrying out their duties should
be treated in accordance with international law, just
as they must adhere to their missions' mandates and
codes of conduct. I welcomed Mr. Tanin's briefing this
afternoon on the outcome of UNMIK's internal View of
the incident. We will consider those findings carefully.

We welcome the progress made by the Kosovo
Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor's
Office over the past few months. We urge Pristina,
Belgrade and the members of the Council to cooperate
fully in the interest of achieving justice for victims, and
we call on both Pristina and Belgrade to press ahead
with domestic prosecutions for historic crimes. The
interests of all victims and their families must be at the
centre ofjudicial proceedings, efforts to locate missing
persons and the provision of support to survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence, regardless of their
ethnicity. We particularly welcome the joint declaration
of representatives of religious groups in Kosovo in
support of survivors of sexual violence. The United
Kingdom is committed to supporting victims and
preventing sexual violence in all its forms as shown
during Her Royal Highness the Countess of Wessex's
recent visit to Pristina, during which she focused on
support for survivors from all communities.

With regard to the Kosovo elections on 6 October,
we echo the statement of the European Union Election
Observation Mission. The elections were calm and well
administered, and the Central Election Commission
worked with dedication, professionalism and
transparency, although we continue to be concerned
about reports of pre-election intimidation in some
Kosovo-Serb areas. We have been following the reports
of staff suffering ill health at the national counting centre
and await the outcome of the investigation. We must not
allow this incident to sow suspicion and distrust.

Kosovo has voted for change. We call on the
party leaders to work diligently to form a new, stable
Government to tackle the pressing issues facing
the country. The United Kingdom expects the new
Government to uphold and strengthen the rule of law,
improve inclusivity in a multi-ethnic State and commit
to strengthening regional security. Dialogue with
Belgrade must be a priority. We call on both Belgrade
and Pristina to remove obstacles to its resumption.
Pristina must remove tariffs and Belgrade must stop
its de-recognition campaign. For dialogue to succeed,
both sides must refrain from provocative rhetoric and
actions. We welcome Kosovo's completion of two
more common crossing points, but we regret that the
implementation of many other aspects of the Brussels
Agreement remains unaddressed by both parties. The
people of Serbia and Kosovo have much to gain from a
resumption of talks and a comprehensive, sustainable,
implementable deal to their mutual and lasting benefit.

The twentieth anniversary of the NATO intervention
fell during this reporting period. It was an important
moment for reflection. We remember the victims on
all sides of this conflict and remind ourselves of the
reasons for the intervention. We renew our commitment
to building good-neighbourly relations so that peace
can be safeguarded for future generations. The Kosovo
of today is almost unrecognizable from the Kosovo that
the media reported on across the world in 1999. We
thank the members of the Security Council, the staff of
UNMIK, the European Union, NATO, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo
Force, the Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo, and
most importantly the Government and institutions of
Kosovo for their ongoing pursuit of Kosovo's progress
and developments.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom pays tribute to
the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and his team, and we look forward to continuing
to support them in their endeavours.

