Ms. Tornaes (Denmark): On behalf of the
Government of Denmark, I would like to commend the
African Union, as well as the Sudanese parties, for
their efforts and diligence in working towards a peace
agreement. The seventh round of Abuja talks lasted
more than five months. The commitment shown by
African leaders, as well as other international partners
and observers, deserves our recognition and sincere
thanks.

In particular, I would like to acknowledge the
leaders of the Government of National Unity and the
faction of the Sudan Liberation Movement represented
by Mr. Minni Minawi. Both parties have shown
leadership and courage by accepting the necessary
compromises and signing the Darfur peace agreement.

The remaining leaders of the movements - those
who have yet to accept the agreement - must be made
aware that by hesitating they fail their own people,
who most of all want to see peace and security for
themselves and for future generations. It is our hope
that strong international support for the implementation
of the Darfur peace agreement will show that those
who choose to stay outside the agreement will also
have denied themselves influence over the future of
Darfur. There is still room, but not a lot of time, for the
leaders of the two remaining movements - the Justice
and Equality Movement and the other faction of the
SLM- to join the agreement that has now been
achieved.

As a member of the Security Council, Denmark
has consistently supported the position that all
measures, including sanctions, should be put to use as
and when appropriate. It is crucial that we
encourage- and if necessary apply - pressure on
those parties or individuals who stand in the way of
peace. We continue to support that approach in order to
achieve a lasting peace in Darfur and in the Sudan as a
whole.

Denmark is committed to supporting the
implementation of the Darfur peace agreement. The
signing in Abuja was only a first step, but a very
crucial one. The agreement calls for a Darfur-Darfur
dialogue as well as post-conflict reconstruction; both
will need continued support from the international
community.

Denmark has, from the outset of this crisis,
provided substantial support for humanitarian activities
in Darfur. Yesterday, I set aside further means, and we
will closely monitor the situation in the coming
months. I strongly urge the international donor
community to provide immediate support for the
humanitarian efforts in Darfur.

Today's meeting takes place on a positive note.
However, we remain deeply concerned over the
continued fighting and violence in Darfur. No one
should forget the dire situation that, at this very
moment, continues to face many thousands of people in
Darfur. Improved security and better access for
humanitarian workers are imperatives. All restrictions
on the work of humanitarian organizations must be
lifted immediately. Leaders who fail their own
populations in that regard are, in effect, neglecting
their core responsibilities.

Access to people in need is critically dependent
on the security situation on the ground. The African
Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) has done a
commendable job under very difficult circumstances.
We continue to recognize its important role, while we
also believe that it is essential to secure a transition
from AMIS to a United Nations operation as quickly as
possible.

Denmark strongly encourages the Sudanese
Government to agree to allow the United Nations
planning team to visit Darfur. That is crucial not only
in order to prepare for a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, but also to ensure that AMIS receives all the
support needed during the transition period. Together
with our partners, we stand ready to provide support
during this process.

I would like to close by expressing, on behalf of
the Government of Denmark, our recognition and
thanks to the African Union and its leadership for
showing unwavering support and consistent
engagement in fostering an agreement in Abuja. The
leadership we have seen, and the readiness to apply
pressure on peers when needed, have generated
international respect. That will undoubtedly serve as an
indispensable foundation for an increasing role by the
African Union in conflict resolution on the African
continent.

