Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, allow me to warmly thank the Secretariat, in
particular the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), for having made possible the Security
Council's mission to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Angola from 11 to 14 November. I would
also like to thank the Senegalese presidency. We would
like to continue working with the Secretariat to learn
all that we can from that important mission. I also
sincerely thank Angola for the solid partnership we
forged as we travelled from Kinshasa to Beni and then
to Luanda. I will focus my remarks on our Visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Security Council visited that country in order
to have discussions with national stakeholders about the
country's current political situation, given the recent
unrest caused by the delay in the electoral process,
as well as about the security challenges related, in
particular to protecting civilians and combating armed
groups in the east of the country. As I mentioned, the
Council Visited Kinshasa and Beni, in North Kivu.
In Kinshasa, the Security Council met with a wide
range of actors. In particular, the Council met with the
President, the Prime Minister, representatives of the
presidential majority, the opposition that signed the
18 October agreement and those that did not sign it. We
were also able to meet with the National Conference of
Catholic Bishops (CENCO), representatives of human
rights organizations, youth associations and women's
associations. We also had a very useful exchange with
the leadership of MONUSCO. In Beni, the Council
was able to meet with the different representatives of
MONUSCO, the Governors ofNorth and South Kivu as
well as the Mayor of Beni and the commanders of the
Forces arme'es de la Republique democratique du Congo.
The Council also met with representatives of local
populations who were victims of the recent atrocities.

To try to draw with the main lessons of the mission,
the mission made it possible for the Security Council to
convey two messages. The first message was that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is at a turning point
in its history: for the first time, a peaceful transition
of power following President Kabila's term is possible.
This in itself is reason for hope, but to achieve it all
the political forces of the country will need to unite
in order to respond to the wishes of the Congolese
people. Dialogue remains the best possible way to
overcome the differences that remain. The second
message that we were able to convey was that holding
free, fair, credible, open, transparent and peaceful
elections as soon as possible, in accordance with the
Congolese Constitution, is something that everyone is
expecting. It is now up to all political forces to ensure
that the country remains on the path of peace and of
strengthening its democratic institutions.

In response to those messages, which were delivered
in a very united way by all members of the Security
Council, all the Council's interlocutors expressed their
wish to avoid a new episode of violence after the tragic
events of 19 and 20 September 2016. They assured us
of their readiness to continue discussions following the
18 October agreement in a more sweeping and inclusive
framework to reach a clear and precise road map based
on a broad consensus that would make it possible to
achieve a transition within a specific timetable.

The Security Council clearly encouraged all actors
to continue these discussions so that the electoral process
could take place in a peaceful climate and in a spirit of
consensus that brings together all the political forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council
also encouraged the parties to take the necessary
confidence-building measures, such as the suspension
of judicial proceedings undertaken for political ends,
freeing political prisoners, a clear commitment by
everyone to respecting the Constitution, and the
opening of the political space to allow for discussions
to be held in peaceful conditions and come to a quick
and positive conclusion.

The Council also called for this process to be
accompanied by a free and constructive political debate,
where freedom of opinion, assembly and fair access
to the media are guaranteed and where security and
freedom of movement are also ensured. The Security
Council called on the Congolese authorities to restore
the broadcast signal of Radio France Internationale and
to lift the ban on demonstrations. It also called on the
opposition forces, for their part, to act responsibly and
ensure that their demonstrations would be peaceful.

That is the overall message that together the 15
members of the Council transmitted to all the political
actors that we met. Compromises will be necessary on
both sides, and we hope that the spirit of responsibility
in the political leaders will prevail. The mediation
currently being carried out by CENCO deserves our
support. It has the potential to bring the parties to the
compromise necessary for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to experience a peaceful transition after
19 December.

The Council remains aware of the situation of
the civilian populations in the east of the country.
Everything must be done to protect them. This was
also an essential component of our visit. The Security
Council visited Beni for the first time in order to express
its solidarity with the victims of the recent violence. We
attached particular interest to making this point. The
atrocities committed in the region over the past two
years are a challenge for all of us, for human dignity,
for peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in the region as a whole.

In eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, there will be no lasting security as long as
illegal armed groups continue to operate in the region.
The Council was able to see that this is a problem
that requires a comprehensive response: it will have a
military aspect, thanks to MONUSCO and to the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo, which
are fighting on the ground, as well as political and legal
aspects, in the form of combating illegal trafficking
in natural resources and shutting down the predatory
networks that enable these groups to survive and of
prosecuting perpetrators of atrocities. Collaboration
among the countries of the region is essential to achieve
those objectives.

In that context, the Council expressed its strong
support for MONUSCO, which had been targeted on
8 November by an unprecedented attack. We also heard
the message of representatives of civil society in Beni,
which called for the Mission to be more effective. It must
indeed adapt to the new challenges and show greater
robustness and flexibility in order to be as effective
as possible. This was the subject of the Council's
discussions with the commanders of MONUSCO,
and we will pursue this task in coordination with the
Secretariat. The Security Council has great confidence
in MONUSCO, which can count on the Council's support
in this phase where it must adapt to new challenges.

Those are some of the main conclusions and
lessons learned that I wanted to call to your attention,
Mr. President.

