Mr. Hoxhaj: It is a great honour for me to address
the Security Council today and to present the latest
developments and progress in the Republic of Kosovo.
During the past three months there have been many
important developments contributing to peace and
stability as well as to strengthening a multi-ethnic and
democratic Kosovo.

I am pleased to be able to report to you today on
the subjects of Kosovo's strengthening of statehood
internally, its further integration into the international
community, its successful negotiation of a draft
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union and the continuation of our inter-State
dialogue with Serbia. I will also take this opportunity to
raise a number of concerns on behalf of the Government
of Kosovo.

Before addressing those issues, I would first like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and the current
States members of the Security Council for their support
for peace and progress in Kosovo. For the citizens of
Kosovo, the United Nations remains a symbol of hope,
peace and international justice.

Two decades ago, the Council had repeated
discussions and acted on those discussions, as the main
United Nations body addressing the human-rights
violations and crimes against humanity committed by
the Milosevic regime. It witnessed the apartheid period
in Kosovo and drew attention to the State-sponsored
crimes and ethnic cleansing perpetrated by the
Milosevic regime. Today, 15 years since the end of the
war and despite many challenges, Kosovo represents
a successful story of State- and peacebuilding, which
would not have been possible without the international
community's active support.

Over the past three months, Kosovo has continued to
maintain political and economic stability and to further
strengthen its democratic governance. One of the main
developments of recent months has been the successful
holding of parliamentary elections. The international
democratic community, including a European election
observation mission, applauded the elections of 8 June
for their credibility, organization and transparency, and
for being in line with the highest European standards.
Those elections also marked an important milestone,
because for the first time Kosovo Serbs living in the
four northern municipalities participated in electing
representatives to the Kosovo Assembly.

We are currently at the stage of consolidating the
new Assembly. The Constitutional Court has been
crucial to that process by ensuring the establishment
of a democratic and constitutional basis for
Kosovo's new legislative and executive institutions.
Kosovo's new Government will therefore soon be in
place - a Government whose composition will be
inclusive, multi-ethnic, and committed to continuing
comprehensive reforms. In that regard, it is important
to emphasize that, while our institutions are in the
process of being formed, Kosovo has continued to
maintain high levels of security and stability.

On 25 July, Kosovo initialled a Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union (EU).
It is the first contractual Agreement between Kosovo
and the European Union, and it will provide a clear
framework for reforms and political engagement with
the EU in the integration process. The next step will
be the Agreement's adoption by the Council of the
European Union and its formal signing. This crucial step
on our path to European integration signals Kosovo's
comprehensive progress in democratic governance, the
protection of human rights, economic reform, ethnic
relations, and strengthened statehood. The deal seals
our country's strategic orientation and launches us on
the path to our desire, which is to become a full-fledged
and equal member of the European Union.
Beyond the political benefits, the Agreement
will open the EU market to our small and medium
enterprises, which will generate newjobs and economic
growth in Kosovo. On its path to joining the EU,
Kosovo will continue to exhibit high levels of political
and institutional responsibility. We will undertake all
necessary reforms in the areas of the rule of law and
the alignment of our legislation with that of the EU. On
the EU integration path, Kosovo has shown progress in
fulfilling the remaining criteria for visa-free travel in
the EU Schengen zone. The visible progress on the EU
integration path shows that Kosovo's European future
is secure.

Parallel to the consolidation ofdomestic institutions,
Kosovo has shown progress in strengthening its
international position. In the past two months, the
Togolese Republic and Solomon Islands have recognized
the independence and sovereignty of Kosovo. We are
committed to strengthening our bilateral relations
with all 108 countries that have recognized Kosovo's
independence and statehood. The unprecedented and
overwhelming international support for Kosovo's
statehood shows that the declaration of independence
was a legitimate and legal act, with wide international
acceptance, which has contributed to regional peace
and stability. Kosovo is therefore gradually claiming
its rightful place in the family of free, democratic and
peace-loving nations.

Moreover, Kosovo has shown progress in
increasing its membership in international and regional
organizations. Kosovo has become a full member of
the Venice Commission, which is part of the Council
of Europe, and has joined two important regional
organizations, the South-East European Cooperation
Process and the Migration, Asylum, Refugees Regional
Initiative. Kosovo's membership in those regional
bodies has strengthened Kosovo's regional role in the
service of constructive regional cooperation.

In the near future, we intend to apply for full
membership in the Council of Europe, an important
regional body for strengthening human rights and
democracy. Kosovo deserves a place in the Council of
Europe because of our geographic position, democratic
performance and commitment to human rights
protection and the rule of law. Kosovo will continue
to press forward on achieving its goal of gaining full
membership in the international community. That
would be in the best interest of our citizens and would
provide an opportunity to contribute to regional
and international peace and stability and to take on
international responsibility.
Kosovo has been and remains highly committed
to the EU-facilitated dialogue with Serbia. We are
dedicated to improving the relations between our two
independent and sovereign States. Thus far, substantial
success has been achieved in the implementation
of the First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations, reached between Kosovo
and Serbia in April 2013. However, more needs to be
done. In recent months, there have been some incidents
in the Serb-populated northern part of Kosovo that
have impeded the implementation of technical and
political agreements and have not contributed to the
normalization and improvement of the everyday lives
of people. Here I am referring to the placement of
barricades on the bridge over the river in Mitrovica and
the recent aggressive rhetoric of local Serb leaders in
the north against the work of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo, which seeks to strengthen
the rule of law in Kosovo.

I take this opportunity to call upon on the authorities
in Belgrade to respect the agreements that we have
reached together and not to promote the destabilization
of the situation in those municipalities. The Government
of Kosovo highly condemns all possible pressure on
EULEX personnel when it comes to arresting alleged
criminals operating in the northern municipalities.
Beyond that, we share our serious concern that the
Serbian authorities have not upheld the implementation
of other agreements reached as part of the dialogue.
This year, the Constitutional Court of Serbia nullified
the agreements on cadastral surveys and records and
the mutual recognition of university diplomas. While
Kosovo has undertaken all necessary legal changes to
accommodate the technical and political agreements,
the same is not the case with Serbia. We urge our
Serbian counterparts to respect the agreements reached
and undertake the necessary constitutional and legal
changes in order to ensure their normal implementation.

Despite those developments, we have expressed
our will to make progress on discussing new topics as
part of the dialogue with Serbia until we achieve full
normalization of inter-State and inter-society relations.
However, the dialogue cannot continue endlessly and
must come to a successful conclusion with the signing of
a peace treaty, which should represent an agreement for
mutual recognition and the establishment of permanent
friendship and neighbourly relations between Kosovo
and Serbia. That would be in the interest of advancing
a common peace, regional stability and our joint
European future.

In speaking about relations with Serbia, I would
like to point out that, two days ago, an isolated incident
took place on the north-eastern border with Serbia,
where a private citizen of Kosovo had a confrontation
with Serb security forces across the border. We wish
to reassure Serbian authorities that it was an isolated
incident, and we regret that it happened. Nether side
should exaggerate it, and we should continue working
together to build confidence and resolve all outstanding
issues through dialogue.

The Special Investigative Task Force for alleged
war crimes in Kosovo, initiated by former Special
Rapporteur of the Council of Europe Dick Marty, issued
a statement (S/2014/558, annex II) at the end of July.
The Government of Kosovo has closely cooperated with
the Task Force throughout the entire process, and we
will continue to cooperate until the entire investigation
is over. Our commitment is also demonstrated by the
actions taken in the Kosovo Assembly to create a special
chamber as part of Kosovo's legal system to address
those allegations. That is the best proof that Kosovo is
a State governed by the law, and it demonstrates our
willingness to undertake all necessary steps to fully
cooperate with our international partners in that process.
The Government of Kosovo appreciates the work of
Ambassador Williamson, which is an important step
for resolving all the allegations and other accusations.

As I address the Council here, a mass grave has
been discovered in the town of Raska in Serbia that
holds the bodies of approximately 350 Kosovo Albanian
civilians killed during the war in Kosovo. Those
innocent civilians were killed in Kosovo, transported
by the Serbian security apparatus to Serbia to hide
the traces and buried in a mass grave, above which
buildings have been constructed. It is not the only mass
grave of civilians killed during the Kosovo war that
has been discovered in Serbia. While we acknowledge
Serbia's efforts towards cooperation on this matter, we
appeal to Serbia to undertake more proactive measures
to move ahead with the excavation and identification of
the bodies in the mass grave in Raska.

Serbia should also show more willingness to
cooperate with Kosovar and international authorities
in identifying the bodies of over 1,700 other missing
persons. Any delay in resolving the fate of missing
persons prolongs the pain of their families. It is
an inhumane practice and does not contribute to
inter-ethnic reconciliation between Kosovo and
Serbia. I would to bring to the Council's attention that
approximately 15,000 Albanian civilians were killed
for ethnic reasons alone, and that all of those crimes
against humanity have been proved and documented in
the proceedings of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia.

Recently, we joined the international campaign led
by the United Kingdom on ending sexual violence in
conflict. During the Kosovo war, there was a significant
number of women who experienced sexual violence at
the hands of the Serbian State and security apparatus,
and those acts have to date remained unaddressed
by international or domestic transitional justice
mechanisms. Besides taking certain legal measures,
very soon a petition will be addressed to the Secretary-
General to urge the United Nations to undertake all
necessary measures to bring justice to those women
who have silently endured pain and suffering since the
time of the war. Addressing past sexual violence done
to women during the Kosovo war is a matter ofjustice
and reconciliation, and we are committed to dealing
with it.

Let me conclude by expressing the gratitude of
the people and Government of Kosovo to the United
Nations for supporting Kosovo over the years in
consolidating peace and building State institutions.
Since the declaration of independence in 2008, the role
of the United Nations in Kosovo has gradually been
reduced and its presence downsized. This has been in
accordance with the evolving circumstances and local
needs. Today, Kosovo has democratic, functioning,
multi-ethnic institutions and has successfully
implemented the Ahtisaari plan under international
supervision.

As the European Union has taken a greater
role in the region, it is of critical importance that
the Council should consider ending the presence in
Kosovo of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), as this would be timely,
cost-effective and in line with the United Nations
commitment to empowering local ownership and
drafting successful exit strategies. We recommend
that the Council reconfigure the UNMIK presence
from its current mission to a United Nations political
office in Kosovo, which could take on a new role in
supporting Kosovo institutions in strengthening
domestic capacities for more responsible engagement
in the international community.

In the meantime, the United Nations should
reduce the budget and number of staff of UNMIK,
since the Mission has no role in the implementation of
the agreements reached as part of the EU-facilitated
dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia. The guarantor
of the implementation of those agreements remains the
European Union. The financial costs of UNMIK could
be distributed to other agencies in Kosovo and around
the world and used for different projects that would
improve the lives of the citizens in Kosovo and in other
parts of the world.

