Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to extend
to you, Mr. President, my delegation's gratitude for
your leadership and for your organization of this open
debate on non-proliferation - a matter of considerable
attention and importance - to coincide with the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1540 (2004). Similarly, I
thank Nigeria for its able leadership of the Council in
April. I would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for his comprehensive briefing.

My delegation affirms that the important
mandate of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) fosters the Council's work
with regard to resolution 1540 (2004) in the areas of
national implementation, supervision, the provision
of assistance, cooperation, awareness-raising and
transparency. A question comes to mind about
facilitating the Committee's mandate, which will come
to an end in 2021. Is it not high time for our Council
to grant the Committee a permanent mandate like
other subsidiary bodies of the Council, taking into
consideration the international community's pressing
need for the Committee's work?

On another score, is it reasonable for the Security
Council to play a significant role, through its subsidiary
bodies, in the imposition of effective sanctions on
terrorists with a view to preserving international
peace and security, even though no general mechanism
exists to curb the smuggling of materials to be used
in the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction?
It is time to think seriously about amending the
Committee's mandate to enable it to draw up a list of
names of smugglers - non-State actors, entities and
individuals - whose persistence in smuggling such
materials has been proven and who have demonstrated
no desire to refrain from that crime.

It is well known that violence in one State may spill
over borders into others. We are therefore duty-bound,
as is the 1540 Committee, to move from a unilateral
approach to tackling States' adherence to and application
of the resolution to a comprehensive approach to its
implementation from an inclusive perspective. In that
regard, the Council should in future follow up on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by building
regional road maps for implementation by groups of
States and not confine monitoring to implementation
by individual States.

We appreciate the efforts made by the Committee
in facilitating the extension of assistance. We also
appreciate the efforts made by States and international
donor organizations in the provision of technical
assistance. We urge those actors to continue their efforts
given their benefits for recipient and donor States alike.
If we may say so, such assistance should be considered
as mutual assistance, given the shared nature of the
security environment experienced by States.

Jordan has made strides in adhering to the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) and relevant
subsequent resolutions. We have taken and enforced a
number of legislative and practical steps at the national
level to develop local controls designed to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery. Jordan has always
favoured accession to relevant multilateral treaties on
non-proliferation. We are looking into ratifying the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism. In this connection, we welcome the
outcomes and declaration of the international Nuclear
Security Summit held recently in The Hague with the
participation of 53 leaders, including His Majesty King
Abdullah, in the light of Jordan's pioneering role in this
area.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our profuse
gratitude to you, Sir. I hope that this meeting will
consolidate Member States' commitment to enhancing
efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004).

