Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Your stewardship
of the Council, Mr. President, has proved eminently
wise this month, and I can do no better than to echo
your wise words of thanks to Assistant Secretary-
General Annabi. Again, his briefing has been
extremely useful and extremely comprehensive. It
demonstrates the scale of the difficulties that the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) has to face. It really is quite a
remarkable mission, in the sense of having to build an
infrastructure from the bottom up and prepare a
territory for independence with very little to start from.
It also demonstrates the ingenuity with which those
challenges are being tackled and the progress that is
being made.

I would like to start almost in reverse order
compared to Mr. Annabi, by considering refugees. I
find it interesting to note that the rate of return over the
last month, and since the Council was last briefed, is
down to only about 1,000 persons. We think that it is
now time to clarify how many people remain in the
refugee camps in West Timor, and we are pleased that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) census is going ahead. It is
clearly very important that the remaining refugees
should be registered expeditiously - not least because
of the activities of the militia and not least because it
will be very important to know and to get a good feel
for the reasons why they have not returned. The
register will be a useful tool in helping to create the
conditions for those still in the camps to return home.
We hope that UNHCR and the Indonesian Government
will quickly be able to resolve issues such as pension
payments, which are currently restraining many of the
refugees from making that leap. Those who wish to
return should be allowed to do so swiftly and safely.

In this connection, we are particularly concerned
about the effects of the recent floods in West Timor.
We were very pleased that UNTAET was able to
provide assistance to the Indonesian authorities in
some areas, in coping with the floods, but it is
particularly troubling that so many of those who have
been killed or displaced are refugees from East Timor.
We fully support anything that UNTAET can do to
provide further assistance in the relief efforts. I think
we should all think very carefully about what we can
do in relation to those poor people who have
effectively had to suffer a double whammy, both of
displacement from East Timor and now of natural
disaster. What I had to say earlier about the need for
refugee returns applies doubly to those people who find
themselves flooded out in West Timor.

I would like to turn now to the question of
resources. It is almost a truism that UNTAET can be
fully effective only if it is properly resourced. We
continue to have some concern that the work of the
Mission is being inhibited by a lack of funds on the
ground. It would be helpful to have some indication
from Mr. Annabi of the current position on expenditure
from the United Nations Trust Fund. We understand
that although some $20 million has been pledged,
spending has so far been only a small proportion of
that. We need also to ensure that disbursement is
proceeding apace from the World Bank trust fund. We
hope that UNTAET, the Secretariat and others involved
can work to identify the barriers to disbursement, and
we would be very open to whatever can be done to
streamline the procedures so that more of the money
can be spent more quickly.

I have to say that recently there has been a sense
on the ground of - well, it would be an exaggeration
to say bureaucracy run riot, but certainly the
bureaucratic impediments to getting things done seem
to be on the increase rather than the reverse. Of course,
a lot of these procedures are not within the Council's
area of responsibility, but, for our part, we stand ready
to do what we can to help reduce such obstacles while
of course retaining sufficient checks on expenditure.

It would also be helpful to know whether there is
anything more that could be done to ensure that
UNTAET has the specialist staff it needs to do some of
the things it has to do by way of building up
infrastructure, developing governmental capacity and
so forth. As a member of a diplomatic service
renowned for its reliance on generalists, I have to say
that is a good thing, but there are limits to the extent to
which they can deal with some specialist issues where
obviously technical expertise is required and necessary.
It is particularly important to try to make progress on
both funding and capacity before next month's donor
conference in Lisbon. I am sure that the importance of
that meeting will not be lost on any of us around this
table.

I would also welcome the Secretariat's comments
on its longer-term vision for United Nations
engagement in East Timor. During our last briefing Mr.
Annabi very helpfully mentioned the series of
benchmarks or objectives that would be necessary
before independence could be reached. As I said at that
time, we have to maintain a careful balance between
not pushing too hard and not pushing hard enough. I
am not sure that "push" is quite the right verb to use,
but what is important is that as East Timor moves to
independence it should have adequate capacity to cope
with independence in governance, governmental
services, security, democratic institutions and a whole
host of things.

I think the work that the Secretariat has already
done in mapping out an exit strategy, to put it a little
crudely, is very useful. But there is a need to develop
timelines to ensure that the mission completes its job in
the right timescale and in the right way. It would be
very helpful to have any comments that Mr. Annabi
might wish to offer on the future shape of UNTAET or
indeed on the United Nations role in East Timor post-
UNTAET.

I want to conclude my intervention at this
briefing in the same way that I concluded my
intervention last time. None of what I have said is
meant to be criticism. I want to pay tribute to the quite
remarkable job that UNTAET has done on the ground
and that those backstopping UNTAET have done in the
Secretariat in New York. They deserve our
congratulations and our thanks.

