Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to express the Mexican delegation's
deep appreciation for your presence here, Sir, as you
preside over this Security Council meeting, which
highlights the importance that the Government of
Singapore attaches to its representation on the Security
Council. I also wish to convey the joy of the people
and Government of Mexico to the new Government at
the birth of East Timor as an independent State.

Wishing to be with them on this special date, a
high-level Mexican delegation, led by the Deputy
Foreign Minister, Ambassador Miguel Marin Bosch,
travelled to Dili to attend the Independence Day
ceremony on behalf of the President of Mexico, Mr.
Vicente Fox. The willingness of the Government of
Mexico to strengthen the relations of friendship and
cooperation with East Timor was conveyed in Dili.

Mexico welcomes this transcendental moment in
East Timor's history, the culminating point in the
struggle of a people to exercise its right to self-
determination. Mexico reiterates once again its high
esteem of the United Nations for its dedication to the
attainment of East Timor's independence, which will
remain on record as one of the successful chapters in
the history of this Organization.

Today we joyfully welcome the Democratic
Republic of East Timor to the community of nations.
The people and the authorities of East Timor have
expressed their wish to participate actively and
constructively in the international system. We await the
time when the Council can make the recommendation
to the General Assembly to accept East Timor as a new
Member State of this Organization.

I wish to express my country's support for the
readiness shown by the new authorities of East Timor
to sign and to ratify the principal international treaties,
particularly those on disarmament, the environment
and human rights. We also particularly welcome the
statement made in this Chamber by young Jose Cabral
on the occasion of the special session on children to the
effect that one of the first international instruments that
the new Government of East Timor will sign will be
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including its
Optional Protocols.

The people and the Government of East Timor
have an enormous task before them: the consolidation
of basic structures and of public and private social and
community institutions, to respond to political,
economic and social development needs. We are deeply
gratified at the beginning of the work of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation,
the conclusion of the phase of emergency rehabilitation
in the education sector and progress in the creation of
health infrastructure in the country. We are also
gratified by the adoption of domestic labour legislative
aimed at the implementation of relevant international
standards.

The efforts of the new Government of East Timor
to respond to the needs of its population in the priority
areas of education, health, housing and agriculture
require the sustained support of the international
community. This will contribute to the country's
economic and social development, will alleviate
poverty and will contribute to the effective exercise of
independence and self-determination by the people of
East Timor.

The $360 million pledge made during the donors'
conference recently held in Dili augurs well for the
future.

The United Nations also has a responsibility to
fulfil in the consolidation of the newly independent
State. Cognizant of this, Mexico supported the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1410 (2002)
last Friday. This resolution establishes the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), which is provided with an appropriate
mandate to contribute to the establishment of a
representative and solid administration, to the rule of
law and order and to external security.

It is now the Security Council's task
appropriately to follow up the implementation of the
resolution and to support UNMISET and its head,
Kamalesh Sharma, in the implementation of their
mandate. We will closely follow the progress made in
the field in order to adapt the composition and the
mandate of the Mission as needed, ensuring the gradual
hand-over of responsibilities and powers to the people
of East Timor in all spheres.

