Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): It has
been a long day, but I can assure the members of the
Security Council that it has been a productive one.

At the outset, on behalf of the delegation of Mali,
I would like to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on a
successful presidency of the Security Council this
month and on the outstanding manner in which you are
guiding the Council's work.

I would like to highlight the contribution made
by your beautiful country, the Netherlands, a friend
of Mali, to the stabilization process under way in my
country. I also take this opportunity to welcome the
recent decision taken by the Government of Canada
to deploy an air task force to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).

The topic of today's debate is of particular
importance to my country, which, as the Council knows,
is both a troop-contributing country and, above all,
now host to one of the most significant United Nations
missions, MINUSMA, both in terms of its personnel
and budget and its complex challenges.

The Government of Mali is fully aware of the scope
of the missions entrusted to the Blue Helmets - men
and women deployed to maintain peace and security
throughout the world, often in extreme conditions and
at risk to their lives. In that regard, I would like to pay
well-deserved tribute to all of the victims of the Malian
crisis - civilians and military personnel, foreigners
and Malians - who perished on the field of honour in
our country.

United Nations peacekeeping operations remain
an indispensable instrument for ensuring international
peace and security. Earlier today we heard soulful
pleas and strong demands and expectations from
my compatriot Fatimata Toure. She conveyed the
expectations the entire population of Mali has of the
United Nations. We must believe that the nature of
conflict has changed and that the complex situation
on the ground calls for collective responsibility on
our part to implement the bold and swift reforms
required to improve United Nations peace missions.
That collective responsibility lies with the Security
Council, the States Members of the United Nations, in
particular troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat
and regional organizations.

With regard to MINUSMA in particular, we
all agree that it does not operate in a traditional
peacekeeping environment. Asymmetrical attacks are
carried out by terrorist groups and drug traffickers of all
kinds who indiscriminately target civilians, the Malian
defence and security forces and the foreign forces of
MINUSMA, France and all partners on the ground,
including those of the European Union. That is why
the Government of Mali has asked that MINUSMA be
given a robust mandate, not to combat terrorism - we
know that is not in its remit - but, above all, to adopt
a more offensive stance in the face of imminent and
real threats, in order to protect itself and defenceless
civilians, as stipulated in its mandate. In doing so
MINUSMA would be more effective and credible in the
eyes of our people. We hope that the ongoing strategic
review of MINUSMA will recommend, inter alia, that
the strong opinions of Malians be taken into account
ahead of the Mission's mandate renewal scheduled
for June.

Similarly, it is essential to strengthen the operational
capacities of peacekeeping missions, in particular
MINUSMA, so that they can fully and effectively
implement their mandates. Troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat have a clear responsibility
in that area.

The delegation of Mali welcomes the Secretary-
General's initiative to reform the peace and security pillar
of the United Nations and to enhance the effectiveness
and coherence of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, while paying particular attention to
preventive measures and sustaining peace. I would also
like to stress the relevance of the recommendations
made by Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos
Cruz in his report on improving the safety and security
of United Nations peacekeepers.

Finally, I would like to underscore the role of
regional organizations, in particular the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Group of Five States for the Sahel, in the stabilization
and development processes ofMember States in crisis. It
is therefore essential that the United Nations strengthen

its cooperation with regional organizations in order to
ensure the success of peacekeeping operations.

