Mr. de Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I would also like to extend my good wishes in
connection with today's national day in the Russian
Federation.

Peru has the honour to speak before the Council
on behalf of the States members of the Rio Group,
namely, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Chile, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Mexico,
Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Uruguay, Venezuela and
Peru.

We are pleased, Sir, that you have convened this
open debate to once again take up the issue of
operations established or authorized by the Security
Council and which may be linked to the International
Criminal Court (ICC).

The Rio Group is pleased that the International
Criminal Court has already been established. In
addition to the election of a diverse and representative
group of judges, who were sworn in in March 2003,
Mr. Luis Moreno Ocampo has been elected as the
Court's Prosecutor and will assume his position on 16
June 2003. The fact that this position has been
entrusted to a distinguished citizen of Argentina brings
honour to our region and strengthens our commitment
to this process.

The international community needs international
law. We have the collective responsibility to combat
war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. The
relevance of the International Criminal Court lies in the
fact that it will confront such crimes, which constitute
the most serious assaults upon mankind.

The Security Council's debates and decisions
should strengthen international cooperation in order to
give impetus to, and promote the development of,
respect for human rights and a system of international
justice that is permanently respected and implemented.
Those are the basic purposes and principles set out
both in the Charter of the United Nations and in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.

We are aware that the Council is considering an
extension of the request for an exception adopted last
year. In that regard, it is the understanding of the Rio
Group that adopting the draft resolution will not make
the exemption permanent.

We are convinced that, apart from any unexpected
eventualities, the Security Council will continue to
contribute to strengthening the International Criminal
Court in accordance with its obligation to maintain
international peace and security.

The Rio Group believes that the relationship
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court should be one of cooperation, because
their responsibilities and functions for humanity are
thoroughly complementary. The Rio Group will
therefore continue working to promote the future
strengthening of that relationship.

