Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I
would like to welcome the presence and statements of
Foreign Minister Spanta of Afghanistan and of Foreign
Minister Qureshi of Pakistan. I would also like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Kai
Eide and Under-Secretary-General John Holmes for
their briefings this afternoon.

On behalf of the United States, I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Eide and the staff of the United Nations Mission of
Assistance in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their hard
work and dedication to improving the lives of the
Afghan people and helping Afghanistan to succeed. At
the recent Paris Conference, the Final Declaration of
the three co-chairs - the Secretary-General, the
President of France and the President of Afghanistan -
affirmed strong support for the expanded role of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
UNAMA to lead coordination of the international
civilian efforts, as well as coordination between the
Afghan Government and the international community.

Today, I would like to make four points. First, we
need to present a common front against extremists and
terrorists in words and in deeds. We are deeply
troubled by the increasing violence in Pakistan and
Afghanistan. As the Secretary-General's report
indicated, May 2008 recorded the highest number of
security incidents in Afghanistan since the overthrow
of the Taliban in 2001.

Those attacks are becoming increasingly complex
and coordinated. Insurgents and terrorists have grown
more effective and more aggressive, most recently in
the cowardly and despicable attack on the Indian
Embassy in Kabul. Greater efforts to increase security
are vital. However, the international community must
support not only increased security efforts but also a
broad, coordinated and comprehensive approach that
includes infrastructure improvement, investment in
agriculture and the creation of new businesses.
Progress is critical in all those areas to ultimately
stabilize Afghanistan.

Secondly, the implementation and success of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy will
require a strengthened partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community, with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
UNAMA playing a crucial role. The launch of the
National Development Strategy in Paris means that
some 80 international stakeholders are now engaged in
an Afghan-led effort to implement a road map for
activities in three broad areas: security; governance,
rule of law and human rights; and economic and social
development. The Government of Afghanistan has
commitments to its people and to the international
community to make progress in those areas, to fight
corruption and the trafficking of narcotics, to extend its
reach throughout the country, and to increase its
capacity to serve the people of Afghanistan. To keep
the confidence of the Afghan people and its
international partners, it must deliver on those
commitments.

The donor community has responsibilities to
Afghanistan in keeping with their commitments in
Paris and in previous meetings. UNAMA will play an
essential role in ensuring that the commitments made
at the Paris Conference are met. The United States is
steadfast in acknowledging and following up on its
commitments and responsibilities in Afghanistan. The
international community should not risk Afghan
disillusionment with its international partners.

The countries that met in Paris committed
themselves not only to providing greater resources to
the reconstruction of Afghanistan but also to making
the provision of those resources more transparent,
accountable and effective. We welcome the fact that
they are all committed to more local procurement and
capacity-building and to ensuring that the benefits of
development can reach all provinces equitably.

For UNAMA to play that role, it will require
greater resources so that Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Eide will have the tools to do his
job, aid can actually reach the Afghan people and the
donor countries can get the greatest value added for
their contributions. We concur with the Secretary-
General's recommendation that UNAMA expand its
presence throughout Afghanistan with the opening of
six new provincial offices in the next 12 months. We
strongly support Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Eide's drive to increase the capacity
and effectiveness of UNAMA in a number of key areas
through staffing increases and structural changes that
allow for an integrated approach, thereby ensuring all
United Nations and international efforts are properly
coordinated.

Coordination is UNAMA's key mandate and
priority, and UNAMA has responsibility for
coordinating between civilian and military efforts, the
Afghan Government and the donor community, within
the donor community, and within the United Nations
family. Therefore, we fully support and encourage any
and all efforts by Special Representative Eide to
reinforce UNAMA's central coordinating role, as
provided for in resolution 1806 (2008).

Thirdly, we fully agree with the Special
Representative's conclusion that elections are a key
priority and an important measure of Afghanistan's
democratic progress. The Afghan Independent Election
Commission is the lead coordinating body for the
August 2009 presidential and provincial council
elections and the summer 2010 parliamentary
elections. We strongly urge Special Representative
Eide to work closely with the Afghan Government, the
Afghan Independent Election Commission and the
United Nations Development Programme to relieve
pressing issues relating to voter registration and the
passage of the new election law.

Fourthly, Afghanistan's neighbours have an
important role to play in supporting the Afghan
Government's efforts to secure its borders. Resolution
1806 (2008) highlights UNAMA's role in supporting
regional cooperation and the Special Representative

has been active in that area. A stable Afghanistan could
be a land bridge creating an economic zone comprised
of Central Asia, South Asia and South-West Asia.
Afghanistan should not used as a geopolitical
battleground and we call on Afghanistan's neighbours
not to arm or finance insurgents or allow them to
operate from their territories.

Today, I want to reaffirm America's steadfast
commitment to the people of Afghanistan. The United
States will continue to work closely with our partners
on those issues until the Afghan people can live in
stability, prosperity and democracy.

