Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): The situation in the
Middle East, especially the question of Palestine,
remains of concern, with no progress or clear view of a
durable and lasting peace leading to a two-State

solution. It is my delegation's hope that our meeting
today will assist in changing this status quo and will
enable the relevant parties to re-start negotiations in
good faith towards finding a lasting solution to this
issue, which has long beleaguered the international
community, and more so the Middle East, particularly
Palestine. In this regard, we thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for giving us this
opportunity to participate in this open debate. Allow
me to also congratulate you, Sir, for your presidency of
the Council for the month of July.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement by
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

For genuine progress to be made on the Middle
East peace process, including a resumption of peace
negotiations, all parties must demonstrate honesty and
sincerity aimed at achieving the objective of a just and
lasting solution to the question of Palestine and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East based on a
two-State solution, the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and
the Arab Peace Initiative. Words must be matched with
actions to reflect this genuine desire.

Unfortunately, the negative signals from Israel,
from statements by its leaders to actions in the Gaza
Strip and inaction on halting illegal settlement
activities in the occupied territories, among others, are
indicators that Israel is not in any way close to
reflecting any intent or desire to find a durable and
lasting solution to the Palestinian issue, including a
two-State solution. It baffles us all that while, on the
one hand, it seems to agree to a two-State solution, on
the other hand, illegal Israeli settlements continue to be
built in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem.
Palestinian lands are also illegally confiscated,
including through the building of the separation wall,
which continues to be built despite the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on
stopping its construction. Not only has the construction
of settlements not been halted and they have not been
demolished, there is even a caveat for allowing their
expansion due to natural growth. Would not allowing
these settlements to expand for natural growth
presuppose that these illegal settlements are accepted
as a permanent feature in the occupied Palestinian
territories? Would not that then violate the various
Security Council resolutions that call for Israel to
return to the 1967 border and run counter to achieving

a two-State solution and a comprehensive lasting and
durable peace?

Clearly the calls by the international community,
including by one of the major partners, to stop these
illegal settlements has not been heeded. The building
of these settlements, let alone their expansion for
whatever reasons, violates all international laws and
norms and various Council resolutions. We continue to
call on Israel to cease constructing these settlements in
the occupied land and to return it to the Palestinians.
We urge the Council, in particular, to ensure that Israel
abides by the relevant Council resolutions in this
regard and to desist from changing the facts on the
ground.

Despite the almost seven months since the Israeli
onslaught on Gaza that saw devastating consequences
for the life of the Palestinian people in Gaza and its
infrastructure, the humanitarian situation remains dire.
Israeli imposed a blockade on Gaza, through access by
land, air and sea, perpetually imprisoning the people of
Gaza in an open prison and depriving them, especially
children, women and the elderly, of daily essentials.

While international efforts are afoot trying to
rebuild what was destroyed by Israel, humanitarian aid
and personnel continue to be largely restricted from
entering Gaza, and in many ways the area is strangled
and its inhabitants isolated from the outside world.
Such action grossly violates international humanitarian
law on ensuring the protection of civilians. In this
regard, we again urge the Council to take the necessary
action to end this siege on Gaza and to allow the
movement of goods, including humanitarian aid, into
Gaza. Compensation must also be made to the people
in Gaza by those responsible for the casualties and
destruction to homes and infrastructure.

The actions by Israel have thus far not reflected a
genuine and honest desire to find a just and lasting
solution to the question of Palestine based on a two-
State solution. All parties must fulfil their roles as
honest parties to this peace process, lest we remain in
the state we are in now, far from seeing peace in the
Middle East and a solution to the Palestinian question.
The price for the international community if peace is
not achieved is high and higher still for the people in
the Middle East, especially the Palestinians.
We urge the Security Council to take the
necessary and appropriate action to ensure all parties
resume the peace negotiations. On this note also,
Malaysia supports the recent proposal by the European
Union High Representative for the Common Foreign
and Security Policy regarding the need for the Security
Council to set a deadline on resolving the question of
Palestine and on the eventual creation of a Palestinian
State by the United Nations.

