Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
The Russian delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General
for the comprehensive report on United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) of former parties to armed
conflicts. We are also grateful to him for the statement he
made in the Council today.

We agree with the main conclusion of the report that
this process is of vital importance for the long-term
settlement of conflicts, and also with the idea that the key
to the success of a peaceful settlement is the political will
of the parties to the conflict. In view of this, Russia
supports the further enhancement of the United Nations role
in carrying out tasks relating to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.

The Russian Federation believes that the attainment of
these goals requires a comprehensive approach to the
coordination of actions by United Nations bodies. We
believe that during the period of post-conflict peace-
building a leading role should be played by the Economic
and Social Council, the specialized agencies and the United
Nations programmes. However, since disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration is a cross-cutting issue,
and since it is a job that can be carried out at both the
peacekeeping and peace-building stages, we deem it
justified, in cases where the situation warrants, for the
Security Council to establish follow-on missions whose
mandates could include DDR tasks. It is very important
here to be extremely precise about defining these tasks in
the mandates of the operations and to determine the
functions of the organs participating in the solution.

Experience has shown that the effectiveness of the
United Nations efforts in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration depends directly on the extent to which they
command the support of the parties directly involved in
the conflict. Attempts to use force to resolve problems -
as was the case with Somalia, for example - usually do
not work. In this connection, we agree with the Secretary-
General's view that the best way to ensure a legal basis
for the DDR process is to include appropriate provisions
in the ceasefire agreements; and when these agreements
are under negotiation, it would be desirable to bring in
international experts at the early stages of the talks.

Clearly, an important factor for the success of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration - and in
everything that is related to peacekeeping - is learning
from past experience, including negative experience.
Methods for carrying out disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration that have proved to work in practice,
including those aspects of processes that relate to specific
problems arising from the involvement of women and
children in armed conflicts, should be a subject of study
during the training of national peacekeeping personnel.

However, good decisions very often remain mere
words on paper and are not properly implemented. A
graphic illustration of this was the collapse of the peace
process in Angola, where the disarmament of UNITA -
and this was the fault of that organization's leadership -
was basically a fiction. There are also serious questions
as to how the demilitarization of the Kosovo Liberation
Army took place in Kosovo.

Carrying out the tasks under discussion today means,
as a rule, that major and often costly projects must be
initiated, and a comprehensive approach and the
coordinated efforts of the international community are
required. We welcome the increasingly active involvement
of the World Bank in providing technical and financial
support for DDR processes. Enhancing the effectiveness
of United Nations efforts in this area would be helped by
expanding dialogue with international monetary
institutions that, because of their experience and
resources, could make a key contribution to carrying out
DDR programmes.

The job of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration is intrinsically linked to the problem of the
rampant spread of small arms and light weapons,
primarily in crisis areas. Russia is interested in
intensifying the struggle against the illegal spread of
conventional weapons, particularly in conflict areas.

 

Enhancing the effectiveness of Security Council arms
embargoes is on the agenda now. As the experience of
Angola and a number of other conflicts has shown, a
porous embargo can only increase military confrontation
between the parties to the conflict and subvert the Security
Council's authority and that of the United Nations as a
whole.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that Russia
fully recognizes its responsibility as a permanent member
of the Security Council and will continue to make an active
and practical contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
activities in all of their aspects, including the questions that
are under discussion today in the Security Council.

