Mr. Griffiths: We are witnessing in Yemen what we have long feared. Since October, I have briefed the Security Council several times on the signs of hope and momentum towards peace. But, at the same time, we have all been acutely aware that renewed violence could reverse the gains made, render peace more difficult and inflict even more severe humanitarian consequences on the population. Since we last met (see S/PV.8704), the military situation over the past month has grown increasingly dire. Both sides have announced expansive military goals and exchanged fierce rhetoric. Most of the heavy fighting has taken place in the Nihm district of Sana'a governorate and in Al-Jawf, Ma'rib and Sa'dah governorates. Front lines that had been quiet for several months have been drawn into the escalation. Reports of airstrikes and cross-border aerial attacks have increased considerably.I am distressed - as we all must be - by reports of dozens, and perhaps hundreds, of civilian casualties, displacement of families and damage to schools and hospitals. Women and children continue to suffer the most from several attacks. Yemeni journalists and civil- society activists have also continued to face severe pressure and restrictions. The parties have reassured me many times of their belief in a peaceful, political solution to the conflict. But peace cannot be taken for granted. It requires continuous commitment and the nurturing of a political process to make it happen. The escalation I just described directly contradicts the parties' desire to move in that direction. The leaderships of both parties have the ability and responsibility to rein in the violence, scale down the rhetoric and commit to a more sustainable de-escalation. Prior to the recent increase in violence, the parties - as we observed in the Council - had considerably reduced the number of airstrikes and cross-border aerial attacks. That de-escalation had a strong, positive impact on the prospect of peace, and indeed can do so again if the parties are committed. I am concerned that the escalations may also threaten the progress made in Al-Hudaydah, where the situation is vulnerable to an increase in violence. In December 2018, the parties reached the Al-Hudaydah Agreement in Stockholm based on the shared goals of avoiding military operations in the city and ensuring the passage of humanitarian and commercial goods through the three ports. We must not lose sight of those goals. The escalations on other fronts have raised tensions and led to greater volatility in Al-Hudaydah but have not yet had a major impact on the overall military situation - a small blessing, but one we must be happy for. The United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA), led by Lieutenant General Guha, is striving to maintain cooperation between the parties, despite continued operational challenges and restrictions on the freedom of movement. However, I fear - and I know this would be true of my colleague Lieutenant General Guha as well - that the escalations elsewhere could pose a challenge to his efforts to maintain calm in Al-Hudaydah and distract the parties from the implementation of the Agreement. Despite the unremittingly dire military situation, the parties have made significant progress in their efforts to build confidence and provide relief for those who are suffering. Between 10 and 16 February, the parties met in Amman and agreed to exchange prisoners and detainees, in line with the executive mechanism agreed in Stockholm 14 months ago. That is a firm commitment from the parties to the families that they will be reunited with their loved ones. And it is a sign that the parties are prepared to progress towards their commitment to eventually release - "all for all" - all those deprived of their liberty in relation to the conflict. I heartily commend the Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah for their positive engagement and for making the concessions required to make progress. I was present during those discussions; the atmosphere to enable those concessions was unmistakable. I also thank the coalition, of course, but also the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for hosting the meeting. We all look forward to the implementation of the agreed releases as soon as possible. I should add that, as usual, that process benefits from the unique value of the International Committee of the Red Cross, with which we are very proud to be partners. That positive step follows the release from prison by Ansar Allah, supported by our colleagues in UNICEF, of 68 boys encountered during military operations. The boys are now in interim care and - I am glad to say - being united with their families. I encourage Ansar Allah to continue to engage with the United Nations and UNICEF in order to make progress in addressing violations of children's rights. Furthermore, during the first half of February, the first two medical air bridge flights transported 28 patients from Sana'a for medical assistance abroad. I once again commend the commitment of the parties and the support of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for that humanitarian measure. I am also grateful to the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Egyptian Government, which will host additional patients. Despite that small but significant sign of hope, many thousands of patients in need of medical care abroad remain in Sana'a, where such care is not available. For their sake, the medical air bridge must operate regularly and not just as a temporary solution. I know that my good friend and colleague, Ms. Lise Grande, United Nations Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen, and Mr. Altaf Musani, the World Health Organization's representative in Yemen, are working very hard to make that happen.I am sure Council members will join me in hoping that those efforts bear fruit. Overall, the progress on those humanitarian measures shows us that, even in this bleak situation, the parties can work together and situation across the table from one another to relieve the suffering of the Yemeni people. We must hope that the confidence they have built has not completely gone to waste. However, my fear is that, as this briefing suggests, such confidence, trust and relationships are becoming increasingly fragile. I am also acutely alarmed by the lack of progress in addressing the threat posed by the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which we have discussed on previous occasions in the Chamber. The tanker's condition is deteriorating by the day. Any rupture could spill more than | million barrels of oil into the Red Sea, causing an environmental and economic catastrophe for Yemen and its neighbours. We are all on notice of that potential catastrophe. That threat - which we discuss every time we visit Sana'a - must be dealt with on a purely technical basis, without politicization. The United Nations is committed, ready and prepared to send objective technical experts to undertake an assessment and initial repair, to be immediately followed by permanent arrangements to address the threat and make that vessel safe. In my briefing last August (see S/PV.8598), I informed the Council, to my slight shame, that a date had been agreed for the assessment to occur later that month, but it never happened. The assessment mission must take place immediately and unconditionally, without further delay. Everything I have heard from Yemeni leaders in the almost two years that I have had the privilege of serving the Secretary-General and the Council in this assignment points to a core principle that I wish to emphasize today - peace in Yemen can emerge only from a political compromise between both parties through a process mediated by the United Nations, our process, which we discuss each time we meet. It will not be dictated or successfully resolved from a position of military dominance. Engagement in the United Nations process must be unconditional. It cannot be secondary to territorial gain, particularly when - as we have so vividly seen in Yemen - there is no military solution to the conflict. How do we move from here to the launch, at last, of that process? With the encouragement of the Council, we are actively working towards that goal and the re-establishment of truly inclusive de-escalation arrangements, but we realize that a reduction in violence is not enough. That has been the lesson of the past two months. We need the parties to unite around a vision for a post-conflict Yemen that is in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions. It is perhaps timely to recall those elements - a genuinely inclusive Governmentanda political transition process; a military and security arrangement and sector that safeguards all Yemenis; the chance for reconstruction and the revitalization of the country's institutions and economy; and, finally, an acceptance that enmities must end even while differences remain. Those are reasonable, achievable goals, and they are no secret. I insist that it is time for us to recall them here and to hope that we will soon see their realization when the political will is truly there. I am sometimes accused of impatience, but now we see why. Hesitance on the political track allows the war drums to beat louder and allows provocations to spiral and multiply. The hard work of the parties is at grave risk of being undone. The parties must display the courage that I know they have to set aside short- term military goals and make a sustained, tangible and irreversible commitment to the political process.
