Mr. Pohan (Indonesia): My delegation wishes to
extend its congratulations to you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. We have full confidence
that under your wise guidance and skilful stewardship
progress will be made in dealing with the issues on the
Council's agenda.
I would also like to extend our appreciation and
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting. We also welcome the format of
today's discussion, which enhances the possibility for
the further involvement of States that are not members
of the Council to participate in the discussion of an
issue deemed critical to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

My delegation fully recognizes that HIV is a
serious peril that endangers humankind. It is poignant
to note that the rapid spread and devastating
consequences of HIV is numbing. The millennium
report of the Secretary-General notes that

"Some 50 million people have been infected with
HIV since the early 1970s".
(A/54/2000, para. 119)

The sad thing is that the worst effects of the epidemic
are particularly striking in developing countries, where
health infrastructure is lacking and available HIV
vaccines remain costly. The situation has further
deteriorated prolonged civil conflicts that have
obliterated decades of social and economic
development. This multifaceted condition has plunged
life expectancies of people in those nations to the same
low levels as in the 1960s.

Indonesia believes that the international
community should undertake a sincere commitment to
eradicate the scourge of HIV. My delegation supports
the efforts exerted by the World Bank to set up a $ 500
million package for AIDS programmes in Africa. We
endorse a close partnership between the Bretton Woods
institutions and the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS with a view to ensuring a coordinated,
strengthened and expanded response to the HIV plight.
We also commend the Secretary-General for his plea in
his millennium report to advance innovative public-
private partnerships, especially in developing
countries, to promote an effective and affordable
vaccine against HIV.

While believing that the HIV plague, prolonged
civil conflicts and setbacks in development are
intermingled in a multifaceted magnitude, my
delegation holds the View that linking HIV to
international peacekeeping operations raises some
serious questions. Are HIV and peacekeeping
operations genuinely interrelated, or are they meant to
be interrelated? Which aspects of peacekeeping
operations are related to the issue of HIV? If they are
interrelated, how are they interrelated?
Peacekeeping operations have a wide range of
aspects. These include principles and mandates,
personnel, planning and organization, the safety and
security of peacekeepers, training, administration and
finances. The medical aspects of peacekeeping
operations are probably the most conspicuous point
with which the issue of HIV is tangibly connected. As
outlined in paragraph 128 of the report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (A/54/839),
United Nations peacekeepers in the field face a high
risk of the transmission and contraction of HIV/AIDS
and other communicable diseases.

As we do not yet have a clear picture of the
connection between HIV and international
peacekeeping operations, my delegation would like to
approach the issue in a practical way. First, my
delegation attaches great significance to the orientation
on the epidemic provided to peacekeepers before their
deployment. Indonesia supports the decision contained
in paragraph 128 of the report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to welcome

"the Training Unit's ongoing efforts to raise

awareness of these diseases [to request] the

Department of Peacekeeping Operations to

incorporate language into the 'Guidelines for

Military and CIVPOL Participation in

Peacekeeping Operations' manuals, to further

raise peacekeepers' awareness of these diseases

[and to request] the Training Unit to conduct this

awareness through the train-the-trainers

programme."

Secondly, preventive measures, such as
affordable pre-deployment immunizations provided to
peacekeepers, will be helpful in mitigating their risk of
being exposed to HIV. In that connection, partnerships
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
UNAIDS and other relevant United Nations agencies,
such as the World Health Organization (WHO) and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and
between troop-contributing countries and those
agencies are pertinent.

Thirdly, my delegation emphasizes the
importance of the inclusion of medical units in United
Nations missions or operations in countries where HIV
is spreading. These medical units should provide
regular medical check-ups, on a daily basis if
necessary, to peacekeepers and other personnel in the
mission. Once the unit finds that one or more members
of the mission are showing symptoms of the disease,
prompt action should be taken.
Fourthly, my delegation supports the development
of HIV mapping in countries where peacekeepers are
going to be deployed. This means there is a need for
pre-deployment surveys by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, for example, in cooperation
or partnership with other relevant United Nations
agencies in the field. Cooperation on the part of the
host country will facilitate the mapping process. The
data collected from that mapping will help design a
deployment strategy that minimizes the risk of
peacekeepers' being exposed to the disease.

I should like to conclude my statement by
reiterating Indonesia's position regarding HIV/AIDS,
as expressed in the open meeting of the Security
Council on the impact of AIDS on peace and security
in Africa, held on 10 January 2000. My delegation
shares the vision of a world free from the
unprecedented human disaster of HIV, a world in which
HIV transmission is substantially reduced; where there
is affordable treatment; where there is a substantial
reduction in individual and collective vulnerability to
the epidemic; where there is a significant alleviation of
the adverse impact of the disease on individuals,
communities and nations; where the silence
surrounding the disease is broken forever, thereby
sharply reducing the stigma and denial that have stifled
resolution; and where this deadly disease is ultimately
eliminated.

Indonesia believes that this vision can be
achieved only through partnerships among the relevant
agencies within the United Nations and other systems,
and especially between the public and private sectors
and members of civil society in developed and
developing countries.

