Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her report and briefing and, in that connection, I
reiterate our full support to her. It is particularly useful
that this debate was preceded yesterday by an informal
interactive dialogue, which allowed us to prepare for
this meeting.

The aspects touched upon today by the Prosecutor
provide insight into the situation in Libya. That country
is in transition after 42 years of dictatorship. Violent
acts continue, including against diplomatic missions.
However, the Libyan authorities, including Prime
Minister Ali Zeidan, have consistently reiterated their
commitment to pursuing the democratization of the
country, and the Council stands ready to help them.

Libya, despite its difficulties, has asked to try Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi itself.
That is an option created by the Rome Statute. It is
also a tribute to that post-conflict country that it has
endeavoured thereby to shoulder its responsibilities.

We welcome the Libyan Government's choice to
avail itself of its right to challenge the admissibility
of the case before the ICC, in full conformity with
the Statute and thus in full conformity with resolution
1970 (2011) . As the Prosecutor reminded us, by law the
final decision will be up to the judges of the ICC. We
have no doubt that Libya, pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), will respect that decision. Libya's upholding
of its international obligations is a key indicator of its
commitment to the rule of law. From that perspective,
we must not speak about competition between Libya
and the ICC. Libya has obligations under resolution
1970 (2011) and is upholding them; that is the heart of
the matter. That is also an example for other countries
such as the Sudan that refuse to engage in judicial
proceedings with the Court, which runs counter to
Council decisions.

The Prosecutor also indicated that she would
continue her investigation regarding allegations of
sexual crimes committed in Libya by members of
Al-Qadhafi's entourage, who may be outside of Libya.
She can be assured of our support. The use of rape as
a weapon of terror and a weapon of war is a crime to
which the Council attaches particular importance.

With regard to the other allegations, we support
the Prosecutor in the discussions she is holding with
the Government on a comprehensive strategy aimed
at putting an end to crime and impunity in Libya. As
noted by Ms. Bensouda yesterday, the Council may
have a role to play in that regard by stressing, in its
deliberations and in its directives to the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), the issue of the
security of Libyan judges and prosecutors. That is an
issue that is part and parcel of all efforts to reform local
judicial institutions.

Resolution 1970 (2011) remains an example of the
capacity of the Security Council and, more generally,
the international community to act in a unified
and swift manner. Given the crimes perpetrated by
Libyan officials, both the United Nations and regional
organizations condemned the atrocities that were
perpetrated. Resolution 1970 (2011), referring the
situation in Libya to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, is at the heart of the process for
identifying perpetrators, whatever their rank. It has
allowed us to save thousands of human lives.

Today follow-up must be provided to that approach.
The Council must be rigorous and better organize its
cooperation with the ICC when it refers cases to it. That
is one ofthe lessons that we draw from the public debate
on interaction with the ICC held last year under the
auspices of Guatemala, as well as yesterday's dialogue.
We must be ready to better and more quickly deal with
the requests for support and cooperation made by the
Court. The easiest thing, of course, would be to request
experts to deal with the issue in the framework of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
We must also ensure that, in the framework of the
Sanctions Committees, we respond to requests for
information from the Court.

The process initiated by resolution 1970 (2011)
must run its course. Indeed, that is what the Council
reiterated in its resolutions 1973 (2011), 2009 (2011),
2040 (2012) and 2095 (2013). That requires both full
cooperation on the part of Libya with the Office of
the Prosecutor and full support from the Council. It
also requires further consultation by the Secretariat
and Mr. Tarek Mitri, the head of UNSMIL, with the
Prosecutor, so as to ensure that UNSMIL contributes
to combating impunity and supports the activities of
the ICC. We must ensure, during the next UNSMIL
briefing, that the Mission describes to the Council the
synergies involved in upholding the mandates of each
institution.

