Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to welcome the presence and
the statement of His Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, President of the Federal Republic of
Somalia. I also thank Mr. Michael Keating, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
and Ambassador Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations, for
their briefings.

The security situation in Somalia, as well as in all of
the Horn of Africa, is fragile as a result of the actions of
the terrorist group Al-Shabaab, the presence of armed
groups and criminal organizations and the increase
in the trafficking in small arms and light weapons
throughout the entire region. The peacebuilding
process in Somalia is taking place in a context in which
the progress made has not been without difficulties. A
year ago, we welcomed the achievements of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in the fight
against Al-Shabaab. Today, we note with concern the
re-emergence of Al-Shabaab, marked by asymmetric
bloody attacks carried out against civilians, AMISOM
and Somalia's own armed forces. We see how a more
assertive Al-Shabaab, with hundreds of combatants, is
launching attacks against military targets. We note with
concern how AMISOM. contingents are barricading
themselves in and limiting their security patrols to
those of defensive perimeters. We recall with dismay
the victims of brutal attacks by Al-Shabaab against
civilians, AMISOM. and the Somalia's armed forces
that resulted in hundreds of deaths over the past six
months.

Despite those threats and difficulties, Somalia is
making progress in the arduous process of establishing
legitimate institutions throughout the country, laying
the foundations so that, once peace is achieved,
there will be no relapse into conflict. The process is
painstaking and challenging. The Somali State is
still fighting to establish its presence and authority
throughout its entire national territory. Occasionally,
the Somali armed forces and local authorities are
unable to hold or maintain territory that they have
wrested from Al-Shabaab. In that vein, international
support to the Somali security sector is essential and
must be maintained with increasing transparency,
within the framework of the development plans of the
Federal Government. It is also vital to support efforts
aimed at extending State authority to very corner of the
country so that local administrations can provide basic
services to their populations. It is essential to shore up
the institutional capacity of the country. Only in that
way, can it meet the hard challenges that it faces.

In that regard, we also acknowledge the need to
address violent extremism in Somalia holistically,
going beyond a strictly military approach and
rolling out strategies that address the root causes of
radicalization. Given those circumstances, the support
of the international community and the commitment of
the United Nations need to be more present than ever.
Our country is therefore of the opinion that the Security
Council must consider supporting the appeal for a
lifting of the sanctions, in particular the arms embargo,
thereby contributing to strengthening the State and
Somalia's armed forces in its fight against Al-Shabaab
and other scourges that threaten the well-being and
stability of the country.

The United Nations must be more effective in
the way it works to cut off sources of funding for
Al-Shabaab, while respecting the sovereign right of
Somalia to develop its natural resources and ensure
subsistence for those communities whose livelihoods
depend upon the extraction trade and artisanal trade.
Even as the embargo on charcoal has been tightened,
Al-Shabaab has merely developed new funding sources
of funding, including, among others, racketeering,
extorting money from private businesses, blackmailing,
holding members of the local population for ransom,
extorting fees on transportation and trading illegally in
natural resources, as well as donations from the Somali
diaspora.

That stands in stark contrast with the revenue
challenges facing the Federal Government of Somalia
and of the question of how to sustain itself fiscally. One
of the primary sources of income is the collection of
taxes. However, international corporations in Somalia
provide very little revenue to the country. In the specific
case of the oil industry, we see how it is seeking to
divide the country by taking advantage of the concept of
federalism to exploit the State's institutional weakness
and secure lucrative contracts that are of little benefit
to the sustainable development of the Somali people.
In order to address the challenges facing the country,
there is a need to strengthen State institutions and
bolster capacities for exercising full sovereign control
over its natural resources. For instance, illegal fishing
in Somalia's exclusive economic zone jeopardizes the
survival of thousands of small-scale fishers who, given
their economic conditions, are apt to turn to criminal or
destabilizing activities.

On another front, I would like to mention the
humanitarian situation, which continues to be very
complex, with more than 4 million people still
requiring humanitarian aid, over 1 million facing food
insecurity and over 300,000 children suffering from
acute malnutrition, of whom 58,000 are suffering
from severe malnutrition. The needs of the more than
1.1 million displaced persons is urgent, and the recent
drought has only made things worse. We call on the
international community unconditionally to provide the
necessary financial resources to alleviate the pressing
humanitarian needs of the Somali population, who
have been affected by recurring conflict and economic,
social and environmental hardships. Unfortunately,
reports speak of difficulties in gaining access to the
areas most in need, and the endless negotiations and
payment of fees in many part of the country seem to
be the norm for humanitarian convoys, particularly in
areas where Al-Shabaab is present.

From a political perspective, we welcome the
mediation efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the African Union that led to the
recent decision of the President of Puntland, Abdiweli
Mohamed Ali Gaas, to accept the electoral formula for
the 2016 elections. We also stress the vital role played by
women in economic, political and social life in Somalia.
We therefore commend the Federal Government in
Somalia's decision to reserve 30 per cent of available
seats for women in the 2016 parliamentary elections.

In that regard, it is important that all political
sectors in Somalia understand that it is only in political
unity that can they effectively address the phenomenon
of terrorism, defeat Al-Shabaab and strengthen their
State institutions in order to ensure that Somalia can
meet the major challenges that still lie before it. We
wish the electoral process every success and call for the
deployment of an important security presence to ensure
the peaceful holding of elections throughout Somalia.

We underscire the role that the Federal Constitution
of Somalia must play as the bedrock of stability and the
peaceful development of politics in the country. It will
provide the legal framework that will shape the destiny
of the people. We call for the review process of the key
chapters of the provisional constitution to be completed
swiftly. By the same token, we encourage the Federal
Government to engage the emerging federal states and
their people in the review process and consultations
on the development of this Magna Carta for Somalia
through a widespread civic education campaign that
will achieve a broad and lasting social consensus based
on the inclusion of all sectors of society.

Finally, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
reiterates its commitment to the peace, security and
development of Somalia and the entire region of the
Horn of Africa.

