Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): First of all, I would
like to thank the presidency of Cote d'Ivoire for
convening this very important briefing on the drug
situation in West Africa, and also express gratitude to
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his
comprehensive report.

This meeting provides a unique platform and
opportunity to share experiences related to the combat
against the production and distribution of drugs
through joint multilateral action. Drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime in West Africa remain
matters ofgreat concern for us. In the affected countries,
including in West Africa, profits from drug trafficking
are used to destabilize States and also threaten both
development and stability. Besides their damaging
effects on people, they give rise to corruption and a
shadow economy, which are reinforced by money-
laundering and transnational crime and increased
funding to terrorist groups, thereby impeding sound
political stability and the progress of the African
region.

According to the World Drug Report 2018 released
in June by UNODC, Tramadol, an opioid used to treat
moderate and moderate-to-severe pain, has become
a growing concern in many regions of Africa and
Asia. The report also indicates that Africa and Asia
are emerging as cocaine-trafficking and consumption
hubs. It is well known that drug trafficking and related
illegal activities constitute the most serious threats to
security and human well-being worldwide.

My delegation makes the following observations
with regard to combating the drug problem in West
Africa.

The prompt and decisive action that is needed calls
for political will and regional collaboration to take
action at the regional and national levels. First, we
need to address factors that trigger distressing global
trends, instability, armed conflicts in many regions of
the world and refugee flows, together with unresolved
problems of poverty and disparities in development,
all of which further derail progress and impede the
full effectiveness of our interventions. Therefore,
critical engagement is necessary to implement
different international programmes and projects
aimed at strengthening the security, judicial and law
enforcement sectors.

We must aim for a major overhaul of the criminal
code, with a harmonization of legislation across
countries ofthe region. Our measures should be focused
on stricter law enforcement and justice systems,
together with early warning signals, intelligence
management and sharing, and rigorous border control,
with the help of UNODC and INTERPOL. All these
operations must be reinforced with capacity-building,
training and support by way of state-of-the-art detection
and communication equipment. We encourage West
African countries to continue to strengthen their
national institutional frameworks and responses
against these perilous threats, in close cooperation
with the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS), the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, United Nations
country teams, UNODC and INTERPOL.

Trafficking heroin from production centres to
heroin markets requires a global network of routes
and facilitation by domestic and international criminal
groups. In these circumstances, we need to relentlessly
search for ways to improve, strengthen and unite our
efforts. We should make better use of the enormous
potential of UNODC to share experience and best
practices, train personnel and develop effective tools
of practical cooperation. Capacity-building is the key
word for success.

This will be achieved only through a more effective
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. We welcome the continued efforts
of the Economic Community of West African States
to advance the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, including through the development of the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. We believe
that the establishment and deployment of the Group of
Five for the Sahel Joint Force will positively contribute
to maintaining stability in the region and help
countries, subregional organizations and UNOWAS to
address more effectively cross-border security threats,
including drug trafficking and piracy.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan is ready to work hand in
hand with others to improve and intensify the impetus
of mutually beneficial cooperation to mobilize all
possible efforts to counter the drug problem in Africa
and globally.

