Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to express my gratitude to you, Sir,
for convening this important meeting today. I would be
remiss if I did not once again pay tribute to your excellent
effort in presiding over the work of the Council and express
my appreciation for your personal presence as Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs of your country.

This Council is discussing the Lockerbie case. It is
indeed an important case which has drawn the attention of
the international public opinion over the past few years.
The Council has adopted three resolutions under Chapter
VII of the Charter concerning this case, and Libya has also
taken some measures in an attempt to respond to the
resolutions adopted by the Council. Moreover, regional
organizations, such as the League of Arab States and the
Organization of African Unity, have made efforts and taken
diplomatic steps over the past few years with a view to
finding a way out of the problem in keeping with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. The efforts
culminated with those organizations' adoption of diplomatic
options, options that have been submitted to the Council.
The proposals have in fact elicited a positive response from
many Member States of the United Nations.

The continuing situation and the lack of a solution
have led to great suffering for the Libyan people. Kuwait
regrets this suffering and shares Libya's hopes that it causes
will come to an end. We also wish to express our sincere
condolences to the families and friends of the victims of the
incident.

At present, we believe that the case is entering a new
phase that may help in finding a just solution satisfactory
to all the parties concerned. I refer here to the two
Judgments handed down by the International Court of
Justice on 27 February 1998 confirming the existence of a
legal dispute concerning the interpretation and application
of the 1971 Montreal Convention on the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, and
affirming the jurisdiction of the Court over the dispute on
the basis of article 14 of that Convention, notwithstanding
the adoption of Security Council resolutions 748 (1992) and
883 (1993), which do not contradict the jurisdiction of the
International Court. We believe there have been
developments in the case, which could be a beginning for
the Council to re-examine the situation.

In this respect, we would like to reaffirm the following
points. First, Kuwait believes that the implementation by all
States of all relevant Security Council resolutions is
essential if we wish to ensure respect for the Charter and
support international legitimacy and the rule of law while
maintaining peace and security in the world. Secondly,
Kuwait fully rejects all forms of terrorism and wishes to
express its sympathy for the innocent victims of terrorist
acts and their families. Thirdly, Kuwait welcomes the
Secretary-General's commendable efforts to find a
solution to the problem, foremost among which is the
dispatch of representatives to study the Scottish judicial
system in order to ensure the integrity and available
resources of the Scottish courts, which would guarantee
a fair trial of the suspects in this case.

We wish to express our general satisfaction with the
report of the Secretary-General's representative and
commend Mr. Petrovsky, who was sent by the Secretary-
General to Libya.

Fourthly, a positive view should be adopted
concerning the decisions of the International Court of
Justice, and they should be seriously considered by the
Security Council in order to achieve progress. The
International Court of Justice decision concerning its
jurisdiction in the matter is a starting point for the
achievement of the objectives of the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Fifthly, within the framework of
promoting close cooperation between regional
organizations and the United Nations in the field of world
peace and security, the Security Council should consider
positively the options submitted by the regional
organizations aimed at a speedy settlement of the case in
order to alleviate the suffering of the brotherly Libyan
people, with whom we fully sympathize.

In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm my country's
full awareness of the importance of the role assumed by
the Security Council in ensuring respect for the principles
of the Charter and international legitimacy and their role
in safeguarding world peace and security. We also wish
to reaffirm the responsibility of all Member States in
strengthening international legitimacy and the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council.

Finally, we wish to thank God and to thank you,
Mr. President.

