The Secretary-General: Less than a week ago,
the Quartet met in this building and agreed on the need
for a road map to achieve a permanent settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We agreed that it was
essential and urgent for the Palestinians to take all
possible steps to improve security by bringing an
immediate end to violence and terror. But we also
agreed that it had to be done within the context of an
overall plan, which must address the political,
economic, humanitarian and institutional dimensions of
the problem.

We agreed that the plan must spell out reciprocal
steps to be taken by the parties in each of three phases,
with a Quartet mechanism to monitor and assess each
party's progress against specific benchmarks,
culminating in the negotiation of a final and
comprehensive settlement by 2005.

We agreed, in short, on the need for a process
driven both by performance and by hope. That linkage
is essential, and I cannot emphasize it too strongly.
Yes, we need performance. But there must be hope,
too. For without hope there will be no performance.

So, far from seeing the first steps towards
implementing the Quartet's vision, the events of the
past few days represent a tragic step in the opposite
direction. Until last week, there had been six weeks of
relative calm in Israel itself, but during the same period
in the occupied territory at least 54 Palestinians were
killed in Israeli military operations. Then, in the space
of three days, 17 to 19 September, we saw a bomb
explode in a Palestinian school and two new suicide
attacks perpetrated against Israeli civilians inside
Israel.

I have said over and over again that such acts are
morally repugnant, and I say it again today. Each time
those words have to be repeated, they become even
more grimly apt. These acts are to be condemned both
for the utterly unjustifiable loss of life, the pain and
misery that they cause to innocent people and because
they set back even further the prospect of a just and
lasting settlement. They strike directly at that very
hope which, as the Quartet agreed, is an essential
driver of political progress.

Once again, I urge all Palestinians, especially the
leaders of all political factions, to renounce this wicked
instrument of terror, clearly and irrevocably, now and
forever.

Last week, the Quartet recognized Israel's
legitimate security concerns and repeated its demand
that terrorist attacks be stopped once and for all. It also
repeated its call on the Palestinian Authority to work
with the United States and regional partners to reform
security services and combat terrorism.

But how can the Palestinians respond to that call
if what is left of the civil and security infrastructure of
the Palestinian Authority, which is already gravely
weakened, is now in the process of being destroyed?
Surely, such destruction will only set back even further
the prospects for implementing necessary reforms and
ensuring real improvements in the Authority's security
performance.
Similarly, the continuing destruction of the
capacity of ministries and municipalities to provide
basic services such as water, electricity and education
will hamper and even undermine efforts to meet
humanitarian needs, whether by Palestinian or by
international organizations. Further misery is hardly a
basis for progress, whether political, security or
economic.

The Quartet and our Arab partners in the region
are working intensively with the Palestinian Authority
to see that security and institutional reforms are
implemented. But we can succeed only if the
Government of Israel actively supports the process
rather than hindering it. The systematic and literal
grinding down of the Authority's headquarters in
Ramallah, in which a further 10 Palestinians have been
killed, is also likely to cause greater political instability
in the West Bank and Gaza. Despite the re-imposition
of curfews in most West Bank towns, it has already
prompted mass demonstrations in a number of
Palestinian cities, including Ramallah, and efforts to
address key reform issues have been postponed as a
result.

This too will set back the prospects for resuming
the peace process. Once again, I appeal to Israel to take
greater care to protect the lives of Palestinian civilians
and to refrain from policies and actions that are in
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention.

My Special Envoy is in constant contact with
both parties and has repeatedly spoken to Chairman
Arafat and other senior Palestinian officials in
Ramallah. He met this morning with Foreign Minister
Peres and is now in Ramallah with the Secretary-
General of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Abu
Mazen. He is working in close coordination with the
other members of the Quartet and key actors in the
region.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is not going to be
resolved by military might alone, or by violent means
of any kind. A policy based on forcing the other side to
capitulate is a bankrupt policy. It is not working, and it
will never work. It only encourages desperation. It
weakens moderates and strengthens extremists. In the
end there will have to be a political settlement,
negotiated between the two peoples on an equal
basis - a settlement in which, as this Council has said,
two States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side within
secure and recognized borders.

Why not reach that end sooner rather than later?
How many hundreds or thousands more have to die,
how much more pain and misery must be endured
before leaders on both sides find the Vision and the
courage to accept the inevitable?

Only a settlement on that basis can bring real
peace and security to both peoples, and only a
comprehensive approach can bring a settlement on that
basis nearer.

The so-called sequential approach, which insists
on full security as a precondition for progress on the
political, humanitarian and institutional fronts, has
clearly failed. Israel needs to understand that there will
be no lasting security without a political settlement.
And therefore, even while defending itself against
terrorist attacks, Israel should cooperate actively with
the Quartet's efforts to reach such a settlement within
the next three years.

The Palestinians, on their side, need to
understand that there will be no settlement without
lasting security for Israel.

Both sides must be urged by all who have any
influence over them to accept and act on those
understandings so that at last there can be peace and
security for both peoples, as part of a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.

But I fear this vision will remain a distant mirage
so long as our television screens - and the minds of
all those involved - are filled with ugly scenes of
death and destruction, whether in the streets of Tel
Aviv or at the Muqata'a in Ramallah.

More than 80 years ago, the great Irish poet
William Butler Yeats wrote of a time in his country
when

"Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;
Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world

The best lack all conviction, while the worst

Are full of passionate intensity."

Alas, those words have been true of many times
and many places since, and they seem all too true of
the situation between Israelis and Palestinians today.

But let us not resign ourselves to that state of
affairs. Let us help the best on both sides, Palestinian
and Israeli, to regain their passion for peace and the
conviction that brought them so close to agreement two
years ago.

Let us resist the downward spiral into anarchy.
Let us rebuild a centre that can hold.

