The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Croatia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a place at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to documents S/l995/349 and S/l995/351,
which contain the texts of two letters dated 2 and 3 May
1995 respectively, from the Permanent Representative of
Croatia to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the
continuation of hostilities in the Republic of Croatia.

"The Security Council reaffirms in this context
its statement of 1 May 1995 (S/PRST/l995/23) in all
its aspects, and demands that the parties comply with
the requirements set out therein immediately and in
full.

"The Security Council condemns the incursions
into the zone of separation by the forces of the
Government of the Republic of Croatia in Sectors
North and South, and by both sides in Sector East.

It demands that the forces in question withdraw
immediately.

"The Security Council also condemns the
bombardment of Zagreb and other centres of civilian
population by the forces of the local Serb authorities
and demands that they cease immediately.

"The Security Council further condemns acts of
harassment and intimidation against United Nations
personnel and reminds the parties of their obligations
to respect such personnel at all times and to ensure
their safety, security and freedom of movement.

"The Security Council calls on the parties to
cooperate fully with UNCRO, UNHCR and the
ICRC in protecting and assisting the local civilian
population and any displaced persons. The Council
is deeply concerned by reports that the human rights
of the Serb population of Western Slavonia are
being violated. It demands that the Government of
the Republic of Croatia respect fully the rights of the
Serb population concerned in conformity with
internationally recognized standards.

"The Security Council insists that the authority
of UN CRO be re-established and respected in Sector
West and other areas affected by the hostilities.

"The Security Council demands that the parties
act in accordance with the proposals put to them by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
that they cease all hostilities immediately, and that
they cooperate fully with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and with UNCRO.

"The Security Council further calls upon the
parties to enter without delay into the discussions in
Geneva to which they have been invited by the
Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia.
 

"The Security Council will remain actively seized
of the matter and will be ready to consider further
steps as necessary."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/26.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The
Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 8.20 pm.

