Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Le Roy for his
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General on
support to African Union peacekeeping operations
(S/2009/470). We are also pleased to once again
welcome Mr. Prodi to the Security Council.

Today's meeting illustrates anew the particular
attention that the Security Council devotes to Africa,
including when it comes to resolving tensions on the
continent.

There is a need to acknowledge that the African
Union (AU) and subregional African organizations
have in recent years become increasingly active in
resolving the problems of the continent. We welcome
and support the resolve of the African Union and its
member States to bear primary responsibility for the
prevention of conflicts and the conduct of
peacekeeping activities in Africa.

African peacekeepers play an essential role in the
operations in Somalia and Darfur. There is no doubt
that the African Union's peacekeeping capacities and
resources need to be strengthened, including through
the support of countries of the international
community. That is the goal of United Nations
cooperation with the African Union. In that regard, we
must first and foremost focus on strengthening links
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council, as well as between the
Secretariat and the African Union Commission.

In addition to peacekeeping efforts, there is also a
need to devote the necessary attention to the building
of the AU's capacity in the areas of mediation,
preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding.

We welcome the Secretary-General's focus on
further developing cooperation between the Secretariat
and the AU Commission, including through the
establishment of a joint task force on peace and
security, the reorganization of the Secretariat's current
presence at African Union headquarters in Addis Ababa
and the initiatives set out in the report on strengthening
the AU's institutional capacities.

We have taken particular note of the Secretary-
General's analysis of existing avenues for providing
United Nations logistical and financial support for AU
peacekeeping operations. There is little accumulated
experience to date in that regard. There was only one
instance of efforts to implement a support package, and
that was irregular in nature. Making such efforts part of
a more regular process would be premature at this
point. That is particularly so given the fact that the
Secretary-General has correctly pointed out that United
Nations support financed through the Organization's
regular budget does not always ensure sustainability or
predictability for the deployment of AU peacekeeping
operations.

We also share the Secretary-General's
conclusions with regard to the fact that the
responsibility for allocating sufficient resources for
African Union peacekeeping operations falls first and
foremost on the member States of that regional
organization. We welcome the African Union's
decision to increase its contributions to its Peace Fund.
We believe that the idea of setting up a flexible trust
fund under the AU Peace Fund merits further attention.
We also think that the role of the United Nations in
relation to such a fund should be to provide expert
advice.

The establishment by the African Union of a
multilevel collective security structure to prevent crises
and respond to them in a timely manner continues to be
a priority. An important component of that architecture
must be an international peacekeeping entity, namely,
the African Standby Force, in whose establishment the
international community is actively participating.
There is also a need to continue to make active efforts
to strengthen the institutional and legal foundations of
the Force.

The Russian Federation is participating in the
development and implementation of international
assistance programmes for Africa, including in the area
of strengthening the peacekeeping capacities of the
African Union. Russian specialized educational
institutions include training programmes for
participants in African peacekeeping operations.

Russian peacekeepers are active in almost all United
Nations peacekeeping operations on the continent. A
Russian helicopter unit is deployed as part of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan, and another
helicopter unit has begun its activities as part of the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad. We intend to continue to develop
our multifaceted cooperation with African countries
with a view to strengthening peace and stability in that
region.

We support the draft presidential statement that
has been circulated among members of the Council.

