Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Farid Zarif for his briefing and for
the Secretary-General's comprehensive report on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), covering the period of July to
October (S/2011/675). I would also like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Foreign Minister of
Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their statements.

There have been a few positive developments
during the reporting period. We note that during the
European Union-facilitated dialogue in Brussels on
2September, Serbia agreed to recognize Kosovo's
customs stamps. The two sides also reached
agreements on the issue of cadastre records and on
establishing a fully reliable cadastre in Kosovo in order
to provide legal certainty and to protect the rights of
people with legitimate claims to property. In addition,
both parties expressed their commitment to look
further into the technical and political aspects of issues
such as telecommunications, energy and university
diplomas. The two sides also continued to cooperate on
the issue of missing persons.

While such agreements are welcome, they have
been overshadowed by the situation on the ground in
northern Kosovo. We note with concern that the overall
security situation was negatively affected by the
developments on border crossings and that there was a
24 per cent increase in incidents affecting minority
communities. Those developments also prevented
further talks between the parties until about a week
ago. The incidents during the reporting period and
those that took place yesterday have underlined the
fragility of the security situation in the area. That
requires careful handling.

While we welcome the efforts made by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) to investigate allegations of inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo and note the appointment of the lead
prosecutor, Serbia continues to be interested in a role
of the Security Council in that investigation. We
continue to support the proposal for the creation of a
mechanism that enjoys the support and confidence of
all stakeholders.

We think that a number of unresolved issues are
connected with the question of status, which can be
resolved only through bilateral talks between the
parties. While such talks are being facilitated by the
European Union, it is necessary that the international
presence in Kosovo, including UNMIK, EULEX and
the Kosovo Force, act with strict neutrality and
impartiality and in accordance with their respective
mandates, including resolution 1244 (1999). They
should also ensure that there is no violence or change
of the status quo by force. Unilateral actions should be
avoided, and the parties should resolve sensitive issues
through peaceful means on the basis of consultations
and engagement with all communities.

In conclusion, we call upon the concerned parties
to resolve all issues concerning Kosovo through
consultation and dialogue without resorting to violence
or destabilizing unilateral action. Only thus can the
aspirations of all peoples concerned be met and lasting
peace and stability established in the region.

