Mr. Eitel (Germany): Allow me first to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. I want also to address my delegation's thanks to
the Permanent Representative of Honduras, Ambassador
Martinez Blanco, for his guidance last month. Of course,
we also wish to welcome the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom; we are looking forward to close
cooperation with him.

Germany has just voted in favour of the extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification

Mission (UNAVEM. III) until 8 February 1996.

In the view of my Government, the groundwork for
the successful implementation of the Lusaka Protocol has
been laid. As a consequence, the Secretary-General has
been able to proceed with the full deployment of the
infantry units of UNAVEM. III. We hope that all units will
be operational by the end of this month.

My Government, however, realizes that much work
remains to be done. In the political area we hope that
very soon a second meeting between President dos Santos
and Mr. Savimbi will take place to finalize the
composition of the new Government. That meeting should
also put an end to the current incidents of non-respect of
the cease-fire and should lead to the substantial
involvement of both parties in the future political life of
Angola. Both parties have to realize that there is no room
for competition to obtain a better position for the future.

The disarmament and quartering of demobilized
units should follow swiftly. A viable compromise has to
be reached concerning the future composition of the
armed forces. For those who will not be part of the armed
forces, alternatives should be made available.

Again, the international community will have very
little understanding if parties try to increase their relative
advantage at the expense of the peace process itself. In
this context, my Government is very much concerned
about reports of renewed mine-laying. This will not only
delay further the attempts to clear the roads for
UNAVEM. III; it seems also to be a futile attempt to stem
the tide of the peace process. Because of the special
importance of mine-clearing for the deployment of
UNAVEM. III and for the future of Angola in general,
especially in terms of its economic development, my
country is providing personnel and material for this

purpose.

To summarize, we believe that the integration of
both parties into the future political life of Angola
remains the cornerstone of a peaceful settlement of the
civil war. UNAVEM. III can assist. But only if the
legitimate interests of all concerned are respected will we
see democracy and peace in Angola.

