Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me
too to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
public briefing on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo after the holding of the Gaborone meeting. I
would also like to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hedi
Annabi, for his statement.

We have always said that the restoration of peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will depend on the success of the inter-Congolese
dialogue. Today, my delegation welcomes the holding
and very encouraging results of the Gaborone meeting,
which set the time and place for the long-awaited inter-
Congolese dialogue, which is so essential to the Lusaka
process. We echo those who have said that the
Gaborone meeting has breathed new life into the
Lusaka peace agreements.

We also note with satisfaction that, in addition to
setting the date, venue and rules of procedure for the
inter-Congolese dialogue, the Gaborone meeting also
made it possible to make major decisions on other
problems impeding a political solution to the very
complex conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. My delegation would like to congratulate the
facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire, who succeeded in
organizing a meeting that had increasingly seemed
impossible. We would like to convey our
congratulations also to all the participants in the
Gaborone meeting.

The success of the Gaborone meeting should not
make us forget that we have a long way to go before
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo can be called irreversible. It is for that reason
that my delegation has constantly called for the
launching of the third phase of the deployment of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which should not
be held up by the Council.

With regard to questions relating to the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement of armed groups, we agree
with the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, that the
staunch resolve of the Council will be crucial. We have
great hopes that progress will be made on this issue
during his upcoming visit to the region.

It is imperative that we demonstrate today the
credibility and commitment of the Council to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, just as the parties
must comply with the Council's demands. We also
believe that the Council should continue to encourage
the continuation of a dialogue of trust between the
leaders of the region, so as to find a final and
acceptable solution to the issue of armed groups.

In conclusion, my delegation appeals to the
parties to show restraint and to demonstrate a spirit of
compromise, responsibility and good faith so that the
Addis Ababa meeting to be held on 15 October is a real
success that leads to the implementation of the
remainder of the Lusaka Agreement.

