Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
The United States is pleased to support this latest
expression of the Council's efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation ofthe Iraqi people.

We continue to believe that the oil-for-food
programme is meeting the needs of the Iraqi people
while denying the Baghdad regime access to funds it
would use to further threaten its neighbours. The oil-
for-food programme can be improved, and the changes
which we have agreed to today reflect our interest in
making those improvements. But the most effective
change would be for the regime to stop obstruction and
implement the relevant humanitarian sections of
resolution 1284 (1999), which are intended to improve
the operation ofthe oil-for-food programme.

While the Security Council implemented every
humanitarian paragraph in resolutions 1284 (1999) and
1302 (2000), the Government of Iraq denied thousands
of its citizens the opportunity to perform the hajj,
submitted virtually no contracts for the health, water
and sanitation, education or oil sectors for phase VIII
ofthe programme, proposed a conversion of the escrow
account from dollars to euros, which will cost the
humanitarian programme hundreds of millions of
dollars, and initiated a housing sector distribution
programme that ignores those most in need of housing
assistance, against the understanding of the Secretary-
General.

Council agreement to Iraq's requests, such as the
conversion of the escrow account, has reaped few
benefits. On the contrary, during the negotiation of this
new phase of the programme we have seen numerous
Iraqi attempts to avoid, rather than accept, obligations
to the international community. This is clearly
unacceptable and works to the detriment of the Iraqi
people.

In this draft resolution the Council underscores
that arrangements for the purchase of locally produced
goods and for the cash component of the oil sector are
subject to the Council's approval and are desirable.
Funding the cash component in the oil sector is linked
conceptually to the need for cash components in all
sectors. As the Secretary-General made clear in his
report, a cash component is essential for all sectors of
the programme. Making progress on this is important
and has been a priority for some time.

The Secretary-General should also give priority
to making arrangements associated with essential
human needs, as requested in resolution 1284 (1999)
and in the draft resolution, as well as for the oil
industry. We would view submission of arrangements
for the oil industry only as incomplete, and the draft
resolution calls upon the Government of Iraq to
cooperate in the implementation of all such
arrangements.

The Security Council agreed in September to
transfer funds from the United Nations Compensation
Commission for strictly humanitarian projects, and this
draft resolution does that. For that move to have real
meaning, those funds must be used in a way that takes
into account the key elements of the humanitarian
needs of the Iraqi people, as well as the needs of the
victims of aggression. Specifically, we suggested that
those funds be directed towards malnutrition in
children, including the establishment of supplementary
feeding centres, the purchase and provision of targeted
nutrition supplies and breast-feeding education
programmes; for health and nutritional support for
internally displaced persons; for specific health
infrastructure support for the southern governorates,
including Basra; for infrastructural improvements in
the health and education sectors; and for the purchase
and use of children's vaccines and health and
nutritional support for orphaned children resident in
other institutions.
The focus ofthis effort should be on the priorities
identified with the Secretary-General and by United
Nations personnel on the ground. We hope that the
Government of Iraq will cooperate across the board on
these and other humanitarian issues. The problem is not
lack of resources. Indeed, the Government of Iraq has
given up almost $300 million in converting currency
from dollars to euros, and, according to the oil-for-food
programme, it should give up some $500 million in this
phase by stopping the flow of oil. This means some
$800 million will be sacrificed which could have
benefited the people ofIraq.

We look forward to the implementation of this
new six-month phase of the programme. We will
continue to work in this Council to gain Iraqi
acceptance of its obligations to the international
community.

