Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I
would like to thank President Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their informative briefings.

The United States would like to begin by recognizing
President Meron. He has led the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals since
2012, overseeing the assumption of responsibilities
from the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). President Meron's efforts, through
his leadership of the Mechanism have helped ensure
that victims of horrific atrocities addressed by the ICTR
and ICTY receive meaningful measures ofjustice. He
has done so while running a lean, efficient operation.

The volume of work that the Mechanism conducts
is impressive given its lean operations - 253 judicial
decisions and orders issued during the past reporting
period alone, in addition to an ongoing trial in the case
Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanisic and Franko Simatovic,
ongoing appeal proceedings in the cases Prosecutor
v. Radovan Karadeie and Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladie
and preparations for appeals in the case Prosecutor v.
Augustin Ngirabatware.

We would also like to recognize the work of
Prosecutor Brammertz. In particular we commend
his Office's continued efforts in managing trials
and appeals cases, as well as the renewed focus on
the Tracking Unit activities to locate and apprehend
remaining fugitives. We also appreciate the ongoing
efforts to provide assistance to national war crimes
prosecutions, encourage regional judicial cooperation
and support reconciliation, all of which build on the
legacy of accountability established by the Tribunals.

With regard to the future, we urge the Mechanism
to continue to implement the recommendations of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS), as
described in its report (S/2018/206) issued in March.
It is important to note that the OIOS concluded that
the Mechanism had "achieved much of what the
Security Council envisaged in resolution 1966 (2010)"
(5/2018/206, p. I). The Mechanism took advantage of
operational innovations to streamline its work further.
The implementation of OIOS recommendations will
help the Mechanism become even more efficient and
effective at continuing to achieve its mandate. We
also welcome the revision of the Code of Professional
Conduct for the Judges of the Mechanism to include a
disciplinary mechanism.
We encourage the Mechanism to consider proposals
to respond to concerns raised by some States about the
early-release regime. We note that some individuals
who were released early have subsequently denied
responsibility for their crimes. We share the concern
that denial undermines the fight against impunity. We
recognize and encourage the practice of consulting with
the States concerned about the early-release regime.

In the former Yugoslavia, we welcome the
Prosecutor's report of productive cooperation between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia on transferred
cases. At the same time, we are concerned about his
report that Croatian authorities are not engaging in
a similar way, as well as a report of a breakdown in
cooperation between Kosovo and Serbia with regard
to war crimes prosecutions. We again highlight that,
although the ICTY may have closed last December,
the pursuit of justice for atrocities related to the
conflicts in the former Yugoslavia is not over. There
are many hundreds of cases currently in the hands of
national authorities in the region. We call on all of
the Governments concerned to credibly investigate
and prosecute or otherwise resolve those cases, while
cooperating with one another and the Mechanism to
that end.

The United States also remains concerned about
the failure of the Government of Serbia to execute three
arrest warrants for individuals charged with contempt
of court in relation to witness intimidation in the case
Prosecutor v. Vojislav Seselj. We continue to encourage
Serbia to fulfil its obligations, including with respect
to cooperation with the Mechanism. The United States
urges all States to undertake efforts to arrest and
surrender the eight remaining fugitives indicted by the
ICTR as soon as possible. The United States continues
to offer up to $5 million for information leading to
their arrest. The work of the Mechanism, like that of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
previously, reminds us that in the face of terrible
atrocities, we can work together to hold perpetrators
accountable and to achieve a measure of justice for
victims. We look forward to continuing to support the
Mechanism in the fight against impunity.

