Mr. Staur (Denmark): Let me first of all fully
align Denmark with the European Union statement
delivered this morning by the German presidency of
the European Union.

Denmark sees today's discussion as a very
welcome opportunity to consider the link between
security and climate change. Climate-related resource
shortages are well-recognized and powerful drivers of
conflict, the situation in Darfur being a forceful
reminder thereof. We are also beginning to realize how
climate change in the broader sense threatens to
undermine some Governments' ability to ensure
security and stability.

We would like to commend the Security Council
for having taken on the responsibility of discussing this
wider concept of security early on. We trust that this
debate will serve to attract much-needed attention to
the issue and that by no means will it preclude
discussion - and, more important, of course, action -
in a wide range of forums outside the Council.

Denmark will host the fifteenth session of the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, to take
place in 2009. It is our aim to work with all our
international partners to ensure that agreement is
reached on a future climate agreement at that meeting.
If we miss this goal, it will be difficult to launch a
successor to the Kyoto Protocol in 2012, when its first
commitment period comes to an end.
For a future climate agreement to be effective, we
must take a comprehensive look at the climate
challenge. Here the link between climate, energy and
security is crucial.

In a recent study prepared for the Danish Minister
for Foreign Affairs, these links are clearly highlighted.
The study makes it clear that the issue of climate
change is still a low priority compared to other global
challenges such as terrorism, poverty and proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.

Climate change must be treated in line with other
major global threats in order to prevent very serious
consequences from occurring. Climate change may
undermine the carrying capacity of many developing
countries, exacerbate tensions over scarce water
resources and fertile land, lead to an increasing number
of environmental refugees, drive conflict over strategic
trade routes and newly accessible resources, and lead
to territorial loss. It is therefore crucial to acknowledge
the security implications of climate change. That will
allow us to raise awareness and to mobilize the
political will to address this challenge. Like others, we
very much welcome the decision of the Secretary-
General to make climate change one of his priorities.

Climate change is a complex issue, and there is
no silver bullet to fix it. Traditional security policy
instruments cannot mitigate climate change, therefore
we must take quick and decisive action to mitigate it
while at the same time adapting to it in developed as
well as in developing countries. In particular, we must
assist developing countries to build capacity to deal
with security threats from climate-induced degradation
and potential tension over scarce resources.

The challenge to change from carbon-based
economies to something still unknown is a tremendous
one. But we all have to accept this challenge. The
recent reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change provide a strong basis for action, and
the international community must respond accordingly.
The direction is given. We all have to muster the
political will to make the tough decisions necessary.
The debate today is part of this process.

