Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): 1 thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), Mr. Abou Moussa, for his presentation of
the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of
UNOCA and on the Lord's Resistance Army-affected
areas (S/2013/297). We appreciate the continued
commitment of Mr. Moussa to conflict prevention in
Central Africa.

The situation in Central Africa has worsened since
the last report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/923),
due mainly to the crisis in the Central African Republic
and the continued presence of the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) in the region. Rwanda is cognizant of the
fact that insecurity and statelessness breed criminality
and terrorism. Terrorists groups like the LRA exploit
the vacuum to wreak more havoc in the community.

We once again express our deepest concern
about the situation in the Central African Republic,
particularly with regard to human rights violations and
the humanitarian crisis caused by the Se'leka, which
have consequences not only for the Central African
Republic but also for all countries of the region. That
coalition will be held accountable, and the perpetrators
of those crimes will be brought to justice.

We are concerned that the LRA has continued to
carry out deadly attacks resulting in civilian casualties,
abductions and the displacement of populations.
We condemn in the strongest terms the continued
Violations committed against children by the LRA
and its use of rape, sexual slavery and other acts of
sexual violence. In that regard, we welcome the tools
provided by the conclusions on the situation of children
and armed conflict affected by the Lord's Resistance
Army (S/AC.51/2013/1), adopted by the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict on 19 April. We join
the Working Group in expressing appreciation for the
efforts ofthe Governments of affected States to promote
the protection of children, including the progress made
with regard to the operational plan for cross-border
repatriation, care and the reunification of children
escaped or rescued from the LRA. We encourage armed
forces of the region to establish standard operating
procedures for the reception and handover of LRA
children to civilian child protection actors.

We appreciate the combined efforts by LRA-affected
countries, including through their contribution of troops
to the African Union Regional Task Force against
the LRA. We reiterate our support for the activities
of UNOCA and the new implementation plan of the
United Nations regional strategy to address the threat
and impact of activities of the LRA. We are concerned,
however, that these efforts could be undermined by
those in the region who wish to legitimize the criminal
activities of terrorist groups in Central Africa, such as
the LRA and the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda. We remain gravely concerned by the
humanitarian situation of internally displaced persons
and refugees in LRA-affected countries and we urge
the international community to maintain its support in
favour of displaced populations and refugees.

Before concluding, let me say a word on the scourge
of poaching in Central Africa, mentioned in the report
of the Secretary-General. The consequences are well
known: a dramatic decrease in elephants in Africa,
impact on the environment, financial shortfalls for
tourism, as well as the financing of armed groups. In
that regard, we support the call of the Secretary-General
to consider the issue a major national and subregional
security concern requiring concerted and coordinated
action, but we also believe that, as the demand for
ivory is mainly outside Africa, countries of destination
should also play their part within the framework of
the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.

In conclusion, let me say that Rwanda is still
confident that, despite the crisis in the Central African
Republic, the LRA will eventually be uprooted from
the region through the combined efforts of UNOCA,
the Economic Community of Central African States,
the African Union and countries of the region.

Finally, we reiterate our support for the draft
presidential statement submitted by the United
Kingdom.

