Mr. ngowe (Botswana): When the Security Council
adopted resolution 1044 (1996) on 31 January 1996, my
delegation expressed the hope that it would be the last
resolution to be adopted by the Council on the question of
the extradition to Ethiopia of the three suspects wanted in
connection with the assassination attempt on the life of the
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia, last June. We had hoped the Government of the
Sudan would comply with the demands of resolution 1044
(1996) and avoid a prolonged dispute with the Security
Council. It is not too late; the Sudan can still do what is
expected of it by Security Council resolution 1044 (1996).

The Sudan is a fellow African country, and we do not
harbour any ill intentions against its brotherly people. We
are aware that the draft resolution before us is not as
stringent on the Sudan as it could have been, or as some
would have wanted it to be, thanks to the efforts of the
co-sponsors. We are banking on the compliance of the
Government of the Sudan with the Security Council
resolutions; we trust that the Sudan will hand over the
three suspects to Ethiopia for prosecution and that it will
not be necessary for the Security Council to adopt a third
resolution on this matter.

Immediately following the adoption of resolution
1044 (1996), the Secretary-General dispatched a Special
Envoy to Africa for consultations on the implementation
of that resolution, and a report on the results of that
diplomatic effort was submitted to the Security Council.

What is most striking about the report is that all the
Sudan's neighbours, visited by the Special Envoy, accuse
the Sudanese Government of supporting terrorist activities
in their countries. We find this most disturbing. Africa is
drowning in all manner of problems, and it can ill afford
to add more. We therefore appeal to the Sudan and its
neighbours to respect each other's territorial integrity.

My delegation voted in favour of resolution
1044 (1996) because of its firm aversion to terrorism.
Terrorism is the scourge of world society today, and it is
incumbent upon all States, including the Sudan, to get rid
of this scourge. The extradition of the three suspects to
Ethiopia would serve as a deterrent to terrorists in the
region and beyond. Those with terrorist intentions would
know that there is no place to hide.

The draft resolution before us sends the right
message about the commitment of the international
community to effectively combat terrorism. All States
should cooperate in the efforts to rid the world of the
menace of terrorism. It is therefore our ardent hope that
the Government of the Sudan will also cooperate in this
endeavour and take concrete steps to ensure compliance
with the demands of the international community. This
would send a clear signal that the Sudan does not abet
terrorist activities and the Government of the Sudan
would have clearly dissociated itself from the terrorism
that its neighbours accuse it of encouraging.

The peoples of East Africa want peace, without
which they cannot develop their countries. Coming from
southern Africa, we are fully alive to the negative effects
that terrorism and destabilization can have on the
economies of countries. We do not wish them to be
visited upon the countries of East Africa, or any group of
States, for that matter.

