Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): Ithank you, Madam
President, for convening today's important meeting
and for maintaining the Security Council's focus on
conflict prevention in Africa. I join others in thanking
Special Envoy Said Djinnit for his briefing, but also for
the critical role that he has played in keeping preventive
diplomacy active and in including women in peace
processes, as already mentioned by the representative
of Sweden and others.

As Mr. Djinnit and others have made clear
today, the Great Lakes region continues to face many
challenges. In response, it is clear that a structured
approach to regional stability is needed. We support
work to reform and reinvigorate the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. It needs needs active
engagement from its members and guarantors to have
high impact, and that impact, as we have heard, is vital.
Today I personally want to focus on two countries
in the region, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi.

As we heard last month, the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains deeply
troubling. I pay tribute to the Conference nationale
episcopale du Congo for its mediation efforts, but it
is up to the Government and the opposition to deliver
the 31 December agreement in letter and in spirit, with
purposeful speed. What we have actually seen is stalling
and obfuscation, particularly by the Government. This
is not only hindering implementation of the agreement,
but also is distracting attention from the real prize that
is at stake: peaceful and credible elections to take place
this year, enabling the first democratic transition of
power in the country's history.

Sadly, the obstacles to this goal go beyond inertia.
The appointment of a new Prime Minister by President
Kabila last week was an active step, and I agree with
France that it is a worrying one. It went against both the
spirit and the letter of the agreement. This appointment
will not help to restore the broad national consensus
that lies at the heart of the agreement. Until that
consensus is built, the uncertainty of the politics of the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo risks being mirrored
in the security situation, which continues to deteriorate.

We are particularly concerned about the increase
in violence and reports of atrocities in the Kasai region.
This underlines the importance of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Joint
Human Rights Office investigating violations and
abuses of human rights and international law. Those
who commit human rights violations must be held
to account.

We are also concerned about the ongoing threat
from armed groups, including the resurgence of the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M23) in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We reiterate the
need for dialogue, not just a military effort, in order to
tackle armed groups. The resumption of talks between
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the M23 is vital, as is the implementation
of the Nairobi declarations and the repatriation of M23
and Forces democratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda
rebels. We support the Special Envoy and his efforts to
make progress on these issues.

The presence of Sudan People's Liberation
Movement/Army in Opposition elements in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is destabilizing. We welcome the efforts by
Special Representative Sidikou as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to find a
solution and their engagement with regional partners.
We need to find a regional solution urgently to avoid
exacerbating tensions in fragile local communities. We
ask that the Secretariat keep the Council updated.

Turning to the concerning situation in Burundi, the
regime claims that normality is returning to the country.
It is not. A climate of fear persists as disappearances,
arbitrary arrests and killings continue almost daily. The
Government still shows no sign of acting in the interests
of its people and seems to be concerned only with
clinging onto power. Moves by President Nkurunziza
to enable him to remain in power for a fourth term, and
possibly beyond, risk bringing the country to the brink
once again.

The Government's refusal to engage with the
international community is especially worrying, and
some of the language and activity of the Imbonerakure,
as others have said earlier in this meeting, is truly
horrific. Here, in this open meeting, I call on the
Government of Burundi to participate fully in the talks
being led by former President Mkapa. These talks,
which must be open and sincere, as France has said,
remain the best hope of resolving the crisis peacefully.
We urge the Government to enable implementation of
resolution 2303 (2016) and to allow the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to conduct its
work without hindrance and cooperate fully with the
commission of inquiry which was mandated by the
Human Rights Council. I agree with Egypt and Sweden
that the Peacebuilding Commission has an important
role to play in all of this.

We know how difficult it is to bring peace and
stability to a country or region after conflict, but we
also know that it can be done and that there is nothing
inevitable about the future. The Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi can step
back from their current courses; they can take decisions
in the interests of their people, and they can avoid
bloodshed and instability in this very fragile region.

It is the duty of all countries in the Council to
support that course and to do all we can to implement
our own resolutions. Given the significance that
Ethiopia has already talked about in terms of the wider
strategic posture in this region, it is really important
that we all do our best right now.
