Mr. Cowen (Ireland): I would like to thank the
presidency of the Council for having organized this
important public meeting on Afghanistan -
particularly important in the light of events in the past
hours and days e and to express my appreciation to
the Secretary-General and to his Special
Representative, Mr. Brahimi, for their most important
interventions this morning. I want to assure them of
Ireland's continuing and strong support for their efforts
to achieve an equitable and balanced solution to the
crisis in Afghanistan.

My colleague, Louis Michel, the Foreign Minister
of Belgium, will later deliver a statement on behalf of
the European Union, and Ireland fully associates itself
with his remarks.

I think that with military success come very great
political and humanitarian responsibilities. There have
been too many atrocities in the past in Afghanistan -
too much bloodshed and too little respect for human
life and human dignity. I think that a compelling and
unanimous message needs to go from this Council this
morning that the mistakes of the past must not be
repeated.

We seem today to have a new military situation,
but above all we need a new beginning for the people
of Afghanistan, politically and on the humanitarian
front, and in relation to the dignity of the person and
those universal values that bind us all together as
members of this assembly. We have seen great abuse of
human rights, particularly those of women and girls,
and of respect for human life itself in Afghanistan. We
need to end this nightmare now. I hope that with wise
intervention of the Secretary-General and
Mr. Brahimi - which is based, I think, on a realistic
assessment of the present situation, not as we would
like it to be, but as it is - Afghanis themselves will
take up their responsibilities. I hope that people who
have not been able to provide a unifying element in
their country will now see the higher responsibility to
the people of Afghanistan, who have suffered enough
under this tyranny, that they will not have it revisited
upon them in another form of tyranny in the future.

We all know that the desperate situation of the
Afghan people did not begin on 7 October. Ordinary
Afghans have been the victims of more than two
decades of violence and, more recently, of the
extremism of the Taliban regime. A generation of
Afghans has known little else but conflict, poverty,
malnourishment and human rights abuse.

My Government believes that Afghanistan must
not be allowed to remain a failed State where
continuing internal conflicts breed illegal activities and
provide a safe haven for terrorists. We are determined
that the international process impelled by the current
crisis should bring an end to the misery of Afghans and
provide them, as I have said, with a new beginning.

We hope that the military campaign against the Al
Qaeda terrorist network and the Taliban regime that
shelters it will achieve its objectives in as short a time-
frame as possible, and that every effort will continue to
be made to avoid civilian casualties. We also appeal to
all sides involved in the conflict to respect human
rights and international conventions on the conduct of
war. This morning, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General reported in detail on how the United
Nations intends to coordinate a concerted international
effort to assist the people of Afghanistan in
establishing a broad-based and multi-ethnic
Government. That effort, of course, has to be
accompanied by a long-term, comprehensive and
generous programme of support for the post-military
rehabilitation and reconstruction of that country.

Ireland strongly considers that, as the military
campaign is pursued, a visible and fully effective
strategy must be put in place for addressing the
humanitarian needs of the innocent people of
Afghanistan. We commend the sustained efforts of the
United Nations and its agencies to find practical and
flexible solutions, and we appreciate the fact that
deliveries to Afghanistan have increased substantially
in recent days. There is a continuing and urgent need to
translate the pledges and commitments that the
international community has made in terms of financial
assistance to the United Nations system into active
financial disbursements into the system so that the
United Nations can proceed with its work apace. We
commend the bravery and courage of the many native
Afghans who continue to seek to distribute this food
aid and non-food aid under the most difficult
circumstances.

The distribution of humanitarian assistance
within Afghanistan must be a priority, especially with
the imminent onset of winter. It is important that
international staff be enabled to return in safety to
Afghanistan as soon as possible. In that regard, we
hope that the recent takeover of Mazar-e-Sharif and of
Kabul will facilitate humanitarian access, and we
welcome the deployment of a security assessment team
there, as well as the deployment of United Nations
personnel in Faizabad. We deplore the harassment of
aid workers and call on all those concerned to facilitate
the distribution of supplies to vulnerable Afghans in
need.

As the Secretary-General has said, there is a need
for all States to disburse their generous commitments
as soon as possible. For its part, the Government of
Ireland has already committed and transferred into the
system $5 million this year for emergency
humanitarian relief in Afghanistan, and there are a
number of Irish non-governmental agencies active in
the region. We also stress the importance of providing
financial assistance to neighbouring States, which are
already host to a large number of refugees, to help
them also to cope with the crisis.

At the same time as pursuing humanitarian
efforts, we must focus on the long-term political
objectives in Afghanistan. We believe that only a fully
representative and broad-based Government will
express the will of all its people and ensure long-term
peace and security in the country. Such a Government
must comprise representatives of all ethnic groups,
including Uzbeks, Tajiks, Hazaras and Pashtuns. We
agree with the road map that was set out this morning
by Ambassador Brahimi, and we pledge him our full
support.

As to the best way of achieving those objectives,
which will by no means be easy, Ireland considers
strongly that the process should be led by the United
Nations. As a member of the Security Council, we will
work to ensure that a sufficient mandate is developed.
Although the evolving situation on the ground will
necessitate flexibility and adaptability, endorsement of
the post-Taliban Government by the United Nations
will be an indispensable guarantee of its legitimacy.
The process will need to be undertaken in a secure
environment, and we need to examine carefully the
various options in that regard with a View to endorsing
the appropriate arrangements. We take careful note of
what Ambassador Brahimi had to say in that respect.
We will be very attentive to any recommendations that
the Secretary-General may make in this regard. We will
also need to examine a framework for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of those involved in
the conflict in due course.

I agree with other speakers that the cooperation of
neighbouring States is vital to a permanent solution,
and we very much appreciate Mr. Brahimi's efforts to
consult widely and to take into account the range of
views and considerations. We believe that groups such
as the "six plus two" and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference have an important role to play, and
we encourage the countries of the region to intensify
their consultations with one another.

Given the total breakdown in Afghanistan's
economic and social infrastructure, the United Nations
should plan to move from emergency humanitarian
relief, through a recovery phase including the return of
internally displaced persons and refugees, to
reconstruction and rehabilitation. Close coordination of
all agencies and organizations concerned will be
important to ensure that this is done in a phased and
seamless manner. The initial use of quick-impact
projects could help to jump-start the economy and to
promote eradication of the cultivation and trade in
opium. As a State member of the European Union, we
stand ready to contribute to that process.

For many years, Ireland has condemned human
rights violations in Afghanistan, in particular the
appalling discrimination against women and girls.
Those practices must be reversed, and the new
Government must not only observe but also promote
international obligations in respect of human and
minority rights. We believe that an immediate focus
should be put on providing basic social services,
including education for girls, which has been denied
them for many years. In the meantime, and as the
military situation evolves, we call on all parties to
respect international obligations in respect of human
rights.

The Afghan people must be reassured that the
international community is committed to help them
develop a stable and peaceful society, no matter how
long that might take. For its part, the Government of
Ireland will continue to work on the national level,
through the United Nations and with its European
Union partners, to do all that is humanly possible to
respond to the emergency humanitarian crisis and to
the medium-term and long-term needs of the Afghan
people.

