Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): Let me
begin by welcoming the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste and by thanking the
Secretary-General for his special report on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
(S/2004/117). My delegation also expresses its
gratitude to Mr. Guehenno for his informative briefing.

Over the past 18 months, significant progress has
been made towards the fulfilment of UNMISET's
mandate in the areas of democratization, security and
economic and social development. Credit for the
considerable achievements made in that short time span
should be given to the newly established Timorese
Government for its unswerving commitment and efforts
and to the people of Timor-Leste for persevering in the
face of formidable challenges.

The United Nations, too, has played a pivotal role
in the progress made in Timor-Leste. The stable
environment provided through the actions of the
Security Council has proved crucial to the success of
the ongoing endeavours to consolidate the nascent
nation's independence. In that regard, we cite the close
partnership between Timor-Leste and the United
Nations as a model for future undertakings in post-
conflict situations.

Timor-Leste now stands at a critical juncture in
the peace-building process. Like many newly
independent countries, it faces the daunting challenges
of achieving stability, developing democracy and
overall capacity-building on its road towards a self-
sustaining society. In that regard, my delegation shares
the concerns reflected in the previous and current
reports of the Secretary-General.

My delegation believes that the Secretary-
General's assessments aptly reflect the request of the
Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, His Excellency, Mr.
Mari Alkatiri, and the recommendations of the
technical assessment mission that visited Timor-Leste
last month. From the reports, it is clear that Timor-
Leste requires further assistance to sustain what has
been achieved and to make further progress in the areas
of stability, democracy and justice, internal security
and law enforcement, and external security and border
control. We concur with the view of the Secretary-
General that the United Nations should continue to
play a role in the country's nation-building until such
time as Timor-Leste can firmly stand on its own two
feet.

Noting the recommendations of the Secretary-
Gcneral with deep interest, we support an extended
presence of the United Nations in Timor-Leste beyond
May 2004. Clearly, the substantial support and
assistance of the international community must not be
phased out prematurely. The Republic of Korea
believes that the overall assessment of the situation on
the ground should serve as the basis for decision-
making on how to best organize and structure the
international efforts.

My delegation is confident that the efforts and
assistance of the international community, in
conjunction with the dedication and determination of
the people of Timor-Leste, will prevail in establishing a
nation underpinned by the rule of law, human rights
and sustainable development. The Republic of Korea,
as one of the major troop-contributing countries from
1999 to 2003, remains committed to assisting in the
realization of that noble goal.

