Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I,
too, wish to second the warm comments made by my
colleagues around the table about Ambassador
Morjane. I will not repeat them, but I do want to pay
tribute to the outstanding work of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) under his leadership, which has
helped the Democratic Republic of the Congo find a
chance for peace. He has my country's gratitude and
appreciation for his service and best wishes for his
future.

My Government fully subscribes to the
presidential statement that will be issued at the
conclusion of today's meeting, but, as we look to the
future, we also thought it would be useful to review
briefly the key issues that are still before us in the
peace process.

The demilitarization of Kisangani is a demand of
the Security Council, as others have noted, and the
Council expects this to be accomplished. We do not
accept the argument of the RCD-Goma that the military
presence is necessary to secure the human rights of
citizens there. Moreover, we have serious concerns
about the RCD-Goma's own human rights record in the
areas under its control.

Under the disengagement sub-plans, the RCD-
Goma would maintain administrative control of
Kisangani pending the establishment of new national
institutions. We understand and accept that a
demilitarized Kisangani would require a strengthened
MONUC contingent, and we continue to subscribe to
the conclusions and recommendations of the Security
Council mission in this regard.

While MONUC cannot assume the burden of
administering Kisangani, it can work with local
authorities to provide support and assistance. The first
step is an RCD-Goma acceptance of the principle of a
demilitarized Kisangani. Once that is forthcoming, we
will look to the Political Committee and the Joint
Military Commission (JMC), in consultation with
MONUC, for ideas on the nature of civilian
administration in the area.

For all the talk of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and resettlement or repatriation of the
former Rwandan Army forces (ex-FAR), Interahamwe
and other negative forces, there has not been enough
progress. We note recent reports that some members of
those groups have been brought into camps within the
territory under the control of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we hope that
MONUC will act quickly on the Government's offer to
allow Visits to those sites.

I wish also to underscore the importance of
including representatives from United Nations
humanitarian agencies to ensure the proper focus on
reintegration and resettlement issues.

But the first step of a disarmament process is the
cessation of arming, something that, unfortunately, has
yet to materialize. As long as negative forces such as
the ex-FAR, Interahamwe and the Mayi-Mayi are being
armed by the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and some of its allies, there will be no
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement, and, we believe, no solution to the Great
Lakes crisis. We therefore call on the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo immediately to
cease support, be it through arms, training, money or
other forms of assistance, to all such forces.

We are pleased to note that regional leaders,
including Presidents Kabila and Kagame, whom we
View as the critical players on this issue, continue to
meet. It should be obvious to all that the Governments
of Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have common security interests that can also be
addressed through a policy of cooperation and
dialogue.

The lack of progress on disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement is one of
the reasons we have not seen broader progress on peace
in the region. The remedy is not for the United Nations
to assume a greater role; the remedy is for the parties to
recognize their common interests and to make this a
reality.

As in all other areas of the peace process, the role
of the United Nations in disarmament and reintegration
will expand or contract in direct proportion to the
quality of political will displayed by the parties. If the
United Nations is to assist the parties in this area, the
JMC must produce a credible plan that reflects an
unambiguous regional commitment to address the
issue. This should be done immediately.

We are troubled at the failure of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to accept the
appointment of the new United Nations humanitarian
coordinator. The individual nominated by the
Secretariat is an outstanding candidate, and we urge the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to revise its position. The lack of a humanitarian
coordinator makes it even harder to raise the money
needed to meet the humanitarian needs of the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the
appointment will facilitate a more effective response to
the growing humanitarian crisis.

In that connection, I also want to emphasize the
need for the relevant parties to carry through with their
investigation of the murder of six personnel of the
International Committee of the Red Cross in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to
bring the guilty to justice.

The exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to benefit
warlords, arms producers and corrupt officials. Clearly,
that practice must halt. The natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are the patrimony
of the Congolese nation, and we are concerned when
those resources are not used to advance the welfare of
the Congolese people. We are glad to see that the Panel
of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has resumed work
on this important issue, and we look forward to the
addendum to its original report.

For there to be peace in the region, three things,
at a minimum, must happen: all foreign forces must
withdraw from the territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; the inter-Congolese dialogue must begin
the process of giving the Congolese people their first
accountable Government; and the long-standing
practice of regional governments entering into alliances
with non-State actors must end. Good governance,
democratic accountability and security are fundamental
requirements for regional peace. If a Great Lakes
conference dedicated to those issues can advance those
goals, then perhaps the time has come to take that long-
standing proposal off the back burner and see if it can
help improve the lives of the people of the region.

