Mr. Melkert: I welcome the opportunity to brief
the Security Council today on the challenges facing
Iraq and on the role of the United Nations. As the
Security Council considers the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), I wish to reiterate the Secretary-General's
personal commitment to see the United Nations
continue to implement its mandate and assist the
people and the Government of Iraq to build a
sustainable and prosperous future. During the past
year, my team and I have been working with our Iraqi
counterparts in a range of areas that are vital for Iraq's
future. While notable progress has been made, major
tasks are still ahead.

Following the successful completion of the
parliamentary elections on 7 March 2010 and the
certification of the election results on 2 June, Iraq has
reached a critical juncture. Despite several months of
negotiations, the transition to a new Government is still
pending. As stated in the Secretary-General's report
before the Council (S/20lO/406), persistent delays in
the Government formation process are contributing to
uncertainty in the country and creating conditions that
could be exploited by elements opposed to Iraq's
democratic transition.

This process represents a real test of Iraq's
transition to democracy and the commitment of Iraqi
leaders to adhering to the country's Constitution.
Continuing disagreements over who has the right to
form the next Government and the appointment to key
posts persist. It is too early to speak of an impasse, as
some do, yet this cannot be excluded as a risk. There
have been some encouraging signs. The main political
blocs appear to agree on the need for a partnership
Government and have been discussing possible power-
sharing arrangements. I believe that, at this stage,
Government formation could benefit from adherence to
a specific time frame, as well as a collective process
through which a resolution could be reached.

While negotiations continue, attention must be
paid to the business of governing during this period.
Last week, a common understanding seems to have
10-47406
evolved among all political blocs over whether, indeed,
the stage of a caretaker Government has been reached.
While this is an issue for Iraqis to decide upon
themselves, the concern is that a prolonged delay could
impact on the day-to-day business of governing and
could affect all walks of Iraqi life.

It is well understood that the Government
formation process is a sovereign process and the full
responsibility of Iraqis themselves. For its part,
UNAMI continues to meet and listen to all parties
concerned and stands ready to provide assistance and
support at their request.

It is indeed the enfranchisement of the voters that
now matters most. I therefore reiterate the Secretary-
General's call in the report for Iraqi leaders to show a
higher sense of urgency and to work together to forge
an agreement through an inclusive process, without
further delays caused by either domestically or
externally generated considerations. There is no reason
to be pessimistic as yet, for Iraq has embarked on an
historic path that will shape the future of the country.
However, the onus is ultimately on Iraqi leaders to
ensure an orderly and peaceful transition of power.
This is owed to the people of Iraq and expected by the
international community.

Further delays in the formation of a Government
are also impacting on the country's basic infrastructure
and services, affecting the livelihood and well-being of
Iraqi citizens. Recent protests in a number of cities
denouncing the lack of electricity are a sign of
potentially growing disillusionment and anger over
what has become a situation of daily life for the
average Iraqi citizen. The supply of electricity is at
about 67 per cent of peak demand, with periods of
blackout still averaging more than nine hours per day
nationally. The Government has made electricity
production a priority. Shortages will take several years
to overcome, meanwhile negatively affecting prospects
for employment and economic growth.

In furtherance of identifying the development
agenda, on 26 July I chaired the Global Open Day for
Women and Peace, in celebration of the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), in Iraq. The
meeting, widely attended by women parliamentarians
and civil society leaders, called for wide-ranging legal
reform, technical support for reconciliation and
advocacy for gender equality.
10-47406

With the National Development Plan as a basis,
the Government has set its priorities to address features
of underdevelopment in a country with such rich
resources. Yet political delays stand in the way of
appointments, mandates and capacity-building. After
the signing of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, many United Nations agencies
are preparing for their part in the international
technical assistance and advice that should accelerate
progress on the ground.

I must, however, express a word of concern on
the less than clear strategic involvement of the
international community in its support for Iraq.
Recently, the Humanitarian Coordinator appealed to
donors "not to give up their commitment to the Iraqi
people", as only 12 per cent of the required $187
million sought for the 2010 Humanitarian Action Plan
for Iraq had been received. Clearly, contributions from
Iraq's national budget should provide the lion's share
for development and humanitarian action in the future.
However, that will still take time, and time is not on
the side of Iraqis who require significant support right
now.

Once the Government formation process has been
completed, it is imperative that Iraqi leaders continue
to make national reconciliation a priority and address
the many outstanding political and constitutional
challenges facing the country. This includes Arab-
Kurdish relations, particularly as they relate to
disputed internal boundaries, revenue-sharing,
legislation related to hydrocarbons, the federal
framework and the constitutional review process. One
area that I am pleased to report on is our serious efforts
to promote dialogue in Ninewa governorate.

Following last year's initiative by Deputy Prime
Minister al-Issawi, UNAMI has continued to support
efforts to achieve progress in relation to Ninewa
residents currently in detention in the Kurdistan region.
Additionally, as part of this process a forum has been
created for Ninewa's various minority communities to
come together to identify ways to protect their rights.
Central to the discussion in Ninewa is the handling of
security arrangements between the Government of Iraq
and Kurdistan regional security forces. The trilateral
combined security agreement between the federal
security forces, the Kurdistan Regional Government
security forces, and the United States Forces in Iraq
that currently operate in the disputed areas has made
significant progress towards confronting instability in
3
these areas. Efforts to establish clear and sustainable
security arrangements for the years ahead remain vital.

It is my hope that the process to end the boycott
of the Ninewa Provincial Council will gain momentum,
particularly as clarity and progress are achieved on
some of the efforts just outlined. It is also hoped that
the Ninewa talks will create a positive atmosphere for
addressing the issue of disputed internal boundaries
and improving relations between Arabs and Kurds.

Concerning Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter and relations with Kuwait, I should like to
refer to my visit on 20 June to Kuwait, as well as
various informal exchanges, which have confirmed that
the time has come for a serious concerted effort to
draw outstanding issues to a close. With the new
Ambassador of Iraq having arrived in Kuwait,
conditions for a results-oriented dialogue have
improved. Entering an era of good-neighbourliness
would serve as the necessary response to relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
833 (1993), and at the same time be of great mutual
benefit for trade and development.

Once the formation process is complete, it is
essential that the new Government move quickly to
fulfil Iraq's outstanding obligations under Chapter VII
resolutions, which are necessary for Iraq to achieve
international standing equal to that which it held prior
to the adoption of these resolutions. I hope that the
actions taken by the new Government in this regard
will create a new momentum for the Secretary-
General's report pursuant to resolution 1859 (2008),
which was submitted last July and remains pending
with the Security Council. UNAMI continues its work
to assist parties in this endeavour.

In a climate of uncertainty and volatility, UNAMI
and the United Nations country team continue to work
on the basis of their respective mandates in order to
provide to the Government and people of Iraq, at their
request, the kind of support that will contribute to
stability, investments and long-term development.

I should inform the Council that the practical
implications of the United States military drawdown
are now starting to have an impact on our operations.
We have engaged with the Government of Iraq to
ensure that the conditions for the future United Nations
presence in the country are on a secure and sustainable
foundation, which will require finalization of the
United Nations-Iraq status of mission agreement and
an increase in the Organization's own security and
operational capacity encompassing aviation, transport,
infrastructure and life support.

I must stress that, in order to keep the United
Nations presence at current or even higher levels,
adequate financial resources from Member States will
inevitably be required. I call upon the Council to weigh
the implications of this particular period of transition
as part of its consideration of the extension of the
UNAMI mandate. I would like to remind the Council
that a great number of United Nations staff members
are still operating under challenging working and
living conditions. A clear signal of ongoing
commitment and support is critical to all those who are
dedicating themselves to helping the Iraqi people build
a peaceful and prosperous country.

In conclusion, Iraq has made considerable
progress since 2003. It has come a long way in
consolidating its peace and security and promoting the
welfare of its Citizens. Nevertheless, we cannot
underestimate the challenges that it still faces. It is
essential that the Security Council and the international
community as a whole do their utmost to ensure that all
necessary support continues to be provided to Iraq until
such time that it can reach its full potential. I wish to
assure the Council that the Secretary-General and
UNAMI will endeavour to implement whatever new
mandate the Security Council establishes, working for
the benefit of the people of Iraq.

