Ms. Kuburovie (Serbia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council
today on behalf of the Republic of Serbia. Allow me to
welcome the President of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Carmel Agius,
the President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Theodor Meron, and the
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, Mr. Serge Brammertz.

Fighting impunity for the most serious international
crimes and efficiently prosecuting war crimes were the
key reasons for the establishment of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Since its
establishment, it has been the subject of frequent
criticism by the expert community, and with its
mandate completed some important questions remain
unresolved. By and large, the controversies revolve
around the efforts made by the States of the former
Yugoslavia to cooperate with the ICTY efficiently.
While the efforts of some countries have been assessed
as sufficient, the much greater efforts of Serbia have
not been adequately recognized. Serbia's record in that
regard has been exemplary, both in terms of compliance
with its obligation to cooperate with the ICTY and
the results achieved within its national judicial
system. Moreover, its compliance has been efficient
and non-selective. The judgements rendered before
Serbian courts are eloquent proof of Serbia's readiness
to punish the perpetrators of the most serious crimes
committed in violation of international humanitarian
law, irrespective of their nationality.

Serbia has aligned its legislation with relevant
standards, facilitating cooperation with the ICTY
without exception, and bearing in mind all acts that
the Security Council recognized in the ICTY statute
as serious international crimes. Its commitment to
fighting impunity has also been reflected by the
number and rank of the accused persons it handed over
to the Tribunal. Out of 46 persons whose extradition
was requested by the Tribunal, Serbia extradited 45;
one person committed suicide before he could be
extradited. Some of those people were in very high
positions, including high-ranking officers in Serbia's
military and high officials in the executive branch of
its Government, which is a convincing illustration of
my country's non-selective cooperation - one that is
hardly matched by any other State.

Serbia enabled the ICTY Prosecutor free access
to evidence, documents, archives and witnesses; 2,183
requests for assistance were submitted by the Office of
the ICTY Prosecutor and the Office of the Prosecutor
of the Residual Mechanism, all of which were complied
with. Serbia allowed 759 witnesses to testify freely,
relinquishing their right not to on account of State,
military or official secrets, and 1,341 requests were
submitted by various defence teams, all of which were
complied with.

In the ICTY final report (see S/2017/662), it is said
that Serbia is not cooperating with the Tribunal, as it has
failed to secure the arrest and transfer of two persons in
the case Prosecutor v. Petar Jojie and Vjerica Radeta.
That failure to cooperate with the ICTY is characterized
by a lack of political will - such a contention is
erroneous, and therefore unacceptable. It has been
clarified several times by Serbian representatives that
the competent, independent Serbian court has rejected
the request under relevant legislation, in line with the
ICTY statute. Under the provisions of the law and
the statute, Mr. Jojie and Mr. Radeta committed no
criminal offence.

The following data, however, is much more
illustrative of the deliverance of justice by the ICTY.
One hundred and sixty-one persons were indicted: 109
Serbs, 33 Croats, 10 Bosniaks, sevan Albanians and
two Macedonians. Proceedings against 156 individuals
were finalized. Of the total number of those sentenced,
70 per cent are Serbs, 19 per cent are Croats, 6 per cent
are Bosniaks and only 2 per cent are Albanians. Those
numbers speak tellingly about the selective justice of
the Tribunal, especially in the context of its mandate
to establish the truth about the armed conflict in the
former Yugoslavia and to bring about reconciliation.

In a report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, it is stated that 333,000
refugee Serbs from Croatia and 266,000 from Bosnia
and Herzegovina ended up in Serbia in the wake of the
armed conflict, as well as 287,000 internally displaced
persons from Kosovo and Metohija after the bombing
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 1999. Those
numbers make it difficult for us to understand why such
a small number of persons have been found responsible
for the killing or expulsion of hundreds of thousands
of Serbs. Is it that Serbian victims count for less? Only
Serbs have been handed life sentences, in five cases
before the Tribunal. Such selective prosecution is a
legitimate cause for legal concern and, in some legal
systems, provides the basis for the pursuit of selective
prosecution claims. In any case, it remains an issue that
should be considered in the ICTY records in the future.

The initiative of my country related to the
enforcement of sentences in the countries of origin
of the sentenced persons is another matter to which I
want to draw the attention of the Council. We believe
that it is hard to achieve the goal of punishment and
resocialization in cases where sentenced persons serve
their sentences in faraway countries. In those countries,
they are unable to communicate in their maternal
language and have no possibility of receiving family
Visits or maintaining contact with relatives. Moreover,
some of them are kept in inadequate conditions and
provided inadequate health care. In launching the
initiative, Serbia is committed to providing guarantees
that ensure, in cases of sentence-enforcement transfers,
all security measures are taken. In that regard, it is
ready to accept international monitoring.

Serbia will continue to try war crimes and
expects other countries to follow suit. Improving its
national judicial system along the guidelines defined,
among others, by the national strategy to process war
crimes, which were adopted in 2016, continues to be
one of Serbia's priorities. To that end, a monitoring
mechanism, directed by the Minister of Justice and
the War Crimes Prosecutor, has been established to
monitor the implementation of the strategy. It is hoped
that it will contribute to the effective prosecution of all
those responsible for war crimes.

The Tribunal is receding into history, but its legacy
is here to stay. The question, however, continues to
linger as to whether it has accomplished its purpose.
From our perspective, the statistical account of its
decisions strengthens our impression that its has
delivered justice selectively. The ethnic disparity of
accused persons in ICTY judgements and sentences,
the Violations of the right to trial within reasonable
time and the lack of respect for procedural guarantees
will also be the legacy of the Tribunal. In the eyes of
Serbia and many other countries that believe the law
is an irreplaceable vehicle to ensure respect for, and
the protection of, basic human rights, the 13-year case
involving Vojislav Seselj, who surrendered voluntarily,
which ended in a first-instance acquittal, is surely a
stain on the proceedings of the Tribunal.

For over two decades the Tribunal failed to note two
important and relevant facts: first, during the celebration
of the first anniversary of Croatian independence, in
1992, Franjo Tudjman, the President of Croatia at the
time, said in front of more than 100,000 people that the
war could have been avoided, but he did not want that;
and, secondly, in 1992, Alija Izetbegovic', the President
of Bosnia and Herzegovina at the time, withdrew his
signature from the Cutileiro plan, which was signed
by all three sides in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The plan
could have preserved peace and saved the victims of
the civil war. In disregard of those and other facts, and
motivated by extra-legal considerations, the Tribunal,
which we all believe was established to render
justice impartially, has often fallen short of making a
contribution to regional reconciliation and achieving
fairness and equality - the fundamental principles of
each and every legal order.

To conclude my statement, I express the greatest
respect for all the Victims of the armed conflicts in
the former Yugoslavia, irrespective of nationality,
religion or any other affiliation. The need to work
jointly on mutual understanding, regional cooperation
and reconciliation is indispensable. After all, for peace
and stability in the region it is necessary that efforts be
invested by all its countries, and that active, open and
constructive dialogue and cooperation be engaged in to
bring about a better future, economic development and
the normalization of relations.

The meeting rose at] p.m.
