Mr. Takht-Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
Islamic Republic of Iran fully supports the convening of
this urgent meeting of the Security Council at the request
of the Government of Lebanon, to consider the continuing
flagrant violation by Israel of Lebanon's sovereignty and
territorial integrity. The last five days have seen an
unprecedented escalation in these violations. We hope that
today's deliberation under your leadership, Mr. President,
will yield positive results.

Israel's premeditated and unbridled aerial and artillery
attacks over the past five days against many civilian
quarters in towns and villages of Lebanon, including the
southern suburbs of Beirut, and its naval blockade of the
port of Beirut are prime examples of acts of terrorism by
Israeli policy makers, who all too readily and conveniently
label others either as terrorists or as supporters of terrorists.
The recent acts of terrorism by an organized cabal of
Zionist leaders have resulted in the killing and wounding
of several hundred innocent civilians, forcing the
displacement of hundreds of thousands of people, more
every hour, and have inflicted great material damage in
Lebanon. Even a Lebanese ambulance transporting
women and children, and Beirut's power station, have not
been immune from Israeli attacks and destruction.

Israel's lawless action in Lebanon is a further grave
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon and of the United Nations Charter. It constitutes
a prima facie example of aggression in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 1974 - an
aggression and transgression that clearly expose the brutal
and unmalleable nature of the Zionist regime to all eyes
that are open and willing to see. Regrettably, the eyes of
certain States that support and, in practice, sustain Israel
are either closed or unwilling to see.

Israel's obstinacy in continuing its bombardment of
innocent people in Lebanon, disregarding international
outrage and diplomatic initiatives, clearly points to the
fact that the Zionist leaders have a pre-planned agenda for
the region and will not cease their military operation until
their illegal objectives are achieved. The Israeli media
blitz to disguise these acts of terrorism under the pretext
of taking retaliatory measures does not withstand the most
rudimentary tests, and, in fact, adds insult to injury. The
victims of occupation and of the recent barbarism of the
Israeli military, be they Lebanese or Palestinians, seem to
be the sacrificial lambs of internal Zionist politics and
rivalries.

Southern Lebanon continues to be under Israeli
occupation and aggression in flagrant violation of Security
Council resolution 425 (1978), which inter alia, called
upon Israel

"immediately to cease its military action against
Lebanese territorial integrity and withdraw forthwith
its forces from all Lebanese territory". (resolution 425 (1978), para. 2)

Whatever happened to the authority and integrity of
Security Council resolutions? Who but Israeli ruling
circles are responsible for the abysmal degradation of that
Security Council resolution over these 18 long years. For
18 years, the Zionist regime has rejected outright the
demands of the international community, with impunity.

 

Another example of Israeli intransigence is the
draconian measures it has imposed for more than a month
against Palestinian people in the occupied territories.
Palestinian people find themselves subject to a blockade of
the occupied territories, including Al-Quds al-Sharif -
closure, reoccupation, demolition of their houses, further
expansion of illegal settlements, severe restrictions on the
movement of persons and goods and the strangulation of
people and their economy as a form of collective
punishment. These Israeli measures, which are implemented
under the barrel of a gun and which have inflicted untold
hardship and sorrow on the Palestinian people, paralysing
their lives in an unprecedented fashion, are in total violation
of the rules and principles of international law, and should
accordingly be condemned and should cease forthwith.

The Islamic Republic of Iran condemns the recent
cowardly, though savage, attacks against defenceless
civilians in Lebanon, and calls on the Security Council to
condemn Israel's recent terrorist acts in Lebanon, which
have caused tremendous suffering for a country whose
sovereignty and territorial integrity have for a long time
been violated by the Israeli occupation forces.

It is incumbent upon the Security Council to adopt
specific measures to deal with Israeli intransigence in its
non-compliance with Security Council resolution 425
(1978). Israel's violation of international law is so
enormous and vivid that a lack of an adequate and
necessary response by the Council to these practices will
only encourage the aggressor to continue its aggression.
The Security Council should prevent this inaction from
gaining ground, in order to save the lives of innocent
Lebanese civilians and for the sake of its own credibility.

Before concluding I wish to refer to the statement
made by the representative of the Zionist regime, who, as
usual, resorted to lies about my country. The Islamic
Republic of Iran totally rejects these fabrications. It is
ironic that the occupying regime not only expects a general
surrender and the submission of each and every people and
group in the occupied lands, but also wishes to silence any
voice speaking in moral support of the Lebanese people,
who are struggling to free their homeland from foreign
occupation.

