Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I would like to start by
expressing our gratitude and thanks to the Secretary-
General for his participation with us today, for his
statement and, above all, for his commitment to doing
all he can to end the Israeli occupation begun in 1967
and to allow the two-State solution to see the light of
day on the well-known bases he enumerated. Palestine
will continue to cooperate with him and with the
Security Council to that end.

I would also like to thank Mr. Pascoe for his
statement and for the recommendations and
conclusions contained therein.
08-28218
(spoke in Arabic)

Once again, I am compelled to convey to the
Security Council the recent negative and grave
developments in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, as a result of the illegal and
destructive policies of Israel, the occupying Power.
Instead of advancing towards the consolidation of the
foundations of a just, permanent and comprehensive
peace leading to the conclusion of a peace agreement
that paves the way to the establishment of an
independent, sovereign, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders by
the end of this year, the Israeli Government continues
deliberately to undermine the simplest achievements
made in the interests of peace.

Israel continues to pursue its illegal policies
aimed at entrenching its occupation and colonization of
the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, inter
alia through illegal settlement activities, the
construction of the wall, the confiscation of land, the
imposition of a suffocating siege and collective
punishment, brutal military aggression and countless
other crimes committed by the Israeli occupying forces
and fanatical Israeli settlers against the Palestinian
civilian population.

Particularly over the past few weeks, the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, has witnessed grave developments and a
further deterioration and destabilization of the
situation, which require the immediate attention of the
Security Council. Among those developments have
been brutal crimes committed by the occupying forces
against Palestinian civilians, including children,
particularly in the Gaza Strip, and announcements by
the Israeli Government of ongoing plans to expand
illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory,
especially in and around East Jerusalem.

With regard to the Gaza Strip in particular,
following threats made by several Israeli officials to
launch large-scale military attacks against the
Palestinian people under occupation in the Gaza Strip,
including the threat made by the Deputy Defense
Minister of Israel to inflict a "holocaust" on the
Palestinian population in Gaza, the Israeli occupying
forces launched a barbaric military aggression against
civilian areas in the northern Gaza Strip on
27 February 2008. The raids and attacks resulted in the
deaths of more than 120 Palestinian martyrs, most of

them innocent civilians inside their own homes,
including more than 25 children and infants and
10 women, and the wounding of more than 300 other
civilians. That vicious military campaign lasted for
four days, during which Israel used all types of heavy
and lethal weaponry to bombard densely populated
civilian areas by air, sea and land, causing massive
bloodshed and the widespread destruction of public
and private property and infrastructure.

Despite the warnings of international bodies and
humanitarian organizations of the precarious situation
in the Gaza Strip; despite our continuous warnings
through successive letters and statements to the
Security Council; and despite the appeal made by the
Council to the parties to respect their obligations under
international law following the emergency meeting of
the Council of 1 March 2008, Israel pursued its
military campaign in total disregard for all
international appeals. In that respect, we must stress
the negative ramifications of the Council's inability to
adopt a resolution clearly condemning Israel's acts of
aggression and calling upon it to cease its flagrant
Violations of international law, including human rights
law and particularly the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, which stresses the need to take all necessary
and possible measures to ensure the protection of
children in armed conflict, as well as international
humanitarian law, which, inter alia, in article 33 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, prohibits reprisals against
civilians and the imposition of collective punishment
on civilian populations.

The pursuit of those attacks deepened the
suffering of a people that is already enduring extremely
difficult and miserable living conditions as a result of
the suffocating siege imposed for many months now by
the occupying Power on the Gaza Strip and the ensuing
humanitarian and environmental disaster being
inflicted upon it.

Those crimes have been continuously justified by
Israel, the occupying Power, under the pretexts of
security, the right to self-defence and counter-
terrorism. In that regard, we reiterate our previously
stated position that nothing justifies the killing of
children. When the slaughter of innocent children has
become acceptable or is somehow sought to be
justified under any pretext, we know that we have fully
sunk into a dark abyss characterized by the total
absence of law, logic, reason, morality, conscience and
humanity. When we fail to stand against such brutal

and heinous crimes, we bitterly come to understand
that the standards of law and human rights are not
applicable equally to all human beings, including
children, women, the elderly and the disabled. That
perception is dangerously rife among the Palestinian
people, who have endured the killing of more than
1,000 children by the Israeli occupying forces since
2000 under the pretext of security.

In that context, it must be stated that security,
freedom and basic standards of living are the rights of
all peoples without discrimination and are not
exclusive to any religion, race, colour or ethnicity. Like
all the other peoples of the world, the Palestinian
people - its children, women, young people and men -
have the right to life and to enjoy prosperity, security
and safety. Moreover, they have the right to live in
freedom and dignity in their own land, the land of their
forefathers, following an occupation that has lasted for
more than 40 years and 60 years of exile in refugee
camps and diaspora. In accordance with the norms of
international law and norms, the Palestinian people
also have the right to international protection.

In conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations, peace and security are to be achieved through
effective collective measures to prevent and eradicate
threats to peace and to suppress acts of aggression or
other breaches of the peace. We therefore reaffirm the
fact that peace and security in our region will be
achieved only with the end of Israeli occupation of
Palestinian territory. That requires serious steps that
will lead to the end of the occupation in all its aspects
and make it possible for the Palestinian people to
exercise their right to self-determination on the basis of
the principle of the equality of the rights of all peoples
as enshrined in the Charter.

The hollow security pretext that Israel, the
occupying Power, constantly uses and exploits while
virtually ignoring its very role as an occupying Power
can be summed up in its ongoing pursuit of efforts
intended to prolong the occupation and to conceal the
expansion of its colonialist settlements and its
confiscation of more Palestinian land. What sort of
security does Israel hope to achieve by continuing its
occupation and colonization of Palestinian land? What
kind of security does Israel want to achieve by
transforming the land into isolated ghettos, cantons and
large prisons?

Israel, the occupying Power, is relentlessly
continuing to carry out colonial settlement activities. It
is also continuing to build its illegal wall on occupied
Palestinian territory, including in and around East
Jerusalem. That is a grave and flagrant violation of
international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, as well as of United Nations resolutions
and the advisory opinion issued by the International
Court of Justice on 9 July 2004. It is also a violation of
its obligations under the Road Map.

In that regard, and in the context of its attempts to
create massive physical facts on the ground,
immediately following the convening of the Annapolis
Conference and the resumption of the peace process, in
November 2007, Israel announced the continuation of
its illegal expansionist plans to build at least 2,000 new
settlement units in occupied East Jerusalem, thereby
furthering its illegal efforts to change the character,
status and demographic composition of the Holy City
and to judaize it. The Israeli Housing Ministry's budget
for 2008 includes financing for the building of 500
settlement units in Jebel Abu Ghneim and another 240
units in the Ma'ale Adumim, to the east of Jerusalem.
Just two weeks ago, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud
Olmert announced the approval of the construction of
an additional 750 new units in the Geevat Ze'ev
settlement, north of East Jerusalem. Plans were also
announced for the construction of 400 new settlement
units in the Neve Yacub neighbourhood of occupied
East Jerusalem. Moreover, the Israeli Prime Minister
publicly declared recently that Israel would not stop
building settlements on occupied Palestinian territory,
especially in East Jerusalem. That is a grave breach of
international law that defies the will of the
international community and undermines the efforts to
revive the peace process.

In reality, the illegal settlement campaign and the
peace process clearly cannot coexist. The peace
process cannot be separated from the situation on the
ground, because all of those actions endanger the
continuation of the entire peace process and create
even more physical obstructions that must be
contended with on the road to achieving a just and
lasting peace settlement. They also undermine the
future prospects for achieving the two-State solution of
Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and
security on the basis of the 1967 borders. That physical
affront to the two-State solution has been affirmed by
several international bodies and organizations,
including in reports regarding the negative and
dangerous impact of ongoing settlement colonization
on the future of the peace process. In that regard, the
July 2007 report of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
included alarming facts indicating that more than 38
per cent of the area of the West Bank is now occupied
by settlements, outposts, military bases, roads and
other infrastructure forbidden to Palestinians.

Such successive ongoing illegal measures by
Israel, the occupying Power, and the timing of those
measures are clearly and intricately correlated -
whether they be the intensification of settlement
activities in East Jerusalem and the rest of the West
Bank, the deliberate repeated attempts by Israel to
sabotage security efforts by the Palestinian Authority,
the increase, rather than the removal, of checkpoints
and roadblocks and the continuation and intensification
of its siege of the Gaza Strip and the ongoing
aggression against it to isolate it from the West Bank.
In addition to the extreme suffering caused to the
Palestinian people, all of those actions undermine the
role of the Palestinian Authority and damage the peace
process, raising serious doubts regarding Israel's
intentions and good faith in negotiations while it
continues to pursue its illegal and destructive actions
and measures.

The killing of Palestinian civilians, the
destruction of their properties and infrastructure, the
imprisonment of thousands of civilians, the collective
punishment, the starvation, the humiliation, the
intimidation, the colonization and the other mass
violations of human rights are in compatible with
peace. They serve to dash hopes and impair the peace
process, draining its momentum and credibility. They
also severely worsen the situation on the ground, which
is already critical at all levels, thereby fuelling the
cycle of violence and instability and exclusively
serving the agendas of extremists and pushing peace
further out of reach. Those violations must be brought
to an end. The occupying Power must be held
accountable for its crimes and Violations and be
compelled to abide by all of its legal obligations.

In the light of all of those serious developments,
it is incumbent upon the international community,
particularly the Security Council, to uphold its
responsibilities and take the necessary measures to
bring an end to all of those grave Israeli Violations and
breaches of international law. That includes

humanitarian law, and in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, as well as human rights law and United
Nations resolutions. The Council must take urgent and
practical measures, including, inter alia, measures
prescribed by the Charter, to ensure Israel's scrupulous
compliance with all of its obligations under
international law and the cessation of its illegal
practices, which endanger the international efforts
being made to achieve peace through the peace
process.

Israel, the occupying Power, should be compelled
to completely freeze all of its settlement activities, to
rescind its recent decisions, to start dismantling
settlement outposts and to take further confidence-
building measures to show its seriousness with regard
to addressing this critical issue. Such steps are vital to
calming and improving the atmosphere, reviving
momentum and helping to advance the peace process
towards its stated goals.

Moreover, the failure of the Security Council to
uphold its responsibilities with regard to the
deteriorating and tragic humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory will only encourage the
occupying Power to continue its violations of
international law, to continue committing crimes
against the Palestinian people with impunity and to
continue undermining the fragile peace process in the
region. The international community cannot continue
to allow the incarceration and suffocation of the
entirety of the Palestinian civilian population in the
Gaza Strip under the occupying Power's siege. Israel
must be compelled to allow for the opening of the Gaza
border crossings to permit the movement of persons
and goods, including foodstuffs, medical supplies,
building materials and other necessary goods, and the
unfettered access of the urgently needed humanitarian
assistance and personnel to Gaza. In this regard, we
reiterate the readiness of the Palestinian Authority to
assume responsibility for the Palestine side of the Gaza
Strip's border crossings, and we call on Israel to act on
that initiative.

The current situation in the Gaza Strip is a human
catastrophe, and we cannot remain silent about it.
Immediate action must be taken to lift the siege and
closure and allow for the movement of persons and
goods in order to alleviate the suffering of the civilian
population at all levels and in all sectors and to
improve conditions on the ground. Such measures are
imperative not only from a humanitarian aspect, they

are also imperative from a peace aspect, for no one can
expect a people enduring such inhumane and
oppressive conditions to even entertain hopes for
peace, much less believe in the prospects for peace.

We reiterate that we will continue to resort to the
Security Council until it assumes its responsibilities.
We will also continue to resort to other organs of the
United Nations, including the General Assembly, and
other international forums in order to bring an end to
the violations and crimes being committed by Israel
against the Palestinian people and their inalienable
rights, foremost of which are the right to life, the right
to self-determination, the right of refugees to return
and to find a just solution to their plight in consonance
with General Assembly resolution 194 (III), and the
right to establish the independent State of Palestine,
with its East Jerusalem as its capital - without which
there can be no peaceful solution, as Jerusalem is the
heart of Palestine.

The road to security passes through the gate of
justice and peace. There is no military solution to this
conflict. Violence only begets Violence, and the
continuation of occupation and colonization will
ultimately impede any real prospects for realizing a
peaceful, just and permanent solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and the Arab-Israeli conflict
as a whole.

We reaffirm that the attempts to determine the
future of our people in the context of cantons and
ghettos in a West Bank fragmented by settlements, the
Wall, checkpoints and roadblocks, and of the siege of
the Gaza Strip and acts of aggression will totally
obstruct the attainment of the goal we all strive to
achieve - a just, comprehensive and lasting peace.

In conclusion, I reiterate what President
Mahmoud Abbas has repeatedly stated: there is a
Palestinian partner ready to sit at the negotiating table
with a serious Israeli partner to reach a solution based
on the resolutions of international legitimacy, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Road Map. We seek a just and
permanent solution guaranteeing the flourishing of
peace, not a partial, unilateral or temporary solution
that will actually prevent the realization of peace in our
region. We assure the international community as a
whole that we believe in right over might. We remain
resolved to protect our rights and to promote our desire
for peace. We appeal again to the international
community to do its part to help us achieve peace in
the Holy Land - peace in the land of peace.

