Mr. Hattrem (Norway): Tensions are increasing in
the Middle East, and it has become even more difficult
to re-engage Israel and Palestine in a meaningful
political process. It is therefore imperative to prepare
the ground for political initiatives that can lead to
renewed negotiations on a two-State solution.

Norway is deeply concerned about the violent
clashes on the Gaza-Israeli border. We urge all parties
to act with responsibility and restraint and to refrain
from any actions that could lead to further escalation
or loss of life. The use of lethal force against unarmed
protesters who are demonstrating peacefully is
unacceptable. While Israel has a legitimate right to
protect its borders, any use of force must be necessary
and proportionate.

It is also important to stress that freedom of
expression and freedom of assembly are fundamental
rights that must be respected. But protests must be
non-violent. As we have already emphasized, the most
serious incidents must be subject to an independent
and credible investigation. This is first and foremost
a national responsibility. However, Gaza can be
sustainable only as part of a comprehensive resolution
to the conflict.

As chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians (AHLC), Norway - together with the
European Union, the United Nations and the United
States - has intensified its work to support Palestinian
institution-building and to address the precarious
humanitarian situation in Gaza. We recently held
two AHLC meetings in Brussels, on 31 January and
20 March, both of which aimed at improving the
critical situation in Gaza. Key priorities are increased
water and energy distribution and improved access and
movement of people and goods in and out of Gaza, with
special priority given to medical equipment and people
in need of medical treatment.

Our goal must be to help the 2 million people in
Gaza. Norway is actively consulting with the parties,
Egypt and key international partners to address the
current situation. The policies and decisions of the
parties that run counter to the needs of the people of
Gaza must stop. It is also imperative that the Palestinian
Authority reinstate its full authority in Gaza. The Cairo
agreement must be fully implemented and the closure
of Gaza must be eased.

Following chemical attacks in Syria, it is crucial
that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons inspectors have unhindered access so that
they can continue their investigations. We also urge
the Security Council to establish a mechanism to hold
those responsible to account.

Norway is deeply concerned about the recent
escalations of violence in Syria. We underline the need
for renewed efforts to find political solutions. It is
important that all the parties involved in the conflict
work through the United Nations-led negotiations to
achieve a durable peace.

Yesterday, at the Brussels Conference on Supporting
the Future of Syria and the Region, the donors
pledged $4.4 billion for 2018. While this confirms the
international commitment to easing the burden of the
Syrian people, the pledges made are less than half of
what the United Nations estimates is needed. Norway is
on track to fulfil our four-year pledge of over $1 billion,
and this year we will contribute $280 million to the
crisis in Syria, including neighbouring countries.

Norway fully supports the Iran nuclear deal. When
it was signed in 2015, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) was a milestone for international peace
and security. Iran has complied with its commitments
under the deal. It is now crucial to ensure that the
JCPOA survives. This means that all parties must
remain committed to complying with both the letter
and the spirit of the agreement.

