Mr. Ladsous: I wish to begin by expressing my
deep appreciation for the Security Council's efforts to
mobilize support to defeat the Ebola epidemic, which,
as we all know, has had serious political, security and
social effects on all of the countries affected.

A month ago, I had the opportunity to brief the
Council on the implications for peace and security of
the Ebola crisis (see S/PV.7279). While I spoke then to
the political and security ramifications of the health
emergency for all the countries in West Africa where
we have peacekeeping operations deployed, including
Mali and Cote d'Ivoire, my focus was nevertheless on
Liberia, the country most affected by Ebola. Today, I
will again focus on Liberia, but I will attempt to look
beyond the immediate health crisis to what we, as an
international community deeply committed to that
country, can continue to do in order to keep its longer-
term interests in our sights.

There have been several significant developments in
the past month. In early October, the President accepted
the resignation ofher Minister ofJustice, Ms. Christiana
Tah, after more than five years of service. In departing,
Ms. Tah publicly claimed that she had been thwarted in
her efforts to carry out her responsibility for steering

the national security institutions that come under her
Ministry's authority. A few days ago, the Independent
National Commission on Human Rights released a
report challenging the findings ofa board ofinquiry on
the army's actions while it was enforcing the quarantine
of an Ebola-affected community in Monrovia. Five
soldiers were found guilty of disciplinary offences
related to the incident and have been demoted and
sentenced to be kept in custody, but the question of
criminal prosecution remains.

Following direction from the President and the
legislature, the national body responsible for elections
has held consultations with various stakeholders on
how to proceed with the senatorial elections that
under normal circumstances would have been held on
14 October. Many in civil society have raised serious
concerns about the appropriateness of proceeding
with senatorial elections, while the electoral body has
recommended to the legislature that they be held on
16 December. That is currently under consideration.
Yesterday, the 90-day state of emergency imposed
by the President in response to the health emergency
expired, and the legislature is discussing its possible
extension.

Last month, I spoke about our fear that reversals
could be triggered by the Ebola crisis. The Council
is familiar with the challenges facing Liberia, and
they have been exacerbated by the health emergency.
The political and social divisions in Liberia are
deepening, the already weak national institutions are
looking increasingly vulnerable, and in the current
circumstances the very survival of the country's
economically most vulnerable people is at risk. As I
said last month, even the small dignities of our shared
humanity, the ability to touch and comfort loved ones,
have all disappeared in the context of Ebola.

However, in the midst of this serious crisis there
is some good news. We are no longer seeing signs that
security could seriously deteriorate further, which, the
Council will recall, was our fear in late August and early
September. And while the crisis has put unprecedented
pressure on public institutions to perform, and it is true
that they have not always been successful, some areas
of strength have also been demonstrated. For instance,
local officials have responded to challenges at their
level in a manner we had not seen before, offering
a unique opportunity for decentralizing services.
Furthermore, the fact that the national human rights
commission demanded accountability for the actions

of the security forces at West Point has created an
important opportunity to enhance democratic oversight
of the security forces. Those are goals we have been
working on for years, goals that we had observed there
was a worrying lack of urgency to achieve.

For Liberia, this is clearly a moment of national
tragedy. As the Minister of Defence told the Council
in September, the very existence of the nation is at
stake. But even at such a difficult juncture, there is
an opportunity to mobilize the urgency required for
transformation. And we must encourage the people and
Government of Liberia to seize that opportunity, not
only to address the immediate crisis but also to rebuild
the country after Ebola. The people of Liberia have
demonstrated considerable resilience throughout the
Ebola crisis, and we are impressed by their strength.
We must provide them with whatever assistance we
can, and consider how best we can support not only the
Ebola response, but also, and perhaps most critically, the
post-Ebola reconstruction effort that will be required.

In August, the Secretary-General made a series
of recommendations (see S/2014/598) on how the
United Nations could revise its engagement in Liberia,
including with respect to enhancing the political role
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
and drawing down its uniformed presence. In the
current circumstances, we are of the view that it
would be appropriate to extend UNMIL's mandate
until September 2015, while taking forward the set
of recommendations on political issues and deferring
consideration of the drawdown of troops and police
until such time as the appropriate health authorities
inform us that the Ebola crisis is over.

As a representative of the international community,
we must seize the current moment and see how best we
may collectively help to transform it into one that is
positively catalytic for the country. As the Secretary-
General put it in his report in August, we may have
to reimagine our engagement in Liberia. Even as the
international community scales up its response to the
immediate challenge of defeating Ebola, we must also
consider how we may collectively support the rebuilding
of Liberia in the wake of the disease.

