Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would like to
thank Special Representative Haysom for his briefing
and Ambassador Saikal for his statement.

The situation in Afghanistan is a sobering but
compelling demonstration of how hard it is for a
country to escape the ravages of civil war, terrorism
and the breakdown of civil order, even after years of
investment on the part of the international community
in defeating the terrorists, rebuilding the country's
national security forces and re-establishing the basic
infrastructure ofa State. As the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/942) concludes and as Mr. Haysom has
reaffirmed, Afghanistan continues to face formidable
security, economic and political challenges. Kunduz, a
major provincial capital, was captured by the Taliban,
albeit for a short period; Kabul continues to come under
attack and hundreds of thousands have been killed and
wounded. And the fighting has had the multiplying effect
of hindering the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and other international actors
in the country in carrying out their work.

As the Secretary-General's report also implicitly
recognizes, we have no option but to persevere in the
determination that the situation will improve. To take
any other course would be to concede to the terrorists
and accept the failure of the Afghan State and all of
the consequences that would follow for Afghanistan,
the Afghan people, Afghanistan's neighbours and the
wider international community.

We commend the Afghan Government and the
Afghan security forces that continue to face challenges
that must at times seem unending and insurmountable.
We also welcome the commitment from the nations
of the Resolute Support Mission to maintain current
levels of support and training, assisting and advising
Afghanistan's security forces through 2016. At
the same time, we must urge the Government of
Afghanistan to do more to cement the institutions of
governance and build trust across the various dividing
lines of geography, ethnicity and faith. Inclusivity must
be the touchstone in reestablishing Afghanistan as a
fully functioning State. We urge the Afghan people,
including the Taliban, to embrace the reality that their
future as a country depends on their overcoming rather
than emphasizing the divisions.

We endorse Mr. Haysom's exhortations to the
Government of Afghanistan to demonstrate greater
effectiveness, both in governance and in the delivery
of Government to the Afghanistan people and, in
particular, tackling the problem of corruption, which
undermines confidence internally and externally. We
urge Afghanistan's neighbours to embrace the reality
that there can be no stability in the region without a
peaceful and stable Afghanistan. We welcome the
momentum of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process and
urge participants to carry forward the progress at the
most recent meeting in Islamabad.

I want to draw attention to three specific matters:
the growing threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), the importance of the Taliban sanctions
regime in promoting peace and discouraging those who
have no interest in peace, and the continuing threat
posed by improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and the
need for a stronger response to that threat.

It was perhaps inevitable that ISIL would establish
a presence in Afghanistan, whether by deliberate
strategy or by Afghan groups seeking to take on the
depraved aura. Whatever the motivation, those who
associate with ISIL exclude themselves from a political
dialogue and must be treated in the same manner as
ISIL adherents in Iraq, Syria and elsewhere. It is
important that we heed the call of the Security Council
in resolution 2253 (2015), adopted in the past week,
for Member States to forward listing requests for ISIL
affiliates to the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011), and 2253 (2015), concerning ISIL
(Daesh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities. The framework and tools
are there to target these groups. Their effectiveness
depends on Member States using them.

The Taliban sanctions regime has more nuanced
purposes. It seeks to encourage those members of
the Taliban who are prepared to reconcile with the
Government and to eschew links with those listed as
international terrorists, while at the same time seeking
to isolate those who continue to constitute a threat to
the peace, stability and security of Afghanistan. With
respect to the first element, I note that the resolution
2255 (2015) adopted today clarifies the procedures for
exemptions to the travel ban for peace talks. As Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), I urge full use of those procedures and
look forward to close coordination with the Sanctions
Committee in their implementation. With regard to the
second element, I urge Member States to make full use
of the listing procedures to list individuals associated
with the Taliban who profit from ongoing instability.
That is especially important in the effort to counter the
narcotics trade.

As the Secretary-General reminds us, IEDs remain
one of the biggest killers of Afghan security forces
and civilians, including children. The resolution 2255
(2015) adopted today notes the problem, including the
need for enhanced coordination among Member States
and industry. But in New Zealand's view, that is not
enough. We are disappointed that, unlike the General
Assembly, the Security Council could not agree on
stronger actions to more effectively target the IED
problem. In negotiations, we proposed the incorporation
of component parts in the arms embargo. Regrettably,
that idea was not taken up. As Chair, I look forward to
discussing what more our Sanctions Committee can do
to address this insidious and devastating threat.

Lastly, we commend Mr. Haysom and the staff
of UNAMA for their dedication and commitment to
Afghanistan and to the United Nations.

