Ms. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report
and briefing.

A permanent criminal court with a universal
jurisdiction is more essential than ever if we are to
prosecute the perpetrators of the most serious crimes
and break the cycles of impunity and violence that
operate in too many crisis situations. France considers
that the International Criminal Court is a pillar in the
fight against impunity at the international level. In order
to fulfil that task, the Court must be able to act and
exercise its prerogatives without hindrance and within
the framework established by the Rome Statute. In that
regard, France reiterates its support for the Prosecutor
and her Office in implementing resolution 1970 (2011).

The current situation weakens the peace efforts
going on in Libya. As the Prosecutor notes in her
report, violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law have increased in recent months.
Attacks on civilians, the trafficking of migrants,
arbitrary detention, enforced disappearances and
sexual violence are unacceptable. We also reiterate our
concern about the disappearance in Benghazi in July of
Ms. Siham Sergewa, a member of Parliament. We call
on the competent authorities to investigate this as soon
as possible and to obtain information on her location.

It is a matter of urgency to ensure that the Libyan
parties resume dialogue and work without delay on
both the signing of a ceasefire agreement and a lasting
political solution, based on the principles agreed on in
Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi. That political settlement
should pave the way for credible parliamentary and
presidential elections. In that regard, we reiterate our
support for Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ghassan Salame' and his three-point plan
established at the ministerial meeting co-chaired by
Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, France's Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs, and his Italian counterpart
on the margins of the high-level segment of the
General Assembly. We also support the holding of
an international conference in Berlin, which should
enable the international community to give clear and
unanimous support to a resumption of a political
dialogue between the Libyan parties, before the holding
of an inter-Libyan conference that is truly inclusive and
representative of Libyan society today, particularly its
women and young people. As recalled in the statement
of the Heads of State and Government at the Group of
Seven Summit in Biarritz, the United Nations and the
African Union could organize such a conference.

In that context, combating impunity is one of the
keys to resolving the conflict. The prosecution and
conviction of criminals are essential to rebuilding
the State and restoring democratic life in Libya. The
establishment of strong and independent judicial
institutions is a guarantee of stability for the country that
the International Criminal Court should complement. I
would like to make three specific points.

First, the fight against impunity requires the full and
complete cooperation of all stakeholders and the Libyan
parties first and foremost. We note that the Prosecutor is
pleased with the cooperation of the Libyan Prosecutor-
General. Besides that, the cooperation of all the States
concerned is necessary whether or not they are parties
to the Rome Statute. The Court's arrest warrants must
be executed, which would send a strong message about
the impartiality of justice in Libya. Furthermore, the
effective cooperation established between the Office of
the Prosecutor and the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, as well as with various other organizations,
including INTERPOL, should continue.

Secondly, all the most serious crimes committed
in Libya since 2011 and that continue to be committed
today must be investigated and prosecuted, including
those committed by Da'esh. In that regard, we have
taken note of the Prosecutor's statement of 16 April and
her announcement today regarding the possibility of
issuing new arrest warrants.

Lastly, we welcome the attention of the Prosecutor
to crimes committed against migrants. Once again,
the facts and findings that she mentioned in her report
remind us of the seriousness and magnitude of that
intolerable situation. We welcome her Office's rigorous
approach, based on the principles of cooperation
and complementarity with Libyan jurisdictions. We
welcome the fact that the sharing of some evidence and
information with local authorities operationally has
pushed forward investigations at the national level.

In conclusion, the vicious circle of impunity and
instability in Libya that benefits only terrorist groups,
criminal organizations and militias must be broken.
That is why we must provide immediate responses
to the challenges facing Libya, which cannot be met
without the effective assistance of the Court and the
support of the Security Council. France will continue to
cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court
and to mobilize the Security Council in that regard.

