Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): I should like to
start by wishing Council members a very happy new
year. Ijoin the President in welcoming Her Excellency
Ms. Leonie Banga-Bothy Mbazoa, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, African Integration, Francophonie and Central
Africans Abroad of the Central African Republic.

I would also like to congratulate the delegation
of Jordan on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. I take this opportunity to thank your
predecessor, Mr. President, as you just did, the
delegation of France, for its presidency of the Security
Council during December 2013.

I would also like to congratulate the other new
members of the Security Council: Chad, Chile,
Lithuania and Nigeria. I would like to especially
congratulate the two African delegations that have
joined the Council - Chad and Nigeria - whose work,
alongside that of Rwanda, will raise the voice of Africa
within the framework of the Security Council.

I thank Ambassador Feltman for his very
comprehensive briefing, which painted a very detailed
picture of the situation on the ground and the steps that
need to be taken.

On behalf of the African Union Commission, I
would like to thank the Council for its invitation and
for the opportunity afforded to the African Union to
address this body on the situation in the Central African
Republic. This meeting clearly reflects the Security
Council's focused attention to the especially alarming
developments that continue to unfold in that country.

As Council members know, on 19 July 2013
the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union authorized the deployment of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) and granted it a clear mandate to
protect the civilian population and stabilize the security
situation. The Peace and Security Council had asked
the Security Council to support the deployment of
MISCA and to take the measures needed to that effect.
In that regard, I welcome the fact that, in its resolutions
2121 (2013) and 2127 (2013), the Council has supported
and authorized the deployment of MISCA. That is a
further illustration of the close partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations.

On 19 December 2013, MISCA took over from the
Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in the Central
African Republic (MICOPAX) of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS). That
transition was the result of intense consultations with
the ECCAS, within the African Peace and Security
Framework. I would like once again to express the
appreciation of the African Union to ECCAS and
MICOPAX for their work under particularly difficult
conditions. It goes without saying that the cooperation
between the African Union and ECCAS continues,
given that the situation requires ongoing and active
regional involvement and the mobilization of all of
Africa's energy. As soon as it assumed authority,
MISCA began working to build on the achievements
attained by MICOPAX and effectively implement its
mandate, guided by the concept of operations adopted
in agreement with ECCAS.

I should like to underscore that MISCA's original
plan was severely hindered by the attacks perpetrated
on 5 December 2013 against Government forces by
initially unidentified armed groups that were later
determined to be of the so-called anti-Balaka group.
Following those bloody events and through extended
consultations between Heads of State of the region
and African Union partners, the Peace and Security
Council decided on 13 December 2013 to authorize an
increase in the force strength of MISCA of up to 6,000
uniformed personnel, depending on developments in
the situation on the ground. Clearly, like the French
Operation Sangaris, MISCA embarked on its work in
a particularly difficult environment, characterized by
clashes between anti-Balaka and ex-Se'le'ka forces, and
sometimes between individuals.

This violence is all the more destabilizing and
difficult to contain because it has assumed on a sectarian
and religious character. Heinous crimes have been
committed. Lynchings, summary executions, looting
and destruction of property have increased. Tens of
thousands ofpeople have had to flee their homes to seek
refuge in other areas of the city of Bangui considered
safer, primarily the area surrounding the airport.

Since its inception, MISCA has had to take measures
to address this situation. The reinforcement of ground
personnel following the arrival of the Burundian
contingent helped to contain the tide of violence and
respond as best it could to the many demands on the
MISCA forces - at times for escorts, at others to hold
fixed points or secure commercial and public buildings.
Positioned in various sites in the city of Bangui,
MISCA troops deployed in the capital had initially held
fixed points, while patrols were left to the elements of
the Operation Sangaris, which were more mobile and
equipped with adequate means of communication.

Since then, military and police forces have
adopted new plans for dividing the territory in order
to attain an adequate grip over Bangui and the rest of
Central African territory. The imminent deployment
of the Rwandan contingent and the provision of
communication, mobility and protection equipment
should allow MISCA to accelerate its securing of
Bangui and embark on the second phase of deployment
pursuant to its concept of operations.

During their working visit to Bangui on
28 December 2013, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Chad, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
and of Defence of the Republic of Congo, and the
African Union Peace and Security Commissioner were
encouraged by the steps taken by MISCA commanders
to redeploy its forces and called for the stigmatization
of any contingents within MISCA to be avoided. The
Ministers and the Commissioner also stressed the need
for continued international support to facilitate the
implementation of MISCA's mandate as authorized
by resolution 2127 (2013). I also wish to stress that
the commanders of MISCA and Operation Sangaris
continue to work in coordination and collaboration as
they conduct operations to secure the city of Bangui.
The calm reported in recent days is the result of the
joint action of the two forces.

MISCA is committed to working closely with the
various leaders within the Central African Republic.
At the political level, this means encouraging the
transitional authorities to work closely together,
accelerate the timetable for transition, and launch the
necessary process of reconciliation among the various
national communities. It also means encouraging
them to do what is necessary for the State to resume
the effective provision of public services, including
effective State control over income sources and the
transparent management of public finances.

At a more operational level, MISCA seeks to
promote, as far as possible, the return to normal life.
From this point of view, I note that on 4 January the head
of MISCA held a meeting with the Mayor of Bangui,
district and neighbourhoods leaders from Bangui, and
representatives of humanitarian agencies with a view
to agreeing with them on practical measures to meet
the security needs of the population and facilitate
the work of the military and the police. A committee
was established to monitor the implementation of the
measures agreed. One ofthe immediate results expected
is the return of displaced populations, especially those
located around the Bangui airport, to their homes.

In the coming days, MISCA will make the most of
the current relative calm to step up its implementation
of plans to divide and organize Bangui and the rest of
Central African territory by sector; to develop strategies
to support the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
security and defence sector reform; and to consider how
to support the electoral process, in coordination with
other stakeholders.

The Commission is preparing to deploy an initial
group of human rights observers to support MISCA in
this area, which is critical to the restoration of justice,
public order and State authority. The transitional
authorities, including the Prime Minister, have been
urged to step up the launch of the work of the judiciary.
Similarly, following the discovery in Bangui on
25 December 2013 of a mass grave containing several
bodies, a request was sent to the transitional authorities
for the public prosecutor to initiate the necessary
procedures and conduct adequate investigations into
these events.

Similarly, the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the Commission and MISCA
Commander, General Jean-Marie Michel Mokoko,
maintains close collaboration with other members of
the international community in Bangui, including the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic, and the
representatives of France, the United States of
America and the European Union in order to facilitate
coordinated international action on the ground.

It goes without saying that MISCA is operating
under difficult conditions. Indeed, the Mission still
faces several challenges, linked in particular to the
lack of infrastructure in the country, which has made
its tasks even more complex, hindered manoeuvres
and considerably increased the cost, as well as to the
inadequacy of air and land mobility and communications
assets.

Let me reiterate here the gratitude of the African
Union to the international partners that have been
supporting MISCA. I would like to highlight the
European Union and the United States, as well as
France, with which we are working on the ground.
Additional support, both logistical and financial, is still
required from the international community. We hope
that the donor conference to be held in Addis Ababa on
1 February will be an opportunity for Member States
and our partners alike to show their support for MISCA.

We are confident that MISCA can meet the
challenges before it. The determination of the
African Union is total and the commitment of troop-
contributing countries unflinching. MISCA personnel
are performing their duties with dedication and a great
sense of sacrifice, aware that they are participating in
a duty-bound act of African solidarity with a brotherly
country and people in distress. As fragile as they
may be, the first results on the ground strengthen our
conviction that the established goals will be met -just
as the African Union has proved to be the case in other
theatres of operations, in particular in Somalia - with
the extremely valuable support of the United Nations
and other international partners.

We believe that the priority for the international
community, and of the United Nations in particular,
should be to support MISCA so that the Mission can
create the minimal conditions for the deployment of
a United Nations operation in due course. While the
efforts of the African Union and its peace and security
structures must also be strengthened, it is also true
that a lasting solution to the continent's crises will
be possible only by strengthening African capacities.
Regardless of their good intentions, our partners will
not always be able to assume the burden ofpeacekeeping
on the continent. In our view, any other approach risks
undermining the efforts that MISCA is currently
undertaking, with the support of Operation Sangaris,
by generating uncertainty, which would undermine the
gains already made and complicate the situation on the
ground. Such a situation would make any deployment of
a United Nations operation more difficult. We therefore
expect the Security Council to take this opportunity to
strongly reiterate, in line with its previous resolutions,
its support for MISCA and the need for all involved to
facilitate the implementation of its mandate.

Beyond renewed support for MISCA, the
international community, including the United Nations,
must redouble its efforts to support the implementation
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, security sector reform and the electoral
process. Financial assistance is also urgently needed to
facilitate a relaunching of economic activity. Of course,
I would not want to fail to mention the extremely
worrisome humanitarian situation that prevails on the
ground. The international community's response to
that situation should be much more robust. It is through
such concrete actions to respond to the needs on the
ground that the international community can usefully
contribute to the ongoing work and success of MISCA,
which is working on behalf of not only the African
Union but also the international community as a whole.

The response to the current crisis is obviously not
taking place only on the military and security fronts;
in fact, it is fundamentally political in nature. From
that point of view, the commitment of the transitional
authorities is essential. It is important that they fully
shoulder their responsibilities. The efforts they will
undertake in the effective conduct of the transition and
the contribution they make to MISCA will be crucial
to the success of our efforts. The initiatives undertaken
by ECCAS, particularly through its acting chairman
and the chairman of its committee monitoring the
situation in the Central African Republic, namely,
Their Excellencies President Idriss Deby ltno of Chad
and President Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of
the Congo, should be strongly supported.

