Mr. Vinay Kumar (India): I would like to join
others in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zannier for his briefing. I would
also like to thank His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremic',
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, for his country's
perspective on the situation in Kosovo. My delegation
has carefully listened to the statement of Kosovo's
representative, Mrs. Vlora Citaku.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2011/43) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) has brought out in detail the
prevailing situation there. We note that with UNMIK's
facilitation, Belgrade and Pristina have continued to
make progress on some issues, including missing
persons and religious and cultural heritage. We
encourage the two parties to address all of the
remaining issues seriously and expeditiously. UNMIK
should also continue its work on facilitating
communication between the two parties.

We note from the report of the Secretary-General
that, although the overall security situation in Kosovo
is relatively calm, the continued prevalence of
individual as well as organized crime makes the
security situation potentially volatile. In this
connection, the report of the Council of Europe's
Special Rapporteur, Mr. Dick Marty, which contains
allegations of inhuman treatment of people and illicit
trafficking in human organs, merits examination. We
suggest that a thorough and impartial investigation be
carried out by an entity legally empowered to look into
all aspects of the matter.

1 l-23 603
The Secretary-General's report shows that a
considerable number of tasks under pillars 1 and 2 -
concerning police, justice and civil administration,
which are monitored by UNMIK - remain to be
accomplished. Accordingly, we urge the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to continue to
implement UNMIK's mandate.

We call on all parties to cooperate fully with
UNMIK and to facilitate its work. We hope that all the
issues concerning Kosovo will be resolved peacefully
through consultation and dialogue. We also support the
extension of UNMIK's mandate so that it can continue
to work towards the fulfilment of the tasks mandated to
it by the Council.

