Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his briefing and by welcoming the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the
representative of the Palestinian Authority.

The Under-Secretary-General has given us much
to consider, and at the outset I would like to discuss the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. The United States is
deeply committed to relieving the immediate suffering
of the people there. We are also determined to
aggressively work for a lasting peace that provides a
stable and prosperous future for Israelis and
Palestinians alike. Our response to the urgent needs in
Gaza, however, cannot be separated from our broader
long-term efforts to achieve a comprehensive peace.

To date, my Government has contributed more
than $66 million to provide food, water, medicine and
shelter for the people of Gaza. At the 2 March donors
conference in Sharm el-Sheikh, Secretary of State
Clinton announced our intention to support the
Palestinian Authority and Gaza recovery with up to
$900 million in assistance. That pledge, designed in
coordination with the Palestinian Authority and to be
submitted to the United States Congress, will deliver
assistance to the people of Gaza and will further the
development of the West Bank.

The United States is working with President
Abbas and the Palestinian Authority to address critical
humanitarian, budgetary, security and infrastructure
development needs in Gaza. Direct budget support to
the Palestinian Authority offers one of the quickest
ways to meet those needs: the Palestinian Authority
spends more than 50 per cent of its recurrent budget in
Gaza, for instance, and Palestinian Authority employees
in Gaza's hospitals and schools continue to provide
essential services to the people of Gaza under often
extreme conditions.

Through our assistance and support for the
Palestinian Authority, we aim to foster the conditions in
which a Palestinian State can be created - a State at
peace with Israel and its neighbours and accountable to
its people, a State of which Palestinians everywhere can
be proud. That is the Palestinian State we all envisage and
which we all have an obligation to help create.

We are engaging with the Government of Israel
on a daily basis about the volume and range of
humanitarian items and humanitarian workers entering
Gaza. We encourage Israel to make it easier to bring
humanitarian goods into Gaza and to ease restrictions
on urgently needed items, including critical building
supplies. As part of a lasting ceasefire, Gaza's border
crossings should be opened to permit a robust flow of
aid and commerce, with an appropriate monitoring
regime joined by both the international community and
the Palestinian Authority. We also share Israel's
concern about the fate of Corporal Gilad Shalit and
urge his immediate release.

I also wish to express our deep appreciation to
President Mubarak and the Government of Egypt for
their persistence in promoting a durable ceasefire in
Gaza and southern Israel, and in hosting Palestinian
reconciliation talks. The United States values Egypt's
leadership in the region and its support for peace. We
support its efforts to forge a Palestinian unity
Government that can be a genuine party to peace and
can realize the Palestinian people's legitimate
aspirations to an independent and viable State by
recognizing Israel, renouncing violence and accepting
previous agreements and obligations, including the
Road Map.

The smuggling of weapons into Gaza and
continued rocket attacks by Hamas constitute a serious
and immediate threat to regional peace and security,
putting innocent lives at risk and threatening to set off
another deadly round of violence. Working with our
partners in the region and beyond, the United States is
committed to moving forward quickly with new
mechanisms to block this arms trafficking.

We welcome the programme of action agreed in
London on 13 March by nine nations: Canada,
Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands,
Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States.
Consistent with existing Security Council resolutions,
as well as with counter-terrorism and non-proliferation
conventions and regimes, this initiative will strengthen
the international community's ability to support a
durable ceasefire. It provides a comprehensive
platform for enhanced cooperation, information and
intelligence sharing, diplomatic engagement and
military and law enforcement activities. Participating
countries will meet on a regular basis and have agreed
that the initiative would be open to others that wish to
jom.

It is the policy of the United States to move
quickly and actively to seek a lasting peace between
Israel and the Palestinians. With Special Envoy
Mitchell leading our efforts, we are engaged in
determined and vigorous diplomacy. Lasting peace
requires more than a ceasefire, however. We urge all
parties to respect their obligations under the Road Map
and to refrain from any activities that do not help the
cause of peace in the Middle East.

We have made clear to Israel that settlement
activity is unhelpful, and we call on Israel to dismantle
outposts created since March 2001. We also call on the
Arab States, building on the Arab Peace Initiative, to
reach out to Israel to demonstrate by both word and
deed that Israel has a permanent and secure place in the
region. The United States will engage to help support
the parties as they make progress towards a
comprehensive peace between Israel and all its
neighbours that respects Israel's rightful place in the
community of nations and includes two States - Israel
and Palestine - living side by side in peace and
security.

President Obama, Secretary Clinton and
Ambassador Rice have stated their desire for principled
and sustained engagement in the Middle East. As
President Obama has noted, the United States intends
to pursue engagement with all countries of the region,
including Syria. On 7 March, United States officials
travelled to Damascus to build on previous discussions
in Washington, DC. We are hopeful that Syria can play
a constructive role in the region by supporting, for
example, Palestinian reconciliation based on
commitments undertaken by the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO), a secure and stable Iraq, and free
and fair parliamentary elections in Lebanon.

Before closing, let me make several essential
points about the situation in Lebanon. Sadly, these are
also related to the unremitting threat of violence. The
United States condemns the attack on Monday that
killed Kamal Medhat, adviser to the PLO's
representative in Lebanon, and his bodyguards. We call
on all parties to respect the rule of law and renounce
the use of violence. My Government supports the
Lebanese Government in its efforts to provide security
and to ensure that the perpetrators of this attack are
brought to justice.

We also remain particularly concerned about
Hizbollah's continuing efforts to rearm. In Lebanon as
in Gaza, arms smuggling is a continuing threat to peace
and security in the region. Lebanese civilians will have
real security only when Hizbollah, the Popular Front
for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command,
Fatah al-Intifada and other militias disarm. The
Government of Lebanon must be the sole military
authority in that country. The United States continues
to press all parties to support the conduct of free, fair
and transparent parliamentary elections in Lebanon,
unmarred by political violence. The shape and
composition of Lebanon's next Government should be
decided by the Lebanese themselves, for Lebanon and
free from outside interference.

Finally, we are encouraged by the 1 March
opening of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon in The
Hague, and we are confident that the Tribunal will
bring to justice those who financed, planned and
perpetrated the assassinations of former Prime Minister
Rafiq Hariri and others. The rise of the Tribunal
illustrated the shared determination of Lebanon and the
international community to end an era of impunity for
political assassinations in Lebanon. The United States
will continue to support the Tribunal, and we
encourage all those committed to promoting justice in
Lebanon to do so as well.

