Mr. Valle (Brazil): I am pleased to join previous
speakers in welcoming you, Mr. Secretary, and in
congratulating your delegation on convening this
meeting on such a highly relevant subject. It is indeed
an honour to have His Excellency Mr. Alberto Romulo
presiding over our session today. I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Kalomoh for his statement and
welcome the valuable contributions made by Mr. Paul
van Tongeren, Mr. Andrea Bartoli and Mr. Vasu
Gounden.

For decades, our concept of security has been
associated with military response. This unidimensional
approach is now, however, being redefined to integrate
root causes of conflict into the concept of security
threat. Conflict prevention is directly dependent on a
certain level of quality of life. Hunger, poverty, poor
health and lack of education, although not necessarily
the direct causes, are powerful factors in catalysing
conflict.

It is time for the United Nations, and in particular
the Security Council, to consider managing the
interconnection of various political and socio-
economic factors in conflict situations. This approach
makes explicit the need for an increasing role for civil
society in conflict prevention and the pacific settlement
of disputes.

Citizen-based associations and movements,
educational institutions, charities, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and even corporations now show
a growing understanding that they should also
contribute to common efforts towards avoiding the
scourge of conflict or preventing the relapse into
conflict after a peacekeeping operation is deployed.
Their participation is more than welcome and will be
complementary to the initiatives of Governments.

The Secretary-General's Panel of Eminent
Persons on United Nations-Civil Society Relations
concluded that the constructive engagement with civil
society must promoted for the identification of global
priorities and the mobilization of resources. According
to the Panel, chaired by the former President of Brazil,
Fernando Henrique Cardoso, the engagement of civil
society is not a threat to Governments, but a powerful
way to reinvigorate domestic policies for the well-
being of populations.

When peace processes are being implemented,
the contribution of civil society is particularly relevant
to promote inclusiveness and local ownership,
including through increasing public awareness and
turning public opinion in favour of peace initiatives.
Their participation is also welcome in promoting
reconciliation and education for peace.

A word must also be said for the need to explore
synergies and complementarities among civil society,
Governments, regional organization and the United
Nations. Their efforts must be coherent and compatible
with this Organization's legitimacy as the main global
actor in peace and security.

I should stress the need for increased attention to
the coordinated planning of our response to crisis with
the help of specific mechanisms for that purpose in the
United Nations. Accordingly, we hope the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission will be
of much help.

Available instruments must be constantly
improved and adapted to the changing needs of our
response to crisis. In particular, a joint reflection on the
roles and responsibilities of different actors will allow
the United Nations to devise increasingly efficient
ways to mobilize and finance civilian capabilities on a
global basis to assist countries threatened with conflict.

Meeting the complex changes of conflict
prevention and the settlement of disputes cannot be
attained without the mobilization of a wide range of
actors and the ability to make full use of the expertise,
resourcefulness and comparative advantages of all
sectors of society. Before the eruption of conflict, early
analysis, early warning and preventive diplomacy are
sorely needed. And in a post-conflict phase, structural
rebuilding and long-term reconciliation have become
as important as military response.

In dealing with an ever-changing array of
conflicts, increased attention has to be paid to all
fundamental political, economic, social and
humanitarian dimensions. The complexity and
sensitivity of the United Nations role have multiplied
our responsibilities. Our contribution to peace has been
and must continue to be enriched by the active
participation of civil society.

