Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by thanking
Sweden for organizing today's open debate.

We endorse the Secretary-General's call to make
2017 a year of peace. That is urgent, given that new and
complex conflicts are emerging, even as older, longer-
standing and unresolved disputes continue to fester. We
are in fact witnessing unprecedented human suffering
caused by conflicts and violent upheaval. Entire regions
are being destabilized, and millions of lives destroyed,
by long drawn-out conflicts. Today's debate is therefore
both timely and critical.

The United Nations responsibility for sustaining
peace flows from the Charter's promise of the promotion
of economic and social development for all peoples in
larger freedom. That responsibility is in addition to the
obligation for the maintenance of international peace
and security. United Nations peacebuilding efforts must
respect the fundamental principles of the Charter of
theUnited Nations, including respect for the sovereignty
and sovereign equality of States. Such efforts should

be undertaken under a clear mandate from the Security
Council and the General Assembly.

The United Nations capacity for sustaining peace
is still relatively nascent. It has evolved in response
to the growing number of conflicts across the world.
The United Nations endeavours in nation-building
have, however, had mixed results. Yet they have so far
been more productive and cost effective than unilateral
actions taken by some Powers.

Sustainable peace is a challenge and cannot be
achieved unless the underlying causes of conflicts are
addressed: poverty and, increasingly, environmental
degradation; political and economic injustice; ethnic,
tribal and religious tensions; and external interference
and intervention. It also means finding solutions to
longstanding political disputes. Political, security
and development actors need to support each other in
striving for sustainable peace. It is a comprehensive
activity requiring holistic, long-term thinking that
connects development, peace and security and human
rights into an integrated approach. All our discussions
from the past year have brought forth the understanding
that sustaining peace entails a political process. It
encompasses the prevention of the outbreak, escalation,
continuation and recurrence of conflict.
Its core message is prevention. We believe that
prevention should be taken as a task to be shared by
national Governments and national stakeholders.
Inclusive dialogue, mediation, accountable institutions,
good governance, access to justice, gender equality
and youth participation all feed into the processes of
conflict prevention and, ultimately, sustainable peace.
Inclusivity is the linchpin for sustaining peace.

When we look at sustainable peace through the lens
of conflict prevention, it is important to shift from a
culture of reaction to a culture of prevention. Effective
preventive strategies rely on, first, early reaction to
sign of trouble; secondly, efforts to alleviate the factors
that trigger violence; and, thirdly, the resolution of the
underlying root causes ofviolence. In all such processes,
national ownership is essential. We believe that conflict
prevention and mitigation are not generic. Moving
a country towards durable peace begins with a clear
understanding of the sources and nature of the local
conflicts. Ambitious conflict-prevention strategies
have to avoid the pitfalls of either a delayed reaction or
an incorrect reading ofthe signs of an impending crisis.

The United Nations already has several instruments
for conflict prevention. At present, the United Nations
and regional organizations maintain dozens of good-
offices missions in, or in proximity to, countries faced
with significant risks of conflict. Existing conflict-
prevention mechanisms, such as early-warning
systems, are mostly designed to detect only imminent
or recurring conflicts. The United Nations observer
and peacekeeping missions should serve to provide a
deeper understanding of potential conflicts and crises
and act as early warning systems.

Finally, the United Nations cannot fulfil the role
of sustaining peace and preventing conflict without
adequate financial resources, the political support
of Member States and efficient management and
coordination by the various United Nations organs
and entities concerned. Today's debate can contribute
significantly to advancing such goals.

