Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Madam President, we are very pleased to
welcome you at the helm of the Security Council. We
would express our gratitude to the Chilean delegation
for the convening of today's meeting as well as for the
preparation of the presidential statement just adopted
(S/PRST/2015/3). We also thank the Secretary-General,
who set the tone for today's debate, and the Permanent
Representative of Brazil, Mr. De Aguiar Patriota,
for his statement and his effective leadership of the
Peacebuilding Commission in 2014. We also listened
carefully to the statement made by Nobel Laureate
Ms. Gbowee.

The Russian Federation has always viewed the
United Nations as a unique deliberative platform for the
creation of a more sustainable and lasting architecture
for international relations, where primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
lies with the Security Council.

In today's context of global dynamic changes,
various regions are experiencing full-scale, sweeping
geopolitical transformations, with a growing potential
for conflict. There are increasing numbers of internal
conflicts, compounded by armed clashes and difficult
socioeconomic conditions. Against that backdrop,
long-standing issues are ever more pressing, including
the trans-boundary proliferation of weapons, organized
crime, drug trafficking and new threats such as
terrorism and Violent extremism.

In that context, we fully endorse strengthening
mechanisms for dialogue and conflict prevention
and improving the United Nations and in particular
the Security Council's instruments in the areas
of preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping and post-
conflict peacebuilding. We remain convinced that the
unchanging guideline for such activities remains the
universal norms of international law and the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations.

The interconnected tasks in the areas of security,
human rights and development, enshrined, inter alia,
in the outcome documents of major forums held under
the auspices of the United Nations, including the
Millennium Summit, the 2005 World Summit and the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20), are of particular relevance for States in a
period of post-conflict rebuilding in which the United
Nations plays a central coordinating role. Peacebuilding
assistance here should aim to promote the devising of
priorities by national Governments and should target
national capacity-building. Here we see room for close
cooperation among the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council.

All aspects of the global economic agenda,
including combating inequalities and ensuring
inclusive economic growth and development, should be
considered in the framework of the intergovernmental
process being carried out under the auspices of the
General Assembly in preparation for the September
2015 summit, when a post-2015 global development
agenda is proposed for adoption. There should be no
politicization ofwork in the context ofagreement on this
agenda. We are also opposed to a broad interpretation
of the concept of sustainable development that would
include new aspects, including the so-called political
dimension, that are not in keeping with the ideas set
forth at Rio+20.

We call for restraint and circumspection in the
discussion of development issues in the framework of
non-specialized bodies, in particular in the Security
Council. This also applies to other individualized
platforms for activity, including with respect to issues
related to justice and the upholding of human rights.
It seems that the incorporation of such elements in the
agenda of the Security Council will inevitably lead to
the duplication of work that is already ongoing and
give rise to strong political antagonisms and justified
claims that the Security Council is encroaching on
the prerogatives of other United Nations bodies. That
is why we have consistently called for an effective
division of labour among the principal United Nations
bodies and the discussion in the Security Council only
of situations that have a direct bearing on imminent
threats to international peace and security. In this
connection, we fully agree with the relevant ideas
of Ambassador De Aguiar Patriota, the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

It is clear that in every crisis there is a need for
subtlety, a balanced and impartial approach and patience
in seeking a solution that is acceptable to all parties to
a conflict. For some States, the root causes of conflict
have socioeconomic undertones. In others, they take
the form of the political and cultural exclusion of entire
regions from public life.
Furthermore, in order to bring about lasting peace,
there is a need to take account of cultural, historical and
regional issues as well as the specificities of relations
with neighbouring States. The context for stable and
equitable societies also varies from country to country,
but the common denominator must be to take account
of all social segments and groups in the process of the
State's carrying out the relevant tasks.

In conclusion, I wish to note that the Russian
Federation, committed as it is to such an approach,
continues at the national level to consistently strengthen
and harmonize relations among various segments of
society so as to ensure social and nationwide cohesion.
This was indeed one of the aims of the 15 January
Moscow forum on "The State and civil society:
cooperation for development".

