Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are delighted, Madam Minister, to see
you in the Chair, presiding over the Security Council.
Our thanks go to the delegation of Chile, which has
been guiding our work this January with an
effectiveness that we anticipate will continue
throughout the month.
The item before us today is most topical in the
context of the activities of the Security Council with
respect to various conflicts. A key goal in conflict
resolution is the attainment of national reconciliation in
the countries emerging from crisis. The Security
Council devotes great attention to the issue of national
reconciliation in the specific situations on its agenda.

In January 2004, the Council has adopted
resolution 1522 (2004) to assist in efforts to form an
integrated national army in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; it has considered the post-conflict
rehabilitation of Sierra Leone; it has discussed the
implementation of the recommendations of the Security
Council mission to West Africa; and it is engaged in
intensive work to prepare the deployment of a large-
scale, multi-function United Nations mission to cote
d'Ivoire. Those are examples from one month alone,
and all of them are directly related to the promotion of
national reconciliation.

There is no doubt that the parties to a conflict
themselves must play the main role in charting the
paths towards national reconciliation - paths that take
account of local characteristics, traditions and customs.
Here, the range can be extremely broad: from the
establishment of national truth and reconciliation
commissions, the organization of nationwide dialogue,
the formation of transitional governments of national
unity and the proclamation of general amnesties to the
setting up of ad hoc tribunals to prosecute of all those
involved in crimes during the conflict, including those
involved in massive violations of human rights and of
the norms of international law, in particular
international humanitarian law.

We have repeatedly observed that there can be no
peace or concord without justice. But the quest for
justice should not be an impediment to peace. In this
complex and painful process, a special role should be
played by the international community, and primarily
by the United Nations, whose key task is to promote
the creation of the conditions necessary for national
reconciliation processes. Here, we refer primarily to
establishing a secure climate that can rule out attempts
to use armed force to settle political problems.

The experience of United Nations peacekeeping
operations has shown that only a comprehensive
approach to a settlement can restore lasting peace and
ensure the attainment of genuine national reconciliation
in countries emerging from crisis. Such approaches
include assistance in the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants; the provision of
international guarantees; and assistance with building a
civil society and the rebuilding of State institutions -
including through the holding of free democratic
elections; fostering post-conflict economic
rehabilitation; promoting security, judicial and law-
enforcement reform; addressing women's issues and
the problem child soldiers; et cetera.

A striking example of the special responsibility
borne by the parties to a conflict can be seen in
Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro. Unfortunately, the
progress made in the Kosovo settlement has came
about thanks essentially to the international presences
in that province. The Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government often complicate such efforts, abuse their
powers and even attempt to undermine the basic
resolution of the Security Council: resolution 1244
(1999). Another conclusion we can draw from the case
of Kosovo is the importance of a holistic approach,
establishing a division of labour between the United
Nations and regional organizations. In that province,
there is close interaction not only among various
components of the United Nations system, but also
among regional organizations such as the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization, the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Council of Europe. All together, they make an
important contribution to the common cause.

United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Africa, particularly those in Angola and in Sierra
Leone, clearly demonstrate the Council's ability to deal
with the most complex of tasks involved in the
settlement of crises and the promotion of national
reconciliation.

A striking example of the great importance of
ensuring a central role for the United Nations in
promoting national reconciliation is that of
Afghanistan. The briefing recently given to the
Security Council by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the then
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan (see S/PV.4893), showed that some fairly
good results have been achieved in that country in an
unusually brief span of history. We note in particular
the country's adoption of a new Constitution, which
has opened the way for democratic reforms in Afghan
society.

Certainly, much remains to be done, and the
Security Council must continue to devote priority
attention to Afghanistan's problems. It will be possible
to implement our shared effort to support the Afghan
settlement only if a unified approach is maintained in
the international community as a whole, particularly
among Afghanistan's neighbours. The convening of a
representative international conference on Afghanistan
would be another important step in that area.

The successful experience of the settlement
achieved in Tajikistan offers a wealth of lessons on
national reconciliation. That experience was useful also
because it included an effective plan for interaction
among the various international actors. The United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan, Contact
Group of Guarantor States and international
organizations donor countries all played an
indispensable role at various stages of the inter-Tajik
settlement, whose culmination was the implementation
of the Moscow General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in
Tajikistan. That the effort was effective is
demonstrated by the fact that today, Tajikistan is
experiencing development, has successfully overcome
a dire societal division and is on the path to national
harmony.

The Security Council must take all of those
lessons into account in its current work on the post-war
rehabilitation of Iraq and in post-conflict rehabilitation
efforts in Liberia, Guinea-Bissau, the Central African
Republic and other crisis areas. We look forward to
further close cooperation with all Council members and
with members of the wider United Nations family in
carrying out those efforts.

