Mr. Soares (Portugal): At the outset I would like to
state that we associate ourselves fully with the statement
that will be delivered in a few moments on behalf of the
European Union by the representative of Luxembourg.

Portugal, from the very beginning, actively supported
the efforts of the international community to provide
assistance to Albania after its descent into chaos and
turmoil. In this regard, we would like to join others in
praising the special efforts of Italy as the driving force
behind the establishment of the multinational protection
force in Albania, to which Portugal has contributed
logistical support in the form of air transportation. The
presence of the force permitted the delivery of

 

international humanitarian assistance to the Albanians and
stabilized the political situation in the country, allowing the
holding of elections. In fact, the deployment of the
multinational protection force almost certainly averted a
full-scale civil war, the consequences of which would have
been disastrous, not only for the Albanians themselves but
for the already volatile situation in that region of Europe.

The combined efforts in Albania of the United
Nations, the European Union, the Western European Union,
the Council of Europe, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and international economic institutions and
relief agencies, all under the effective coordination of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), are a good example of a regional response to a
crisis by the international community. The United Nations
Charter refers specifically to the utilization of regional
arrangements under the authority of the Security Council,
and the response to the crisis in Albania was carried out in
strict accordance with these terms.

Now, as the multinational protection force has
withdrawn from Albania, it is time to move forward.
Naturally, the international community will continue to
assist the Albanian people, but it is the Albanian
Government that is principally responsible for the
reestablishment of law and order and for pursuing national
reconciliation and economic reconstruction in Albania, as
well as for continuing the process of democratization and
the protection of human rights. We urge the Albanian
authorities to respond positively to the efforts of the
international community and to cooperate fully with it in
the fulfilment of these important objectives.

