Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
I should like, first, to express to you, Sir, our
compliments and our wishes for all success on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of August. I should like also to thank
Ambassador Martinez Blanco and his delegation very
warmly for the excellent job they did while occupying the
presidency during the month of July.

My delegation voted in favour of resolution 1008
(1995), just adopted, which extends the mandate of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) for six months, until 8 February 1996.

Since the beginnings of the United Nations
involvement in Angola, the Security Council has

 

consistently supported a process that originally appeared to
be almost impossible to conclude successfully. Today, the
situation appears in a completely different light: the
cooperation of the parties and the trust that has developed
between the principal negotiators give us reason once again
to hope that there will be a happy outcome to the Angolan
conflict.

The meeting between the President of Angola and the
head of UNITA will have been a historic and decisive stage
in this process. We hope that the contacts between the two
former belligerents will continue and intensify. Important
progress has been achieved with respect to the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. What is important
now is for the Angolans to do everything necessary to
ensure that all the commitments that have been undertaken
on both sides are implemented.

This applies to all areas: first, political matters with
the integration into the State apparatus of former members
of UNITA; secondly, military matters with respect to the
setting up of a national army, which will have to be
preceded by the withdrawal and quartering of troops on
both sides; and finally, economic, social and humanitarian
matters, which comprise, inter alia, respect for human
rights with the return to civilian life of thousands of
combatants who have known no occupation other than
armed struggle.

Clearly, it is no less essential that the Angolans should
feel right now that things are changing. Angola has the
unenviable reputation of being the most heavily mined
country on the African continent. The French Government
regards tasks related to demining as a matter of the first
priority, for freedom of movement and safety for the entire
Angolan people must be restored rapidly.

By requesting the Secretary-General to carry out full
deployment of UNAVEM. III, the international community
is restating today its desire to support Angola to the very
end of the peace process, which, logically, should conclude
with the restoration of democracy and progress. May our
hopes not be disappointed.

