Mr. Lewicki (Poland): As this is the last time we
take the floor as a member of the Security Council while
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
is in the Chamber, let me reiterate Poland's continued
and unwavering support for her and her Office. Both
the Office of Prosecutor and the ICC continue to
play a crucial role in fighting impunity and ensuring
accountability. In that connection, their work lies at the
heart of the Security Council's mandate, because there
can be no sustainable peace without justice.

As the Prosecutor said, the new Sudanese authorities
have an opportunity to demonstrate their commitment
to international law and respect for human rights by
complying with their international obligations under
resolution 1593 (2005). That is why we encourage the
new authorities of the Sudan to fully cooperate with
the Office of the Prosecutor and because, as I have just
mentioned, it would be extremely difficult to achieve
the long-term peace and well-being of the Sudanese
people without providing them with justice.

Poland takes note of the reported investigation
and prosecution in the Sudan of some of the suspects
in the Darfur situation. We also acknowledge that the
Sudan has the primary responsibility to investigate
and prosecute those suspects. However, we also note,
as did the Prosecutor, that reportedly there is currently
no information indicating that any of the ICC suspects
are subject to domestic investigation or prosecution in
the Sudan for the crimes alleged in the relevant ICC
arrest warrants. Therefore, we concur that the Court's
warrants for all five suspects in the Darfur situation
should remain in force and, that as a court of last resort
where the Sudan will not or cannot deliver genuine
justice for the victims in Darfur, the ICC must be given
the support it needs, including the arrest and surrender
of suspects to ensure fair and effective prosecutions,
consistent with its mandate.

We note that in recent months there have been a
number of positive developments in relation to the
Darfur situation. The signing of the Juba Declaration for
Confidence-building Procedures and the Preparation
for Negotiation and the subsequent agreement of the
parties on, inter alia, a ceasefire and the opening of
humanitarian access to areas of ongoing conflict in
the Sudan, including in Darfur, merit recognition.
The same goes for the reported meetings of Prime
Minister Hamdok with Mr. Abdul Wahid Al-Nour and
the Prime Minister's visit to Darfur, including camps
for internally displaced persons (IDPs). We greatly
appreciate that those steps were taken.

However, the overall security situation in Darfur
has remained volatile and, regrettably, clashes have
reportedly continued in the Jebel Marra area between
Government forces and the Sudan Liberation Army-
Abdul Wahid, which has not joined the peace talks
process so far. We are seriously concerned by the
reported increase of criminality in Darfur, including
against women and children, particularly in IDP camps,
and violence against those who attempt to return to their
area of origin in that region. The still high number of
IDPs is also concerning. We reiterate our condemnation
of the targeting of the civilian population, especially
those most vulnerable, and note the critical mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur in Darfur, which includes the protection of
civilians and reporting on human rights abuses. We call
again on parties to the conflict in Darfur to stop the
hostilities and violence, fully respect international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights law, as well as the relevant Security Council
resolutions. As we have reiterated on a number of
occasions, respect for international humanitarian law
and human rights law is not a matter of choice but one
of international legal obligations,

Poland shares the hope that the Sudan's new
authorities will pursue peace and justice and open
a new chapter of cooperation with the ICC and the
Office of the Prosecutor. We reiterate the call on all
to provide full support to the Sudan's authorities, the
Office of the Prosecutor and all other stakeholders
that work on ensuring peace and accountability for the
crimes committed in Darfur. The Sudanese people, and
in particular Darfur's victims and witnesses, to whom
we pay tribute, deserve nothing less than our solidarity,
responsibility and commitment.

