Ms. Stider (Sweden): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

I would also like to thank the President for
convening this important open debate, and the briefers
for their contributions this morning.

I would like to say that, over the years, the United
Nations has shown that it is uniquely placed to support
efforts to prevent conflict and sustain peace. But we
acknowledge that, to maintain that role in an ever-
changing environment, the United Nations cannot do it
alone. Efforts to meet challenges to peace and security
in Africa will not be successful without the context-
specific knowledge, understanding and ability that rest
with regional and subregional organizations. I am of
course speaking here both of the African Union (AU)
and of the regional economic communities.

In a book published by Uppsala University that I
just read, the author asks whether regional organizations
are challengers or partners to the United Nations. My
response would be, "both, and both in a good way".
While much progress has been made to enhance the
United Nations-African Union partnership over the
years, it is now essential that we move forward towards
the implementation of the measures needed to make the
partnership become sustainable and deliver concrete
results. Open debates are important, but there is also a
need to ensure that the Security Council systematically
integrates the knowledge that we have accumulated
into its daily work and that the regions are proactively
consulted.

I would like to take this opportunity to also pay
tribute to the sixth Secretary-General of the United
Nations, the late Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali. Some
of us remember that, already in 1992, his milestone
report An Agenda for Peace, stated that regional
action, paired with the efforts of the Security Council,
could contribute to a deeper sense of participation,
consensus and democratization in international affairs.
We consider those words to remain truly valid today,
and we, the Nordic countries, strongly believe that a
new United Nations commitment for peace also needs
to include a solid commitment to assisting African
regional and subregional organizations. I would briefly
like to highlight three areas that I believe are essential
features of an enhanced partnership between the United
Nations and the AU.

First, it almost goes without saying, but the
partnership should be mutually reinforcing.

Secondly, the partnership should not only focus
on the narrow peacekeeping aspects, but encompass
conflict prevention and inclusive peacebuilding - in
keeping with the recent resolutions on the United Nations
peacebuilding, which signal a much-needed change in
our mindset by establishing a new concept of sustaining
peace. We must not forget economic and social factors
in that respect.

Thirdly, the partnership should address the need
for predictable and sustainable funding arrangements
for regional peace operations. The Nordic countries
are deeply committed to ensuring thiat. In particular,
we commend the efforts of Donald Kaberuka, High
Representative of the AU Peace Fund.

A few weeks ago Sweden, together with the
Office of the Special Adviser on Africa and the AU
Commission, organized a high-level forum in New
York on the theme "The Africa we want in 2030, 2063
and beyond". The forum confirmed that the continued
and intensified promotion of peace and security was
essential for creating a favourable environment for the
implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1).
As we now work to adapt and revitalize United
Nations structures to conform to the realities of today,
it is of key importance that the linkages between the
African Peace and Security Architecture and all the
relevant parts of the United Nations, including the
peacebuilding entities, be reinforced, and that this
constitutes a cornerstone of a strengthened United
Nations-African Union partnership.

Let me mention the Nordic countries' continued
support for the AU's peace efforts. As part of that,
our Nordic Defense Cooperation is already providing
support to the Eastern Africa Standby Force through
training events in national centres and programmes for
the contributing countries.

Let me compliment the efforts of the African
Union Mission in Somalia. I would mention women's
role in peace in Liberia and, perhaps less known,
in Uganda recently. I also note Namibia's role in
launching resolution 1325 (2000) as far back as 2000,
and I commend the ongoing efforts of the East African
Community, the Economic Community of West African
States and, not least, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, which has many issues on its agenda.

A stronger United Nations-AU partnership will
greatly contribute to reducing fragility and to fostering
political stability and effective governance, not only in
Africa but also in dealing with common challenges such
as piracy, terrorism and climate change. The Nordic
countries, out of the conviction that regional ownership
is a precondition for legitimacy, effectiveness and
success, will continue to support all those efforts. It is
time for progress and partnership. And it is time to push
for peace together.

