Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation deplores the fact that the Council has once
again failed to reach a united position concerning a key
question that falls under the mandate of the Security
Council to on the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Less than a week ago, we managed to adopt
unanimously resolution 2327 (2016), which dealt with
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan following very difficult
negotiations. The Council sent an important message
to the parties to the conflict, and we deemed that an
important step in order to put an end to the attacks that
have been ongoing for more than three years now.

Certain countries are asking that the Council be
united, but these same countries are hardly willing
to take into account the considerations and concerns
expressed by other countries, including the countries in
the region, which are the ones that are most concerned
and are in the best position to assess the very delicate
situation in the region.

The presidents of the countries members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
also refused the sanctions on the basis of the fact that
sanctions would not contribute to a solution.

The resort to threats such as those contained in
the draft resolution submitted today (S/2016/1085) has
already proved to be ineffective in putting an end to
crises in the Sudan and elsewhere. Such measures will
not change reality at all and certainly not contribute
to improving the situation of civilians in South Sudan.
But this is an easy solution, and some prefer such
solutions to genuine efforts that could strengthen
dialogue and help to resolve the crisis. Some prefer
such solutions to efforts to address the causes of
conflicts in order to resolve them; they prefer them to
efforts at comprehensive reconciliation and the creation
of a national identity that would unite all the people of
South Sudan.

Our abstention does not mean that we implicitly
approve of the abuses committed in South Sudan, nor
does not mean that we are unaware of the scope of the
humanitarian crisis. We are perfectly aware of the scope
of the crisis, and we are working to put an end to it. We
call upon all of the parties in South Sudan to assume
their full responsibility to alleviate the suffering of
their fellow citizens, and we call upon them to fulfill
the aspirations that accompanied the emergence oftheir
young country.

I should like to reiterate here that the patience of the
international community and the understanding shown
by some regional parties vis-a-vis the specificities of
the situation in South Sudan should in no way be viewed
as consent in connection with the deaths of innocent
people and human rights violations.

