Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Special Representative Haysom and Executive
Director Fedotov for their hard work in the past few
months. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime are great assets to the Security
Council and to the Afghan Government. We look
forward to seeing their important work continue. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his timely letter summarizing the Tripartite Review
Commission discussions (S/2015/713), and Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his remarks. I would like to take this
opportunity to wish the Ambassador well. It has truly
been an honour to work with him.

I would like to touch on three key areas
today - strides that the National Unity Government
has made over the past year and work that it still
needs to do; the security and stability challenges that
Afghanistan continues to face; and some important
upcoming milestones that could make a genuine
difference to Afghanistan's future.

Mr. Haysom's briefing today underscored
the international community's united support for
Afghanistan, inparticular its commitment to theNational
Unity Government led by President Ghani and Chief
Executive Abdullah. Next week, the Unity Government
will mark its one-year anniversary. We recognize and
support the progress that the Government has made in
key areas since Mr. Haysom's previous briefing (see S/PV.7467), particularly those such as making key
Government appointments, fighting corruption and
establishing the Special Electoral Reform Commission.
The Unity Government's swift adoption of seven of the
Commission's recommendations, including increasing
the quota of female members on provincial and district
councils to 25 per cent and strengthening voter lists,
are just a few examples of progress. In that regard, I
would like to express our special appreciation for the
important role that UNAMA has played in supporting
the work of the Commission. We should underscore that
political stability in Afghanistan is critical to security.

For the Unity Government to achieve its promises
of reform, however, it is essential that the President and
the Chief Executive consult and coordinate fully with
each other on substantial policy decisions and operate
in a broadly inclusive manner. That includes engaging
regularly on important policy matters with the relevant
Afghan stakeholders in all areas of the country. Without
outreach from the Government to all major segments
of society, those who feel excluded could undermine
the Unity Government and foster greater instability. In
that regard, we welcome initiatives such as UNAMA's
efforts to promote inclusive Afghan-led dialogue
aimed at local conflict resolution and linking local and
national reconciliation efforts in several provinces,
including Baghlan, Bamyan and Kunduz.

Similarly, we commend and strongly support the
Afghan Government's efforts to foster a peace and
reconciliation process with the Taliban and other armed
groups. We welcome the efforts by regional partners
such as Pakistan to support that Afghan-led and -owned
initiative. We continue to believe that a reconciliation
process is the best way to end the violence and produce
lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan. The necessary
end conditions of any peace process with insurgent
groups must include ceasing violence, breaking ties
with international terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida,
and accepting the Afghan Constitution, including its
protections for women and minorities.

Afghanistan's progress in all the areas Ijust noted
is remarkable, given the heavy toll the ongoing violence
and conflict is inflicting on the Afghan people. The
increase in targeted killings as the Taliban and other
groups use violence to try to advance their influence
constitutes a worrisome trend. The horrific terror
attacks on 7 August in Kabul represent some of the worst
violence we have seen in recent years. We share the
concern of the Secretary-General about the continuing
impact of the conflict on ordinary Afghans and about
the large number of Afghan civilian casualties.

Terrorism attacks are not the only threat to peace,
however. Counter-narcotics is another area where
solid progress could help to advance stability in
Afghanistan. We are pleased that the Government of
Afghanistan will unveil its new national drug action
plan at a ministerial-level event here in New York later
this month. That public high-level demonstration of
Afghan political will illustrates the high priority that
the Government of National Unity correctly places
on counter-narcotics. The Government inherited a
significant narcotics challenge that fuels corruption,
jeopardizes the legal economy, furthers insecurity
and undermines public health and good governance.
We are therefore encouraged by the Afghan National
Unity Government's renewed commitment to counter-
narcotics. We also thank the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime for its tireless efforts to support the
Afghan Government's efforts to counter narcotics.

Looking ahead to the coming months, there are
several critical opportunities that the international
community must seize to deepen its support for
the Government of National Unity and the people
of Afghanistant. On 26 September, we will co-host
with China and Afghanistan a high-level event on
Afghanistan's peaceful reconstruction and regional
cooperation - an important opportunity for the
international community to recommit to supporting
Afghanistan as it continues its path towards stabilization
and reform. The Security Council's consideration of
UNAMA's mandate in March, the 2016 NATO Summit
in Warsaw and the upcoming Afghanistan development
conference will also be occasions on which the
international community will be able to demonstrate
our collective commitment to Afghanistan.

Afghanistan has come a long way but still faces
challenges. We all need to show that we will continue
to be good partners.

