Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).

At the outset, I align my statement with the
statement delivered by the representative of Maldives
on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States.

I wish to recognize the President of Nauru;
the Prime Minister of Curacao, Kingdom of the
Netherlands; the Minister for Water Resources of Iraq;
the Deputy Foreign Minister of Kazakhstan; and the
Deputy Secretary-General. The Caribbean Community
expresses its sincere gratitude to Sweden, the President
of the Security Council for the month of July for
convening this important meeting, and CARICOM
thanks those who briefed us earlier today.

The Security Council often deals with the issues
on a case-by-case basis, and in most cases reactively
rather than pre-emptively. Conversely, there is a
threat to universal peace and security that cannot go
unanswered. That threat far outweighs the current
structure of the Council. Under the established notion
of peace and security, the current structures within it
will not prove sufficient for discussion of the threats
posed by climate change. For threats to our peace
and security demand far greater measures than
combative, military and sanctions-based ones. The
appropriateness of the discussions within the Council
should not go unanswered. However, the predominance
of climate change should remain within the framework
of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change.

Although the threat to the peace and security of
all humankind by climate change is real, there are
some States, categorized as small island developing
States (SIDS), that face an even greater threat 4 one
that is imminent and requires a pre-emptive response
that includes both risk assessment, planning and
appropriate financing. Climate change and sea-level
rise are unquestionably the most urgent threats to the
environment and the sustainable development of SIDS.

Climate change, if not addressed, has the potential

to compound the peace and security risks of everyone,
but at a faster rate for SIDS. In 2017 the most devastating
manifestation of climate change rendered part of
our sister nation Antigua and Barbuda completely
uninhabitable and rolled back decades of development
in Dominica. CARICOM. recognizes that climate
change poses a serious threat to human societies and
ecosystems, especially in the areas of extreme weather,
sea-level rise, flooding, mangrove degradation, coastal
agricultural soils and residential communities, and
therefore needs to be addressed with urgency.

At the recent meeting of the Heads of State and
Government of the Caribbean Community, held in
Jamaica from 6 to 8 July, our Heads of State adopted a
declaration on climate change, in which they called for
a global effort to close the mitigation ambition gap and
place the world on pathways for low emissions climate
resilient development. They also urged the international
community to continue to support the Caribbean in
its ongoing efforts to contribute to global mitigation
efforts and to adapt to the effects of climate change
and build the region's resilience so as to mitigate and
manage the real risk of irreparable loss and damage.
It is important nonetheless not to turn a blind eye to
the reality that climate risks could exacerbate security
threats. While the Security Council itself does not
have the wherewithal to combat climate change, it is
within its purview to consider all risks that will impact
international peace and security.

In conclusion, CARICOM. thanks you, Madam
President, for this important debate, which exposes a
range of views on how the Council can address climate
risk in a security context, if at all. For CARICOM, it
also importantly brings out a fundamental point 4 that
we all must act in earnest to combat climate change,
lest we find ourselves far beyond any international
capacity to cope.

