Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, Sir, let me commend your leadership of
the Security Council this month. We are grateful for the
concept note and thank Ms. Nakamitsu and Mr. Ballard
for their briefings at today's relevant debate, which,
once again, draws the attention of the Council to the
growing threat of the risk of proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction throughout the world.

Panama aligns itselfwith the statements to be made
by the Permanent Representative of Spain, on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Resolution 1540 (2004), and by
the Permanent Representative of Venezuela, on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

As a country that is fully committed to strengthening

the disarmament and non-proliferation regime, Panama
reaffirms its commitment to resolution 2325 (2016) and
the ongoing fight against the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and their delivery
systems because it believes that they pose a serious
threat to international peace and security, in particular
when in the hands of non-State actors.

Panama attaches particular importance to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and to resolution 1540 (2004) because they are the
only legally binding multilateral instruments currently
in force that address global nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. As a member of the Human Security
Network, whose chairmanship we recently assumed,
Panama promotes the safety and security of all of the
world's citizens and their right to a life of freedom and
dignity, free of threats, so that they can exert their true
potential. Based on that premise, we must combat the
cruel threat posed by weapons of mass destruction.

In February, Latin America and the Caribbean
celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty
of Tlatelolco f the first regional agreement on
disarmament and the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons that gave rise to the first nuclear-free zone,
which has retained that status. Today, under our
region's proven leadership, we welcome the progress
made by the United Nations conference to negotiate a
legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons,
leading towards their total elimination. We believe
that Ambassador Elayne Whyte G()mez will steer the
conference to a successful outcome.

Panama reiterated its commitment to
non-proliferation in 1999 by signing the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and, 21
years after its adoption, urges that greater efforts be
made to achieve its universalization and entry into
force, through a commitment by all States, without
standards or exceptions. Although Panama does not
import, manufacture or stockpile weapons of mass
destruction or nuclear weapons, it is fully aware of the
emerging trends in proliferation through scientific and
technological advances and in international trade that
could be vulnerable to the risk of the possession and
use of such weapons by non-State actors. That is why
we have been adopting and strengthening a series of
practical measures.

As a country that is pivotal to logistics and global
transit, with a larger Panama Canal, it has even greater
challenges and responsibilities. That is why we are
stepping up efforts to assist in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Our geographic location, marine

biodiversity and the advantages of the connectivity that
Panama offers are all assets, but also pose security
challenges, which our country is addressing.

We have worked to draft modern legislation that
allows us to prevent, combat and punish the financing
of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We have adopted a national action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) for
the period 2016-2019 to regulate dual use materials.
We have established a National Coordination
Council against International Terrorism, which is
interinstitutional and has the support of international
experts from the Organization of American States
and the United Nations. In addition, Panama is part of
the Global Container Control Programme, which is a
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and World
Customs Organization initiative. It was implemented
to facilitate information-sharing and cooperation
among participating countries in order to limit the use
of maritime containers for transnational organized
crime. At the regional level, Panama chairs the
Inter-American Committee Against Terrorism, which
we hope will continue to enhance constructive efforts
and cooperation as we stress that they are fundamental
to addressing this grave challenge.

My Government firmly condemns the recent
launches by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
because they are in flagrant violation ofSecurity Council
resolutions and merely heighten tensions in the region.
In that regard, we have reiterated that the manufacture
and use of nuclear weapons cannot continue to be used
as a political tool to assign power in the world. The
humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons is irreversible
and unquantifiable. The global development of such
weapons is measured not only by the number of human
lives that are directly affected, but also by the amount
of resources diverted, which then make it impossible to
meet the aspirations of the well-being of humankind.
We cannot continue to shirk that responsibility.

In conclusion, I underscore the importance of

maintaining a multidimensional approach to security in
the light of the human rights/development nexus, which
is indispensable to building a peaceful and safe world.
Nuclear disarmament must be a global imperative
that, with the necessary political will, can promote
peace and free up billions of dollars for sustainable
development. In that regard, the commitments outlined
here today encourage us to continue the fight, which is
a struggle for humankind, the future and present and
future generations, including the young people who are
with me today and who will take part in the meeting
convened by the President of the General Assembly on
education, as part of the efforts to improve the quality
of education in Panama.

Sir, you have Panama's ongoing support in ensuring
that the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) continues to fulfil its overarching goal of
encouraging global efforts to combat the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction in all its aspects.
