Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I want to start
by congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. My
delegation and I look forward to working with you to
make your presidency truly successful. In an earlier
incarnation, I had the opportunity to have visited your
beautiful country. I would also like to take this
opportunity to complement South Africa, Ambassador
Baso Sangqu and his team for their wise and able
stewardship of the Council in January.

The Syrian Arab Republic has historically played
an important role in the Middle East. Prolonged
instability and unrest in Syria have implications for
peace and stability in the wider region. India is
concerned about the present situation in Syria, which
has resulted in the deaths of thousands of civilians and
security forces personnel over the past 10 months.
Therefore, since the beginning of the protest, we have
called for a peaceful and inclusive political process to
address the grievances of all sections of Syrian society.

We strongly condemn all violence, irrespective of
the perpetrators. We also condemn all Violations of
human rights. India holds the rights of expression and
peaceful assembly among the fundamental values that
should be respected, while ensuring the stability and
8

security of society. India has conveyed that message to
the Syrian leadership, both bilaterally and with our
partners Brazil and South Africa. We have impressed
upon the Syrian side to abjure violence and pay heed to
the aspirations of the people of Syria. That message
was also contained in the presidential statement issued
by the Council in August 2011 under India's
presidency (S/PRST/20l 1/16).

We are firmly of the View that a political process
for the resolution of the present crisis should be led by
the Syrians themselves. We believe that the main role
of the international community, including the Council,
is to facilitate engagement of the Syrian people with all
sections of Syrian society for an inclusive political
process that takes into account the legitimate
aspirations of all Syrians, while ensuring respect for
the country's sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.

We note that the draft resolution enjoins the
Government to protect its population, indicating that it
should have the capacity to do so. The League of Arab
States is an important regional organization and should
play its required and historic role in promoting
political dialogue among the Syrian parties.

In that context, we welcome the deployment of
the League's observer mission across several areas of
the country, which had a calming effect on the level of
Violence and provided a more accurate picture of
developments. We hope that the mission can return
soon.

Our support for today's draft resolution is in
accordance with our support for the efforts of the Arab
League for a peaceful resolution of the crisis through a
Syrian-led inclusive political process. We note that the
draft resolution expressly rules out any measures under
Article 42 of the Charter and calls for a serious
political dialogue between the Syrian Government and
the whole spectrum of the opposition under the
auspices of the League of Arab States.

We believe that the leadership of Syria is a matter
for the Syrian people to decide. It would be necessary
for all opposition forces in Syria to peacefully engage
in constructive dialogue with the authorities. We hope
that that would create a new environment for peace and
facilitate a political process. That political dialogue
should build upon the political reforms already
announced by the Syrian leadership, with the necessary
changes for them to find acceptance among all sections
of Syrian society.

