Judge Yusuf: Allow me at the outset to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the People's Republic of China
on assuming the presidency of the Council for this
month. I also thank you, Sir, for taking the initiative
to convene this meeting and inviting me to participate
in it.

Some would say that my participation in this debate
from The Hague is possible because of technology.
That is perhaps true, but it is not the entire story. They
are forgetting about multilateralism. Technology needs
multilateral rules to be able to cross borders. The
fibre-optic technology that carries digital data relies
on submarine cables in various maritime jurisdictions.
It is only through multilateral rules, such as those set
forth in the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea, that we can make this Viable. Even for the
scheduling of this meeting, we all automatically rely on
time-zone rules that were established in a multilateral
framework as early as 1884, during the International
Meridian Conference.

Regulating global issues through a web of bilateral
agreements has been tried in the past. It has never
worked. That spider web simply collapses on itself.
It produces no silk. At best, it leads to a fragmented
legal order composed of contradictory international
obligations. The predictability, stability and certainty
of the rule of law disappear. That is why the Council's
initiative is timely today as we celebrate the end of the
First World War 100 years ago, which gave new impetus
to the development of multilateralism.

Multilateralism is the result of human experience
and civilization. It is the only path forward in a world
in which we have all become neighbours. For the
International Court of Justice, multilateralism is a
condition not only of its existence; it is also that of
its proper functioning and effectiveness. Bilateral
agreements can create arbitral tribunals, but they cannot
create judicial institutions consisting of an independent
and impartial judiciary that represents the principal
legal systems of the world and decides cases on the
basis of law. The Court therefore owes its very existence
to multilateralism. To allow for the functioning of the
Court, multilateral conventions provide a large share
of the law applicable to disputes that are submitted to
the Court. On the other hand, the Court's decisions
remove uncertainties from international conventions
by interpreting and applying the provisions of those
conventions.

In addition, some multilateral conventions of a
regional nature - such as the 1948 American Treaty on
Pacific Settlement, among Latin American countries,
and the 1957 European Convention for the Peaceful
Settlement of Disputes, among States parties - give
jurisdiction to our Court on disputes arising in those
regions of the world. Other conventions, such as those
that are characterized by the Court as instruments of
a universal or quasi-universal character - such as
the case concerning Barcelona Traction, Light and
Power Company, Limited (Belgium v. Spain) - give
authority to the Court, through their compromissory
clauses, to protect the shared values of the international
community. That is the case of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of
1951 and other human rights instruments, as well as the
Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic Relations of 1961
and 1963. With regard to its effectiveness, the Court has
to rely on multilateral institutions, such as the United
Nations, to ensure compliance with its decisions. That
may be done by the Security Council under Article
94 of the Charter of the United Nations. It has been
done in the past by the Secretary-General, at his own
initiative, in the Land and Maritime Boundary between
Cameroon and Nigeria case (Cameroon v. Nigeria; Equatorial Guinea intervening).

The decisions of the Court have made notable
contributions to multilateralism. Allow me to refer to
three of them very briefly.

First, the Court has developed and clarified the law
of treaties that makes multilateralism possible. It is the
Court that established the object and purpose test to
ascertain the permissibility and validity of reservations
to multilateral treaties, allowing a broad participation
in multilateral conventions without jeopardizing the
normative integrity of the Court's provisions.

Secondly, the Court clarified in the advisory
opinion concerning reparation for injuries suffered
in the service of the United Nations that multilateral
organizations, such as the United Nations, enjoy an
international legal personality that is separate from
that of their member States. That decision of the Court
has strengthened the institutional pillars of multilateral
organizations, including the United Nations.

Thirdly and finally, the Court contributed to the
emergence of erga omnes obligations in international
law, whereby it distinguishes between legal obligations
owed to the international community as a whole and
those owed to individual States. In doing so, the Court
enabled all States parties to multilateral conventions to
serve as guardians of compliance with those rules.

To conclude, allow me to refer again to the advisory
opinionconcerningreparationthatImentionedamoment
ago, in which the Court observed that throughout its
history, the development of international law has
been influenced by the requirements of international
life and that the progressive increase in the collective
activities of States has already given rise to instances
of action at the international level. The requirements
of international life and the increase in the collective
activities of States, which the Court spoke of, reveal the
inadequacy of unilateral or bilateral actions to address
the challenges facing our increasingly interconnected
world. They also dictate the need for multilateral
cooperation in a diverse and complex range of areas
of common concern to humankind. It is that common
concern, recognized in many multilateral conventions,
together with the shared values we all hold dear, that
renders imperative the strengthening and consolidation
of the multilateral system and the rules and institutions
that underpin it.

