Mr. Thoresson (Sweden): Sweden fully aligns
itself with the statement to be made by the observer
of the European Union, but would like to take this
opportunity to also make a few additional remarks.

I would like to start by thanking the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2014/876). Let me also welcome
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom and thank him for his comprehensive and
substantive briefing. Our thanks also go to Mr. Fedotov
and Ambassador Tanin for their statements.

Much has been achieved in Afghanistan during
the past 13 years. The country has come a long way
and the Afghan men and women can take great pride
in this. Earlier this year the Afghan people revealed
their strong desire for democracy by turning up in great
numbers to vote in what became the first democratic
transfer of power in the history of Afghanistan. More
children, especially young girls, are enrolled in schools
and access to health care has increased significantly
since 2001. This year Afghanistan has also taken full
responsibility for its own security.

Despite the progress, reality continues to remind
us that there is certainly work left to do. The election
process illustrated that additional improvements
are needed to better consolidate democracy and
governance. The human rights situation still has a long
way to go, largely due to an ineffective justice system.
Afghanistan is still one of the worst places in the world
to be born a woman. It is time that Afghan women
receive the opportunity to become full and equal
members of society.

The production and smuggling of narcotics
are among the primary drivers of the conflict in
Afghanistan. Corruption is another great obstacle
present at all levels of society. The rule of law must be
strengthened and the culture of impunity must end.

President Ghani Ahmadzai and the Afghan
leadership have demonstrated a strong commitment to
change by outlining a rigorous and bold reform agenda.
This was clearly displayed during the successful
London Conference on Afghanistan on 4 December. The
international community now calls for an expeditious
implementation of these reforms.

The endtoviolence andconflictandthe establishment
of a safe and secure environment are prerequisites for
achieving real and sustainable development results in
Afghanistan. This should be accomplished through
an inclusive peace and reconciliation process. It will
require serious efforts to ensure that such a process can
take root. It needs to be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led,
but the international community should stand ready to
offer its assistance.

Sweden believes that regional cooperation
and constructive engagement from Afghanistan's
neighbours are paramount for creating an environment
conducive to peace and development. We welcome the
intentions and actions taken by the Afghan leadership
to strengthen the ties with neighbouring countries.
Drawing upon the recent Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
Ministerial Conference in Beijing, there now seems to
be an opportunity to solidify a foundation for genuine
regional cooperation.

In one form or another, Sweden has provided
assistance to Afghanistan for more than three decades.
Today, Afghanistan is one of the largest recipients
of Swedish development aid. As we approach the
transformation decade, our focus on civilian matters
is becoming increasingly dominant. At the London
Conference on Afghanistan, we reaffirmed our
long-term support, as stated in the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. Sweden stands ready to
contribute with an indicative volume of $1 billion to
$1.2 billion in development assistance over the next
decade.

Earlier this year, Sweden also established a new
development strategy for the period up to 2019. Our
focus will primarily be on strengthening Afghanistan's
own ability to improve the economy, enhance
democratic governance, promote equality and improve
the human rights situation, in particular the situation
for women and children.

Sweden has over the years made a considerable
contribution to the International Security Assistance
Force. Building on these efforts, we aim to also
participate in the Resolute Support Mission, which will
be launched on 1 January 2015.

Sweden would like to express its full support for
the important role played by United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and by all the United Nations
agencies in supporting the Afghan people and
coordinating the international community's assistance.
Beyond 2014, the presence of the United Nations in
Afghanistan will become even more important.

While our expectations are high for the Afghan
Government to deliver on its reform commitments,
these expectations can hardly compare with the appeals
for improvement coming from Afghan men and women.
The time is ripe now to achieve concrete results, and
Sweden is ready to play its part. We look forward to
continuing our cooperation with the new Afghan
Government as we enter the transformation decade.

