Archbishop Auza (Holy See): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Council for this month and for
convening this open debate on children and armed
conflict.

Today's debate comes at a time when the evils of
using children as soldiers in armed conflicts are not only
morally condemned by international consensus, but are
also being more vigorously challenged on the ground by
various actors around the globe. The increasing use by
terrorist groups and other non-State actors of children
in armed conflicts demonstrates the urgent need for a
new international consensus to confront the crime and
to renew the will of the international community to
address this scourge.

The year 2014 marked the worst year in the
modern era of children being used as soldiers in armed
conflicts. In Syria and Iraq alone, we saw more than
10,000 children forced and coerced into becoming child
soldiers. While the world searches for solutions, we
must take the first step and uniformly affirm that the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflicts are
not only a grave violation of international humanitarian
and human rights law, but also an abominable evil to
be condemned. That affirmation must not be made
by Governments alone, but by all social, political and
religious leaders.

The rising influence of non-State actors in regions
across the globe has presented the Council and the
global community with a growing challenge that
requires new tools and new efforts to confront. It is for
that reason that the founders of the United Nations gave
to the Council the responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. That primordial
mission does not and must not allow the international
community to turn its back on conflicts in the name of
national political interests or geopolitical disagreements
with other countries. The responsibility is entrusted
to the Council by all Members of the United Nations,
so that the foundational notion of governance may be
preserved and the responsibility to protect upheld.

That responsibility not only requires national
Governments to protect their citizens, but also urges
the international community to intervene when national
Governments are unable or unwilling to protect their
citizens. In the case of non-State actors forcibly
recruiting and using child soldiers around the world or
committing brutal violence against religious and ethnic
minorities, when a State is unwilling or unable to
confront such atrocities, it is the responsibility of this
body to provide the military means necessary to protect
citizens from such inhumane aggressors when all other
tools and means are exhausted.

However, solutions to the problem of children
in armed conflict cannot be limited to the use of
force alone. Rather, the first step requires a renewed
commitment to addressing the humanitarian, social,
political and economic situations that drive conflicts
in which child soldiers are used. In that regard, faith-
based communities have played, and continue to play,
a vital role in serving the communities impacted,
reintegrating former child soldiers and providing a
means for dialogue. Faith-based communities also have
a responsibility to ensure that those organizations that
seek to justify the use of child soldiers in the pursuit of
ideological goals driven by distorted understandings of
faith and reason are rightly condemned and denounced.

While the international community plays an
important role in supporting States in their primary
responsibility to protect their citizens, it must also
be sure to interact with the local community so that
solutions to child soldiers and conflicts can also emerge
organically and local ownership be fostered. A solution
to the plight of child soldiers also requires sensitivity
to finding ways to reintegrate the children back into
their own communities. While we witness barbaric
acts beyond anyone's imagination also committed by
child soldiers, we must remember that these children
are exploited and have been manipulated into what
they have become. Therefore, while their reintegration
into society requires that we recognize that they have
committed atrocities, we must at the same time build
pathways for counselling and reconciliation with a
view to fully accomplishing that reintegration.

The international community already has many
of the tools necessary to confront the use of child
soldiers. However, it lacks the political will to take the
steps needed to address the challenge. As children are
abducted from their schools to be enslaved, as children
are forced to become suicide bombers and as children
are drugged and tortured into becoming child soldiers,
what will it take before we no longer avert our eyes?

