Mr. N azario (South Sudan): The Republic of South
Sudan is grateful to all the members of the Security
Council for their continued support for and interest in
the well-being of the people of South Sudan, the Sudan
and the Abyei Area.

The Republic of South Sudan welcomes the signing
on 27 September of a cooperation agreement, including
eight specific sub-agreements, with the Republic
of the Sudan. Those agreements demonstrate my
Government's commitment to peaceful and prosperous
relations between our two States for the benefit of our
two peoples. Resolving the final status of Abyei is a
crucial component of the lasting peace and stability that
we all seek in our region. For that reason, the Republic
of South Sudan fully accepts the report submitted by
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
(AUHIP) and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, which included a specific recommendation,
first presented to the parties on 21 September, on how
the issue of Abyei should be resolved. In line with
the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement and all
subsequent agreements, this calls for a referendum to
be conducted in the Abyei area in October 2013.

We also welcome the African Union Peace and
Security Council's endorsement on 24 October of the
AUHIP's proposal of 21 September. The Peace and
Security Council also called on the parties to negotiate
for six more weeks on the issue of Abyei in order to
explore whether they could reach a final agreement
bilaterally. If the parties fail to agree, the African Union
Peace and Security Council has stated its intention to
declare the AUHIP's last proposal on Abyei final and
binding on the parties. My Government regrets that
it was not possible for President Kiir and President
Al-Bashir to reach agreement on Abyei at their most
recent summit, at the end of September.
My Government is of course fully prepared to
enter into further negotiations on Abyei within the
time frame specified by the African Union Peace
and Security Council, and has issued an invitation to
President Al-Bashir to visit Juba. We will also continue
to welcome any suggestions from our partners in the
international community on the way forward. As a
further indicator of our good faith, the South Sudanese
co-Chair of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee
issued a statement on 10 November that, in the interests
of peace, South Sudan will accept the nominees of the
Republic of the Sudan for the positions of Deputy Chief
Administrator for Abyei and Speaker of the Abyei Area
Council.

The Republic of South Sudan is grateful to the
Security Council for renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA),
which has proved to be an effective promoter of peace
and stability in the Abyei Area. My Government
wishes to express once again its profound gratitude to
the Federal Republic of Ethiopia for its contribution of
forces to UNISFA and for its tireless efforts to promote
peace and security in our shared region. We take note
of the Security Council's wish to downsize the force
at the appropriate time. Given the regrettable incidents
in the Abyei Area this week, which resulted in the
unfortunate death of a South Sudanese UNISFA staff
member, the presence of the international community
in Abyei may remain vital. To that end, the Government
of South Sudan is committed to signing the status-of-
forces agreement for UNISFA in the coming week.

The people of Abyei deserve to return to their
homes following their displacement in May 2011, and
to live in peace and security. We welcome all initiatives
undertaken at the local level in support of the displaced
and of reconstruction and reconciliation. It has always
been our position that the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya
communities should work together peacefully to
address their common challenges. To ensure a truly
comprehensive agreement between the Sudan and
South Sudan, as called for in resolution 2046 (2012),
we hope that the Security Council will accept the
recommendations and decisions of the African Union
in relation to Abyei and all other outstanding issues
between the two parties.

