Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank today's briefers for
their very interesting opinions. We are also grateful
to Mr. Simpson for his preparation and presentation
of the independent expert group's study on the role of
young people in processes related to ensuring peace
and security. Its content and recommendations will
definitely enrich the discussions of Member States
in the United Nations forums to which this subject is
directly relevant.

The study was requested by resolution 2250 (2015),
adopted on 9 December 2015, which emphasized the
important role that young people can and should play
in building modern societies free of terrorism and
extremism, including through constructive participation
in the processes of building and maintaining peace.
There is no question that young people's problems,
however heartily we wish it were not so, cannot be
viewed in isolation from the context of the fight against
the threats of extremism and terrorism, to which young
people, unfortunately, are likely to be more exposed
than almost anyone.

A willingness on the part of some to look the
other way where the activities of terrorist groups are
concerned has already enabled them to threaten the
future of entire countries whose societies have been
plunged into social, political and economic chaos,
something that is particularly evident in Iraq, Syria and
Libya. And it is not just States in the Middle East that
are under threat. Young people, with their unformed
world views, their quest for an identity, their lack of
broad life experience and sometimes lack of education,
are a highly vulnerable sector of society. Young people
are among the first to feel the negative consequences
of economic crises, social instability and armed
clashes, factors that malefactors often exploit in order
to involve them in illegal activity, including through
social networks and other Internet channels. This is not
just about terrorism and the extremism that can lead to
terrorism, but also about political processes dressed up
with slogans about democracy, directed from outside
and aimed at overthrowing legitimate authorities.

Today's much vaunted and trendy support for
young leaders should not be used by outside actors to
encourage anti-State and anti-Government movements
in countries that they do not like. It is immoral to try
to achieve these ends by exploiting young people's
inexperience, desire for quick self-actualization and
inclination to express themselves through protest.
Young people are shamelessly deceived and used in
dirty political games under plausible pretexts. The
connivance or indifference that various States have
shown to the growth of nationalism, xenophobia and
radicalism - which, unfortunately, are very successful
at pulling young people into their orbit - should not
be tolerated.

What is needed in order to combat all these issues is
thorough preventive, systematic effort, above all at the
national level. It is the States' job to prevent terrorists,
radicals and political malefactors from influencing
young people by nipping extremist propaganda in the
bud and increasing young people's resilience in the face
of it. At the same time, it is crucial to use the Internet,
and traditional media as well, to promote a positive
agenda. It is important to actively disseminate among
young people - and with their help - notions of mutual
respect and intercultural and interreligious dialogue,
taking local traditions and specifics into account.
This should not be politicized. Young people should
be protected from political pressures until they reach
legal age. Secondly, we must to create the conditions
that can enable young people to realize their potential
and become socially and economically integrated into
society, including by providing them with a quality
education and employment opportunities. Creative
pursuits, culture and sports are also effective tools to
that end. They enable young people to participate in
socially meaningful activities, help them improve their
skills and talents, increase their self-confidence and
self-esteem and inculcate them with the concept of
peaceful coexistence. Lastly, we should not the forget
the importance of strengthening the family and family
values. Many of the problems we have heard about today
are the result of a neglect of those values, an excessive
enthusiasm for individualism and the destruction of
long-standing social foundations.

Young people's involvement in any political activity
should be a natural process based primarily on acquiring
professional knowledge and skills. There should be
genuine equality in this area, which means that not only
should society's most vulnerable sectors be supported
but that no artificial quotas or privileges, including with
regard to age or gender, should be tolerated. We believe
it is important to tap constructively into young people's
potential - particularly their energy, versatility and
ability to navigate cyberspace easily - by fostering,
among other things, an atmosphere that does not tolerate
violence and that rejects extremist and terrorist ideas.

States affected by conflicts, where establishing the
necessary youth policy programmes and strategies is
very hard and sometimes impossible, for understandable
reasons, are in a much more difficult position, needless
to say. The most urgent issue in such countries is
protecting civilians, including young people, a task
that is the responsibility of national Governments. In
that regard, I want to point out that the international
community's efforts should be aimed at supporting
national efforts in that area. It should undertake no
response measures, especially any involving the use of
force, without authorization from the Security Council
and in strict adherence to the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations. It is also important to ensure
that all parties to an armed conflict comply with their
obligations under the norms of international law on the
protection of civilians, including young people, as well
as the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocols of 1977. Thorough, objective investigations,
based on reliable information, should be conducted for
crimes involving deliberate attacks or the excessive use
of force, and those responsible must be punished.

Russia knows first-hand the importance of
interactive cooperation with young people. Indeed,
it is difficult to overestimate the value of the fresh
ideas that young people can share in exchange for the
knowledge we provide them with. In 2014, the Russian
Government adopted the foundational principles for
the State's youth policy for the next decade. The key
principle of the concept is relying on young people as
drivers of innovative development of the State, which in
turn should create all the conditions for developing their
human potential. We must ensure comprehensive and
continuous support to the younger generation in order
to guarantee our society's long-term development.

International forums and events also play an
important role in bringing young people together.
In Sochi in October 2017 we were pleased to be able
to host the nineteenth World Festival of Youth and
Students, in which more than 20,000 people from more
than 180 countries participated. Many interesting ideas
were expressed during that event in the same spirit as
those that we heard today from our young speakers. We
will definitely and actively take them into account in
our efforts to support young people.

I would like to conclude with a few important
points. First, despite the importance of the subject of
young people, our quest to identify the youth-related
aspects of the acute problems that we have heard about
today should not overshadow the importance of the
work that adults are doing to solve some of them. This
should not be merely a formal approach or a competition
to see who can find and propose the largest number of
ways to involve young people. Not all the problems that
we are facing can be solved that way, and no one is
going to relieve us adults of the main responsibility for
solving them.

I would also like to point out that despite the great
importance of today's discussion, it is also important
to maintain the effectiveness of the United Nations
and adhere to the division of powers of the organs of
the Organization. In accordance with the Charter, the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Issues
of war and peace, requiring urgent and sometimes
immediate decisions, are discussed around this table
every day. Needless to say, the Council does not act in
isolation. In every discussion we rely on the experience
and expertise of specialists who are also working
every day to develop crucial documents pertaining to
their specializations.

It would be much more effective to have an in-depth
discussion in specialized United Nations platforms on
such aspects of youth issues as education, employment,
sustainable development and human rights. We must
not create the illusion that bringing such youth-
related topics to the Security Council will lead to a
breakthrough and enable us to resolve them more
effectively. We believe that the Council has neither
the right nor sufficient expertise to usurp the right of
the professionals to such discussion, and that general
issues and topics that are not directly related to threats
to international peace and security should be discussed
substantively in international forums especially created
for the purpose. Whether we do or do not address a
particular topic in the Security Council should not be a
factor in determining its importance or urgency for the
international community. Let us be more responsible in
adhering to the existing division of labour.

