Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening today's meeting. We also thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary
of the Group of Five for the Sahel; Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations; and Mr. Joao Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, for their briefings.

In December 2017, the Council adopted resolution
2391 (2017) on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). Since its adoption, progress has
been made in the Joint Force's deployment and support,
which China welcomes. At the same time, however, the
Sahel region is facing multifaceted challenges, including
a fragile security situation, spreading terrorism and
increasingly serious transnational organized crime.
We call on the international community to increase its
involvement and to take an integrated approach to those
challenges. I would like to make the following points.

First, we need to step up support for the Joint
Force, which represents an important contribution to
peace and security in Africa and the world at large.
The international community should fully respect and
maximize Africa's leadership in seeking solutions to
African problems, and should support the countries of
the region and regional organizations in their efforts
to safeguard peace and security in the Sahel region.
The G-5 Sahel States, the European Union and the
United Nations held a successful pledging conference
for the Joint Force and signed the technical agreement
requested in resolution 2391 (2017). The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) is ready to provide its support, and
China expresses its appreciation for that. We hope that
MINUSMA will actively provide the support needed
once necessary conditions such as funding are in place,
and will evaluate its experience in practice. China
commends the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/432)
for submitting proposals on support, which we will
study with other Member States.

Secondly, the political settlement of the relevant
regional hotspot issues should be prioritized. On a
basis of respect for the sovereignty of the countries
concerned, the international community should
actively support the countries of the region in taking
forward the peace process, promoting national
reconciliation and continuing to work to calm and
resolve the relevant hotspot issues, thereby helping
to create conditions conducive to lasting peace and
stability in the Sahel region. Right now, support should
be given to all the relevant parties in Mali in order
to expedite the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and seriously address
the spillover effect on the Sahel of issues outside the
region, such as the Libyan crisis, in order to minimize
their negative impact.

Thirdly, support for counter-terrorism efforts in
the Sahel region should be increased, given the gravity
of the situation. The international community should
ramp up its support and help the relevant United
Nations counter-terrorism agencies play an active role
in that regard. Terrorism is the common enemy of
all humankind. We must crack down on it resolutely,
whenever and wherever it appears. All countries should
adhere to unified standards and act with resolve to
eradicate all the terrorist organizations listed by the
Security Council. The international counter-terrorism
operations should ensure the leading role of the
United Nations, including the Security Council, while
upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the other universally recognized
basic norms governing international relations, and
strengthening coordination.

Fourthly, we should appreciate and make the
best possible use of the role of regional mechanisms.
China values the positive role that African countries
and organizations such as the G-5 Sahel, the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States have been playing in seeking solutions to the
issues in the Sahel. The international community
should strengthen its communication and coordination
with the countries of the region and with regional and
subregional organizations, and work to organically
align the individual strategies of the countries and
the region with the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel, maximizing their relative advantages to
create synergies. The United Nations is revising its
integrated strategy, and China hopes that the those
efforts will take serious account of the views of the
countries in the region and meet the real needs of the
countries concerned.
China supports African countries in seeking
African solutions to African problems. We also support
Africa's regional and subregional organizations,
including the G-5 Sahel, in their efforts to address
the problems of peace and security in Africa. We are
ready to work with the members of the Council and the
international community to make positive contributions
to the security and development of the Sahel region.

