Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First, I
should like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this very
timely meeting. During the course of 2017, the Council
has repeatedly reaffirmed the value of peacekeeping
operations as one of the most essential tools of the
United Nations for peace and international security.
By emphasizing the need for continued efforts to
have adequate peacekeeping capabilities, this meeting
contributes to that discussion.

I would also like to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for her very comprehensive and concrete
briefing. France shares the Secretariat's assessment of
the need for agile, rapidly deployable forces that have
the specialized capabilities and expertise necessary for
the proper implementation of their mandates. I wish to
highlight three points in particular.

First, France welcomes the efforts of the Secretariat
to develop an ambitious and innovative approach to
force generation. The past few years have made clear
the shortcomings that peacekeeping operations face, in
terms of air capabilities, medical support, equipment,
pre-deployment training, intelligence and more. We
must aim for greater speed and greater efficiency.

In the face of the existing constraints, innovation
is the best way to respond to such challenges. For
example, the establishment of the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System within the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations was a breakthrough that can
be described as historic. It has already made it possible
to increase the number and develop the specialties of
the contingents ready to be deployed within operations.
It should be further strengthened, in particular by
promoting better use of its levels 2 and 3. At the same
time, ongoing efforts should be made to increase
the number of countries accessing level 1 through
interaction with troop-contributing countries.

France is also supporting the development of new
force-generation mechanisms. The Force Generation
Conference of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
held last May, was a major milestone in ensuring
the predictability of peacekeeping capabilities. That
model should be applied to other operations and other
specialized capabilities, so as to tailor the resources
made available to the needs of our missions.

We also welcome the development of joint
commitments and smart pledges involving several
Member States, aimed at generating critical capabilities
and allowing each Member State, according to
its means and ability, to participate in improved
operational performance. In that regard, we commend
the progress made at the Vancouver conference. Those
mechanisms have made it possible to provide critical
capabilities, particularly air capabilities, within the
framework of MINUSMA, but also to broaden the
spectrum of training needed to acquire new know-how
related to asymmetric environments, such as protection
against improvised explosive devices. We also support
the goal of increasing the number of women in
peacekeeping operations.

In view of those needs, and this is my second
point, France supports the efforts of the Secretariat
and troop-contributors to strengthen their capabilities.
Through our bilateral partnerships and our security and
defence cooperation, France has been contributing to
the training and equipment of many contingents that
are to be deployed in peacekeeping operations. Thus,
on the African continent alone, France has participated
in the training of more than 29,000 African officers
and soldiers per year, in 11 countries and in over 57
different subjects.

France is also working with many troop-contributing
countries to foster the development of French-language
peacekeeping capabilities. That is the reason behind
the Paris Conference on Peacekeeping in the French-
speaking Environment organized last year, and the
establishment of the Boutros-Ghali Peacekeeping
Observatory, which seeks to strengthen French-
speaking peacekeeping capabilities. In cooperation
with the International Organization of la Francophonie,
France has developed and made available to its partners
a course for learning French for armed forces personnel
in a United Nations environment called "En Avant".

Capacity-building support for troop-contributing
countries also includes operational support and
deployment support. As Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le
Drian pointed out at the Council's high-level meeting
on 20 September (see S/PV.8051), we must continue
to create new ways to better involve and empower the
States primarily concerned by the threats in the world
so that they can take charge of their own security. That
was our wish in supporting the Group of Five for the
Sahel initiative, which strengthens the capacities of the
States concerned to better deal with the challenges of
the region, which concern us all.

Our support for capacity-building in various
countries is being carried out, naturally, in synergy with
the efforts of international organizations, including, of
course, the United Nations and the European Union.
In Mali, the Niger, the Central African Republic
and Somalia, the European Union is committed to
strengthening African peace and security capabilities
through its European Union Military Training and
European Union Capacity-Building Missions operations
and through financial support for operations.

In order to meet the challenges of effective
peacekeeping, both the Secretariat and Member States
must step up their efforts. Providing peacekeeping
operations with adequate and effective capabilities
is the shared responsibility of the Secretariat and
Member States. Contingent training is primarily the
responsibility of the State concerned. In order to meet
the current challenges of peacekeeping, it is particularly
necessary to continue and intensify individual and
collective training efforts to deal with the asymmetric
environment, which requires very specific capabilities.

It is our responsibility to give each one of our
soldiers initial basic training. That would ensure their
safety and that of the people they are tasked with
protecting. The States Members of the United Nations
must also guarantee the highest level of conduct and
discipline in order to ensure respect for United Nations
principles, in particular in the fight against exploitation
and sexual abuse.

Identifying capability gaps and properly
coordinating efforts to bridge them are also vital.
Otherwise, the individual efforts of the States
Members of the United Nations will not be maximized.
The Secretariat's proposal to implement a standby
coordination mechanism that would allow States to
request and provide useful information appears to be
a step in the right direction. As underscored by the
Secretariat, it would be useful for efforts to enable
triangular partnerships to be further developed to
cover issues, such as specialized capabilities and
language competency.

At the organizational level of the Secretariat, we
fully support the positive impact of the Secretary-
General's reforms of the peace and security and
management pillars, so as to ensure that peacekeeping
operations are more effective. The goal of implementing
the values and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations with the goal of fostering international peace
and security is at the core of peacekeeping. Our joint
efforts will enable us to implement that vision.

