Ms. Citaku: As always, I am honoured to be here
in the Council on behalf of the Republic of Kosovo,
although, I must admit, I fear we are not showing the
Chamber the respect it deserves when we come here
every three months, taking members' valuable time, to
stage a theatre for purely domestic consumption. The
intention is to somehow artificially instil the idea that
the status of Kosovo is not resolved, and that Kosovo
is akin to a war zone where minorities are expelled
and persecuted.

That is simply not true. Furthermore, that is
Offensive not only to us Kosovars but, frankly speaking,
to the United Nations and its agencies, which have put
so much effort into reviving Kosovo in the immediate
aftermath of the terrible war of 1999. Hundreds of
thousands of refugees and hundreds of thousands of
internally displaced persons returned to their homes to
find everything in ashes. But we had much more than
only hope and determination; we had the help of the
United Nations, and for that we will be forever grateful.
Therefore, for us, this Chamber is too important and
too valuable to see it being misused in a projection
of images that do not match reality. Our northern
neighbour insists on projecting an alternative universe
where time has not moved a second since the 1990s.

Kosovo is free and independent, and that will never
change. A steep price was paid for it. On that cold day
in February 2008, we knew that our struggles would
continue and that there would be twists and turns. But
the clock of history is not going backwards. Regardless
ofthe difficulties, we will never give up our aspiration to
make Kosovo an equal member of the family of the free
nations of the world. We are not asking for shortcuts;
we are just asking for fair treatment. We believe that
it is fair to ask for the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to be redefined to match the reality on the ground.

UNMIK is not a peacekeeping mission, Kosovo is at
peace and there is no conflict to be contained or civilians
to be protected. UNMIK is not an administrative
mission; Kosovo has its institutions. Did its mandate
not expire more than a decade ago? Although the main
purpose of the Council has been to maintain stability
in Kosovo, the Council has not pronounced itself since
2008, when we gained our independence. Instead, it
prefers to continue with routine reporting and keeps
a Mission that reinvents its mandate without any real
need, when we should be talking about downsizing and
withdrawing the United Nations Mission in Kosovo in
the light of the situation on the ground.

In less than six months, Kosovo organized both
national and local elections. The turnout was especially
high in the Serb-majority areas. The new Government,
with Mr. Ramush Haradinaj as Prime Minister, was
voted in on 9 September. It is important to note that
according to international observers, both electoral
processes met the highest international standards,
with the exception of few Serb-majority areas where
the local population was subjected to different kinds
of pressure and intimidation to vote in a certain
way. Often, Belgrade officials were responsible for
such intimidations. In fact, I can say that the only
Government that exercises pressure on the local Serbs
is the one that sits in Belgrade.

Yes, there is discrimination against minorities in
Kosovo, but it is of a positive nature. Kosovo institutions
have gone to great lengths to accommodate the rights
of non-majority communities. In today's Government,
the Serbian community is represented by one Deputy
Prime Minister, three Ministers and six Deputy
Ministers. As the saying goes, we have put our money
where our mouth is. Between 2008 and 2017 alone, the
Kosovo Government has spent over €51 million for the
repatriation and reintegration of minority communities
in Kosovo; that is a public record.

However, I must reiterate that the claim that
200,000 Serbs were displaced from Kosovo after the
war is factually incorrect. If that had been the case,
there would be no single Serb living in Kosovo today.
According to the census organized in 1991 by the then-
Yugoslav authorities, the number of Serbs living in
Kosovo was 194,000. Unfortunately, to date we still do
not know the accurate number of the Serbs living in
Kosovo. That is because when the Kosovo institutions
organized a census in 2011, the Government of Serbia
unleashed a very aggressive campaign to discourage
the participation of the Serb community. The smear
campaign went so far as to label registration for the
census as an act of betrayal. For us, it is not about
numbers. Even if just one Kosovo Serb cannot return,
that is one too many for us.

At the same time, we must also remember that not
all Serbs that fled Kosovo after the war were actually
citizens of Kosovo. When the war erupted in Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, entire neighbourhoods were
built in several locations in Kosovo to accommodate
Serbs who used to live in those parts of the former
Yugoslavia. Some decided to stay in Kosovo, as was
the case of the Marevie family, which came to Kosovo
in July 1995. One member of that family was a minister
of the local Government in the previous Government of
the Republic of Kosovo.

In addition, in line with our Constitution, dual
citizenship is allowed. Kosovo Serbs who are also
citizens of Serbia have a constitutional right to vote in
the Serbian parliamentary and presidential elections.
In the absence of a Serbian embassy in Kosovo, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
mission administers the process. According to data
from the last two rounds of elections, 106,094 voters in
Kosovo were eligible to vote. Obviously, the numbers do
not match up. Either the Serbian Election Commission
inflated the number of Serbian voters in Kosovo or
the number of Serbian displaced persons is inflated.
We will get the full picture only when we organize the
next census, and we will spare no effort to create better
living conditions for all Serbs who decide to return.

It is regrettable that at a time when we should
be concluding the dialogue with Serbia, its political
representatives persistwiththeirhatred andunacceptable
declarations, followed by all sorts of attempts to rewrite
history, including by choosing war criminals, such as
General Ljubisa Dikovic', who committed war crimes in
Kosovo, to teach cadets at the military academy. What
is a man who is responsible and convicted for the death
of thousands, including children, the rape of thousands
of women and the deportation of hundreds of thousands
going to teach young Serbians today? In the words of
the Human Rights Watch official Fred Abrahams,
"this is a dangerous refusal of the truth about the
war. It is the same as if we were to appoint a thief
to protect our banks".

Again, I do not mention this because I want to
talk about the past; I am raising this point because I
simply see no way to build peace and reconciliation
if we deny the truth or bury it. Furthermore, if our
neighbour declares victory because we are not able
to join INTERPOL this year, it is not only wrong, but
also irresponsible. We all know that the challenges we
and the rest of the world face are borderless, and that
they can be won only if we share information and work
together. From terrorism to cyberthreats, we cannot
win by excluding Kosovo and declaring that a Victory.
Quite the opposite is true.

Again, we are not giving up. I believe that Kosovo
will soon secure its place within all the relevant
international bodies, in coordination with our partners.
That would not be a victory of Kosovo over Serbia; it
would only be a just victory over the unjust, and the
right and smart thing for the international community's
investments for peace and stability in the region. The
host country of this year's meeting of the INTERPOL
General Assembly did not allow members of the
Kosovo delegation to obtain visas, which was another
unnecessary obstacle that our shaped final decision to
withdraw our application this year.

Meanwhile, in Kosovo just yesterday, five members
of the non-majority communities - Serbs - were
promoted to higher officer ranks in the Kosovo security
forces. As President Thaci stated during the promotion
ceremony, "once again the Kosovo security forces show
that it is a force in the service of all citizens of Kosovo
and in every corner of Kosovo". Kosovo's army will be
exactly the same - a modern, defensive army that will
reflect Kosovo's desire to join the Euro-Atlantic family.
We will do our utmost to make that process as inclusive
and consensual as possible, but no one will have veto
power over it.

Furthermore, after many years of unnecessary
delays, we can now say that Kosovo's Constitution and
Kosovo's laws can now be applied throughout Kosovo's
territory, since 40 new judges and 13 new prosecutors
from northern Kosovo took an oath of office on
24 October. That is important not only in constitutional
terms but because, after many years of being denied
justice, Serbs living in northern Kosovo will finally
start receiving the services that they deserve from their
own State.
I want to assure everyone here that Kosovo remains
strongly committed to dialogue with Serbia, and I
reaffirm that we will implement all the agreements
reached in Brussels, in line with our Constitution. It is
true that our electoral processes have caused us some
delays, but our commitment remains. We know better
than anyone what happens when we stop talking to each
other, even if we disagree. However, we do not want
a farce, or a process conducted merely for the sake of
obtaining compliments or favours for anyone. We want
a genuine process that will lead to the full normalization
of relations between the two States.

I would like to add that Kosovo's independence
is not a product of a secessionist movement but of the
dissolution by consensus of the former Yugoslavia.
We had borders long before we had statehood. Besides
that, there was international intervention in Kosovo
to stop ethnic cleansing. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission was deployed in Kosovo,
and President Martti Ahtisaari was appointed by the
Secretary-General to head a United Nations-led process,
proposing an initially supervised independence for
Kosovo. The International Court of Justice then issued
a ruling clearly stating that Kosovo had not broken or
violated any international law, and that its case was sui
generis. Any attempt to draw a parallel between Kosovo
and other situations around the globe will fail.

As we approach the tenth anniversary of our
independence, we have a lot to be proud of. Just
last week, for example, the World Bank announced
that Kosovo is among the top 10 global economies
displaying the most notable improvement in carrying
out business reforms. Nonetheless, we are fully aware
that we have much more to do in order to meet the
rightful expectations of all people in Kosovo. They
deserve better education, better health care and more
opportunities to prosper. Our young people deserve
that as they make us increasingly proud every day with
their selfless dedication and accomplishments. With
little or no institutional support, our young women and
men are becoming shining examples and inspirations.
They have taken Kosovo to the Olympics, bringing
home gold medals from competitions ranging from
mathematics to judo and raising our flag in places
where politics still cannot land. We owe it to them and
to future generations to leave behind a Kosovo that is
not only at peace with itself but also prosperous and
at peace with its neighbours. That is a dream worth
fighting for.

