Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev and the Police Commissioners
for their valuable briefings today. I also thank Tuesday
Reitano for her important contribution and perspectives
on transnational organized crime.

It is very encouraging to see so many representatives
of United Nations police in the Chamber this afternoon.
Although I realize that most of the Blue Berets are
behind me, it is very nice anyway that they are at this
meeting. I would like to take this opportunity, as some
of my colleagues have already done, to thank them so
much for the invaluable work that they do for all of
us in their respective missions every day. They really
make a crucial contribution to conflict prevention and
sustaining peace, which are at the very core of the
United Nations work. I thank them again. We are very
proud of their accomplishments.

Imagine our societies without policing - cities,
towns and villages without any objective authority
to uphold the rule of law. The chaos that would reign
under such circumstances is obvious. Accountable,
transparent and effective policing is central to peaceful
and stable societies. Strong institutions that are trusted
by their citizens are crucial for responding effectively
to violence and crime.

Where governance and institutions are weak,
on the other hand, organized crime is more likely to
take hold. Transnational organized crime finances and
fuels conflict, reinforces corruption and undermines
institutions. That erodes confidence in society, and
criminal groups can challenge the State's ability to
control its own territory.

The breakdown of law and order, the violations of
human rights and the lack of the rule of law are often
at the heart of the problem in the countries where the
United Nations is engaged, as illustrated today by our
briefers from South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Haiti. That is why Sweden has for decades
been a consistent contributor to United Nations police.

Policing is an important function in all phases
of conflict. From prevention to peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, there is always a
need for structural capacity and institution-building
that contributes to stability and the rule of law.

Conflict prevention is supported through
direct operational actions and through supporting
international norms, as well as mechanisms, to combat
transnational organized crime, illicit arms flows
and human trafficking. In numerous resolutions, the
Security Council has included mandates or references
to combating criminal flows and networks. As we heard
from the Police Commissioner from the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, to feel hope and
confidence for the future, tangible investments in
the rule of law is important for people in vulnerable
situations. Building responsive and representative
institutions is therefore key, which is also why Sweden
contributes both police and corrections personnel
to United Nations missions. The Global Focal Point
arrangement is one useful vehicle for making a
comprehensive contribution to both the rule of law and
other development work.

For the United Nations to be more effective in
designing adequate responses to different situations
we must further strengthen the role of police in our
approach, as our briefers also highlighted today.
Protecting the human rights of civilians, addressing
organized crime, combating sexual and gender-based
violence, fighting impunity, upholding law and order
and building the rule of law cannot be accomplished
without effective policing.

The centrality of policing to the United Nations
response should be improved through joint analyses and
by taking a broad view of security. The decision-making
process must be informed by relevant policing expertise,
and we need adequate platforms for delivering policing
advice. To make full use of United Nations policing
and for the Police Division to be able to provide
strategic direction on police issues to the Council, the
Secretariat and other elements of the United Nations
system, the Police Division must be adequately placed
in the structures and the United Nations Police Adviser
must have the right level to ensure access to relevant
decision-making discussions.
Sweden strongly supports the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative and will continue
to be involved in the work going forward. Ensuring
an adequate reflection of the different components of
peace operations will be important.

Inclusive and responsive peace operations also
require a gender-balance in the cadre of peacekeepers.
More than one third of the police officers Sweden
today contributes to United Nations peace operations
are women. It is equally important to ensure the
participation of women in local outreach and projects,
as also highlighted in the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan briefing on gender-responsive policing. In
addition, to ensure an effective policing response, it is
important that all our officers be well trained and held
accountable for their conduct.

We look forward to the forthcoming report of the
Secretary-General on policing and to continuing the
discussion on mainstreaming policing in the United
Nations prevention activities and in the peace and
security pillar.

Finally, United Nations police will continue to
carry the dual role of providing security and protection,
as well as supporting the reform, restructuring
and development of rule-of-law institutions. The
protection of civilians is crucially important. As the
Organization is set on moving from conflict response
to conflict prevention, the capacity-building role will
be further highlighted.

It is high time that we act in support of
increased police expertise in the United Nations
decision-making processes. By making the best
possible use of the different instruments that United
Nations policing can provide, we will be one step closer
to sustaining peace.

