Ms. Ognjanovac (Croatia): Memories of the
recent wave of worldwide terrorist attacks make us
painfully aware of how vulnerable all our societies are
when faced with the threat of international terrorism.
The continuing high terror alert, which is becoming a
daily reality for many of us, reminds us that this new
global scourge, which is indiscriminate in its attacks,
does not recognize borders, nationalities, religion, race
or age.

Although anti-terrorism is not a new item on the
United Nations agenda, it took the horrors of 11
September 2001 to galvanize the international
community and to step up the global fight against
terrorism. Those acts, which shook the foundations of
the world order, have redefined our understanding of
the notion of a threat to international peace and
security. The Security Council responded to that threat
appropriately and promptly by adopting resolution
1373 (2001) and by subsequently creating the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). The almost universal
response of Member States to the CTC's requests is a
telling example of how efficient the United Nations can
be in mobilizing the international community in this
fight.

We believe that the CTC's work thus far has been
a success. By prompting Member States to consolidate
and improve their legislative and law-enforcement
measures and to identify possible weak spots in
countering terrorism at the national level, the CTC
reporting system has proved to be more than purely a
stock-taking exercise. I would like to use this
opportunity to express my Government's thanks and
appreciation to the Committee's Chairman, Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, for his dedication, efficiency and
transparency in guiding the work of the CTC.

This meeting comes at an opportune time for
discussing how to enhance and intensify the
Committee's work. As last month's ministerial meeting
indicated, the CTC is ready to enter a new phase,
which should be more action-oriented. We were
particularly encouraged by proposals aimed at the
establishment of a special cooperation and assistance
fund, under United Nations auspices, that would
cooperate closely with international financial
institutions. For many countries, including mine, the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) could be
significantly upgraded through technical and financial
assistance. For its part, Croatia has already elaborated
several projects that could benefit from such
assistance - ranging from enhancing border controls
to the training of law enforcement and anti-terrorist
experts to protection against attacks involving radiation
and weapons of mass destruction - as described in its
earlier submissions to the CTC.

The United Nations has proved to be
indispensable at the global level as a focal point for
integrated action and as the architect of an extensive
body of international anti-terrorist legislation. The
universal criminalization of terrorist-related acts is the
first step towards their eradication. However, relevant
international instruments have no value without
universal participation and full implementation.

In addition to a number of regional and sectoral
agreements, Croatia is party to six key United Nations
conventions on suppressing terrorism and is taking
steps to expeditiously become party to the remaining
legal instruments. In View of next month's meeting of
the Ad Hoc Committee established by General
Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996,
charged with the elaboration of a draft comprehensive
convention on combating international terrorism and a
draft convention on the suppression of nuclear
terrorism, my delegation hopes that Member States will
find the critical political will to finalize these
negotiations.

Regional and subregional cooperation
complements and enhances our global efforts. We
therefore welcome the forthcoming meeting between
the CTC and representatives of the relevant
international and regional organizations, hoping that it
will deepen that synergy.

Croatia plays an active part in various regional
counter-terrorism initiatives. As a member of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
Croatia has implemented obligations set out in the
Bucharest Plan of Action for Combating Terrorism as
well as those stipulated by five anti-terrorism
conventions of the Council of Europe. The Plan of
Action for Combating Terrorism, adopted at the
Warsaw Conference of the Presidents of Central,
Eastern and South-Eastern Europe, has initiated further
measures aimed at strengthening cooperation within the
region.

Within that framework, in September 2002
Croatia hosted an international symposium on
"Terrorism and security in the twenty-first century:
South-Eastern Europe and the world". A number of
additional projects are being realized within the
framework of the Stability Pact for South-Eastern
Europe, the Central European Initiative, the Adriatic-
Ionian Initiative, the Budapest process and the South-
Eastern European Cooperation Initiative Regional
Centre for Combating Transborder Crime, or in direct
collaboration with neighbouring countries.

At the bilateral level, Croatia has concluded
agreements on cooperation in the fight against
terrorism, organized crime and drug abuse with 18
countries, while 32 additional agreements are under
way. By focusing on controlling migration and borders,
harmonizing legislation, sharing information and
fighting organized crime and money-laundering, those
initiatives are important in preventing and eliminating
terrorism.

Ultimately, it is implementation at the national
level that remains crucial for eradicating terrorism.
Following the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), the
Croatian Government established an inter-agency
working group charged specifically with its
implementation and mandated all relevant
governmental agencies to examine the implementing
legislation and to initiate possible amendments.
Subsequently, the criminal code was amended in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), while the law
on foreign currency transactions, the anti-money-
laundering law, the law on legal assistance and the
asylum law are currently being revised. The ratification
of several anti-terrorism treaties is under way. Croatia
has also implemented 98 per cent of the
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force
on Money Laundering, which have been incorporated
into national legislation.

The fight against international terrorism is
multilevel and multifaceted and has many fronts, which
were addressed in the declaration that the Council
adopted on 20 January as an annex to resolution 1456
(2003). We find it encouraging that development issues
and conflict prevention have been integrated into the
Council's campaign against terrorism. The
interdependence of socio-economic, security and
peace-building issues was itself the focus of the
Croatian presidency of the Economic and Social
Council in 2002. The need for a holistic approach calls,
in turn, for tight cooperation between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council. We
believe that collaboration between those two bodies
should be given due consideration in our efforts to
eradicate international terrorism.

Success in combating international terrorism
ultimately depends on the ability of our Governments
to work together through international cooperation
mechanisms. By virtue of its worldwide membership,
the United Nations provides a unique institutional
framework to do this. We therefore welcome the
sustained comprehensive approach outlined in the
ministerial declaration and consider it our common
responsibility to cooperate fully with the Council in
this fight.

