Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in French): I take the opportunity to begin my statement
by thanking you, Sir, for convening this meeting of the
Security Council.

(spoke in Arabic)

Mr. Annan's six-point plan was stillborn. First Arab
observers and then United Nations observers bore false
witness by saying no to a peaceful political solution
and national dialogue, offering no other solution than
providing weapons to the opposition. They have said
that foreign military intervention and the fall of the
regime are non-negotiable points. Safe corridors,
buffer zones and provisional Governments must be
established.

The struggle against the authority of the Syrian
State and the fall of its institutions are irreversible.
The Syrian President has lost all legitimacy and should
relinquish power. Those are quotes from official
statements attributed to representatives of certain
countries represented here in the Council, and from
others of our region. Those words represent the very
substance of the statements and tendencies of certain
Arab, regional and international parties supporting the
armed groups and representing them outside of Syria.

How is it possible, then, to put an end to the
violence and resolve the crisis in Syria by peaceful
means? Is it not high time for us all to learn the lessons
of the disasters brought about by foreign interventionist
policies carried out by certain influential international
Powers aimed at interfering in the internal affairs of
other Member States?

As a counterpart, the Syrian Government has
responded with openness and a positive spirit to the
legitimate claims of its people and all initiatives aimed
at settling the crisis by peaceful and political means,
including Mr. Annan's six-point plan, which is clearly
supported by Syria. To implement the plan, Syria
has fully cooperated with the Supervision Mission
by making all the necessary facilities available in
accordance with agreements made with the United
Nations through the efforts of Mr. Annan and based on
respect for national sovereignty.

Syria also welcomed the final communique of
the Action Group for Syria, issued after its meeting
in Geneva on 30 June. In accordance with an official
communique issued by the Syrian Foreign Minister, my
country consented to the appointment of Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi as the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States on Syria. I take
this opportunity to warmly welcome him.

But what is odd is that certain States that rallied the
consensus for the final communique then did everything
they could to stifle it just hours after its issuance.
They did so through non-consensual parallel efforts
aimed at ending all endeavours towards a peaceful end
to the crisis in Syria. Such efforts would put an end
to the national Syrian-led dialogue by promoting an
inevitable and imminent military intervention under
humanitarian pretexts, which confirms the existence of
a virtually hysterical obsession among the leaders of
those countries to target Syria both as a country and as
a people.

The erroneous and subjective reading of the
situation by certain people, policies based on internal
interference in Syrian affairs, and the failure on the
part of certain countries to cooperate with the six-point
plan are all factors that contributed to the resignation
of Mr. Annan and the decision not to extend the
Supervision Mission in Syria.

Today, we would like to see the clear intentions of
those who talk of addressing the humanitarian aspects
of the crisis. There are those who claim that they wish
to help the Syrian people, provided, however, that such
assistance goes only to the last Syrian in Syria.

It is patently clear, alas, that certain States can only
view the issue of humanitarian aid in the framework of
their own biased political agenda. They refer to aid to
support their own interests in interfering in the internal
affairs of other States. If this meeting is truly focused
on a discussion of the best possible ways of providing
humanitarian aid to the Syrian people, why then
have some insisted on promoting actions outside the
framework of the United Nations, in clear contravention
of the text of the Charter of the United Nations?

We fail to understand how it is that certain countries
provide their modest sums of humanitarian aid via the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) while imposing prior conditions. At the same
time, those States have imposed unfair economic
sanctions, which have had serious humanitarian
repercussions on the lives ofthe Syrian people, inflicting
damage on their means of subsistence and well-
being, even depriving them of medicines and medical
equipment. Who can understand why certain States
have done everything in their power to suspend Syria's
membership of the Arab League and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation on the pretext of sympathy with
the Syrian people? And speaking of humanitarian aid in
Syria, some of those States have not even contributed
funds to the regional response plan approved by OCHA
and the Syrian Government, although they are aware
that funding is the major obstacle to the implementation
of the plan.

In that regard, I would like to recall a well-known
Chinese saying that states that wisdom begins with
calling things by their real names. In that context we
believe that, to the extent that the intentions are sincere,
the best way to aid the Syrian people is, first of all,
by dealing with the causes of the suffering, since the
continuing efforts of the armed groups, which are
operating with external support, to destroy the means
of subsistence - such as infrastructure, health and
education institutions, communication channels, power
sources, places of worship and museums - while
encouraging violence and intimidating peaceful
citizens, are all factors that explain this intolerable
suffering, exacerbated by the armed groups' attempts
to exercise military control over residential areas
in various principal cities, using civilians as human
shields. I would urge the Council to read an article by
the British journalist Robert Fisk in The Independent
on what he saw in Aleppo. It corroborates what I have
been talking about here.

His description tallies precisely with what has been
admitted by senior United Nations officials, such as
Major General Mood and others. There is further proof
in the fact that the armed groups refer to the Battle of
Homs, the Great Battle of Damascus and the Battle
of Aleppo as if they were battles happening beyond
Syria's borders or between Syria and a foreign State. It
is undeniable, after all, that Horns and Aleppo are both
Syrian cities.

In that regard, we must ask if there is any State in
the world that would allow armed elements, terrorists
and mercenaries supported by foreigners to control
neighbourhoods in its towns? Is there any Government
that would agree to suspend its duty to protect its
citizens, leaving them at the mercy of extremism,
terrorism and violence? Let me back up my statements
with facts. Here is a list of 107 names of Arab and
non-Arab terrorists who have died in Aleppo, killed by
the forces of order. It includes names, nationalities and
other details, and we are happy to provide it to anyone
who is interested. It includes Tunisians, Libyans,
Saudis, Palestinians, Jordanians, Egyptians and so on.
Those persons were not Syrian citizens.

For decades, Syria has hosted millions of refugees
from Iran owing to hostile acts that had nothing to do
with Syria. Mr. Guterres, who is at this meeting, knows
full well what we are talking about, because he has
personally witnessed the hospitality Syria has shown
towards Arab and non-Arab refugees, freely welcomed
by my country, without seeking to promote or profit
from them in any international forum or authority.

My country has not just put up tents to shelter the
refugees who have sought asylum on our territory. It has
notjust welcomed them in camps on its borders or in the
desert in order to exploit or manipulate their hopes. On
the contrary, Syria has done its duty, sharing its meagre
resources with them and treating them just as it treats
its own citizens, sharing the brotherly ties of humane
responsibility and in accordance with its international
commitments.

Today we Syrians feel deep bitterness and sorrow
at the sight of some of our brothers, living in terrible
conditions in tents on our borders while attempts are
made to intimidate them into not returning home.
Their dignity is being insulted; they are being turned
into refugees, prisoners of those camps. At best, one
would describe them as detention camps. We ask those
countries that have taken in Syrian refugees to allow all
those who wish to return to do so, and not to prevent
them from returning to their motherland, Syria. That
said, we would also like to thank all who have extended
the hand of friendship to Syrian refugees without
imposing preconditions, let alone transforming some
of those camps into military centres where terrorists
gather to train so that they can then be sent to Syria
to commit their vile crimes, as is still happening in
Aleppo.

What certain capitals may be planning and plotting
for Syria is one thing; what the Syrian people want is
another, namely, genuine reforms and a better life. The
challenges are not only about legitimate aspirations
for reform; the greater challenge right now is to
protect Syria as an independent State, and to counter
the extremist terrorist agendas that aim to condemn
Syria - a country with a history of tolerance and
civilization - to the dark ages and to inquisitional
tribunals. Syria has always been and will remain a land
for Syrians of every stripes; it was a civilization even
before it was a State.

We listened attentively to the statement made by
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
France on 29 July. He said, "they are being supplied
with weapons. According to the information we have,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and probably others are supplying
weapons." We understand "them" to mean the armed
groups in Syria.

Given that statement, we would like to know if
France, with that information on arms trafficking to
Syria, would take the appropriate measures necessary
as a permanent member of the Security Council and
current Council President in order to ensure scrupulous
respect for the articles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law and the spirit of resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). No one can ignore the fact
that turning a deaf ear to arms trafficking to armed
elements in Syria flouts all those provisions.

Major Turkish and international newspapers have
reported the role played by the Turkish Government,
not the Turkish people - those neighbourly, friendly
people linked to us historically and geographically. The
international press has referred of the role of Turkey in
spillilng Syrian blood. Why do we say that? Mr. Kofi
Annan attributed his lack of success to three main
causes, one of which involved the lack of cooperation
on the part of States and parties that have influence
over the armed groups. Certainly, everybody knows
that if the neighbouring country, in this case Turkey,
had merely hosted Syrian refugees, it would have
done nothing. However, given the fact that Turkey
is harboring armed elements that perpetrate cross-
border crimes on my country's territory and the fact
that Turkey is allowing those groups to set up training
camps for Salafist extremist groups and for groups that
are attempting to go back to prehistoric times, in that
regard, the Turkish Government - its Government, not
the Turkish people - is becoming Syria's executioner.
I would have liked to have said that directly to His
Excellency the Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs,
and not to my friend and brother the Ambassador of
Turkey, whose moral integrity and great moral probity
I know full well.

The arms trafficking through Lebanon is being
perpetrated by Lebanese political parties, and not
officially by Lebanon. The President says that it is
Lebanon's turn. When the Lebanese Government
confiscated the Luifallah I] loaded with arms coming
from Libya, it must have truly called down the wrath
of God. The seizure by the Lebanese authorities of that
weapons-loaded vessel bound for Syria is an event that
is not worthy of the very close links between the two
countries. That vessel was followed by seven others,
also loaded with arms and intended for Syrian armed
groups.

His Excellency the Minister for Social Affairs of
Lebanon regretted the presence of 20,000 Syrians in
Lebanon. I would like to remind him that, after the
Israeli aggression against Lebanon in 2006, our aircraft
welcomed tens of thousands of Lebanese in Syria.
We did not turn to the Council to ask for help. On the
contrary, we welcomed our Lebanese brothers with
open arms.

The closure by certain States of their Embassies
in Damascus means that it is no longer possible for
those States to follow the real events as they happen
in Syria. In turn, that means that they are not able to
accurately analyse the facts and the situation. I therefore
cannot reproach the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Morocco for what he said because
I do not wish to rub salt in a wound. I invite him to
adjust his aim and readjust Morocco's relationship
with other countries by responding to the demands
of the Moroccan people and renouncing certain royal
practices that have become archaic. Morocco should
renounce such practices which involve, for example,
kneeling before His Majesty the King and kissing his
hand. Also, with regard to the border, there are people
living in the Sahara who are demanding their rights.

(spoke in French)

At the beginning of my professional career,
more precisely during the first seven-year term of
Mr. Francois Mitterand, I spent a lovely part of my
life as a young diplomat in the Syrian Embassy in
France. I retain excellent memories from the time I
spent among the French and at the centre of French
and, more specifically, Parisian academic, cultural
and educational establishments. At the time, I learned
about the values of national independence and having
an uncompromising attitude in the face of foreign
interference in the internal affairs of any country. I
was obviously also familiar with the major universal
messages of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Montesquieu,
Voltaire and others.

Among the fine principles of international law of
which I learned during my post-graduate studies in Paris,
I recall today one in particular that I hold very dear,
namely, the principle of respect for the most sovereign
of State symbols in each nation: a country's President.
I shall therefore refrain from making the slightest
criticism of France and its senior representatives.
That said, as the Minister spoke to me directly as the
representative of my country, I would like, on behalf of
my people and Government, to express our most serious
concern regarding the new shadow that has been cast
on our troubled relations and memories going back to
the period of the occupation. We have endeavoured to
expunge those memories since 1946.

(spoke in Arabic)

To conclude, I would like to turn to my colleague,
His Excellency the representative of Germany, who
called for the establishment of the Syria of the future
for all Syrians, irrespective of their origin. He also
said that there was no future for Bashar Al-Assad in
the new Syria. I would like to ask him who authorizes
him to speak on behalf of the Syrian people. Is that
not a violation of diplomatic practice in the Council?
Secondly, if the Permanent Representative of Germany
really wants to build the Syria of the future for all
Syrians, why did the German daily newspaper Die Welt
publish an article two days ago stating that

"The German Government is currently working
in the Bundestag on a plan to make the necessary
arrangements to host the Christians from Syria"?

I reiterate that that plan refers only of hosting
Christians from Syria. Why only Christians? Why do
we want to dismantle this Syrian society that we have
all praised? The answer is in the Council's hands.

