Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing today on the tragic
situation facing the more than 400,000 people living in
eastern Ghouta and in other cities.

We heard with dismay that, in that area, the basic
principles of international humanitarian law and
human rights continue to be disregarded. That has been
evidenced by the incessant and merciless bombardments
resulting in hundreds of civilian casualties - many of
whom are women and children - on a daily basis. Far
from decreasing, the bombardments have intensified
over the past several days and weeks, as has been the
case with regard to the number of people with urgent
medical issues who are dying because they cannot be
evacuated. We deeply regret that humanitarian convoys
are unable to reach besieged and difficult-to-access
areas, such as eastern Ghouta, among others, despite
repeated appeals from the United Nations and various
countries, including Peru, to facilitate immediate, safe
and unrestricted access in eastern Ghouta, as well as
other areas of Syria.

All those facts, which are ultimately allowing for
and fuelling a hell on Earth, as the Under-Secretary-
General just pointed out to us, warrant our strongest
condemnation. We must remind all parties, including
the Syrian authorities, of the responsibility to protect
the civilian population. The United Nations has
determined various actions that can be taken to
alleviate the suffering of civilians in eastern Ghouta
and other affected areas. We stress the importance of
the immediate implementation of a 30-day cessation
of hostilities to allow for providing aid and setting
out and implementing the humanitarian assistance
response plan and the five priorities that Mr. Lowcock
mentioned. Those are all indispensable and urgently
needed measures that Peru fully supports.

Implementing them will require a genuine political
will to reverse direction and turn them into a reality.
Accordingly, we thank Sweden and Kuwait for their
generous efforts to reach a consensus on a draft
resolution on a cessation of hostilities, which we hope
can be adopted as soon as possible. It is of the utmost
importance that Council members, in particular those
who are able to exercise their influence on the ground,
show the world their unity, sense ofduty and willingness
to compromise, and that we send a clear signal that
prioritizes human beings over other interests.

The Council must be able to rise to the occasion and
fulfil its sensitive and important responsibilities. All
can count on my delegation's commitment to carrying
out actions that will alleviate the human suffering in
eastern Ghouta and throughout Syria.
