Mr. Sergeev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In assessing the developments in Burundi, we
are disturbed that with the vacuum in the Arusha peace
process, because of the death of Julius Nyerere, there has
been an increase in violence in the country, and the
civilian population is suffering therefrom. We are indeed
disturbed over the actions of extremists; in October,
persons from international humanitarian organizations
were their victims.
Russia has consistently advocated a solution to the
internal conflict in Burundi by peaceful means, through
talks involving all parties involved. We strongly condemn
the attacks by armed groups on Bujumbura and other
populated areas, leading to the death of peaceful civilians.
We are also disturbed over the continuing practice of
forced regroupement of civilians into camps guarded by
the military. We consider the use of terrorist methods to
achieve political ends as inadmissible, and we confirm the
need for a settlement of the internal political problems of
Burundi through dialogue and strict respect for human
rights.

We call on all Burundi sides to refrain from violence
which could torpedo the hard-won gains made in the
Arusha peace process. The continuing tense situation in
Burundi requires the adoption of measures to encourage
talks involving all political forces in that African country.
Confirming our view that the main responsibility for
peace in Burundi lies with the Burundian people
themselves, we call for an intensification of efforts to
achieve this goal within Burundi itself, and also at the
international, and particularly the subregional, levels. It is
our hope that the leaders of countries in the region will be
able to take decisions which will lead to a settlement of
the crisis situation.

We believe that there is real potential for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in Burundi and that that
potential is to be found in the process that was, until
recently, headed by the late President of Tanzania, Julius
Nyerere. In this connection, we believe the most
important need now is for the regional leaders, in close

 

cooperation with the United Nations, to decide as soon as
possible on an international Facilitator acceptable to all the
Burundi parties.

We hope that in future inter-Burundi talks, there will
be a real breakthrough in the key issues of the settlement
and, above all, in ending violence in the country. Our
delegation believes that over the long term this will make
it possible to have balanced and final documents signed.

