Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): The resolution
unanimously adopted today by the Security Council
marks the end of the occupation of Iraq and the
reassertion of all prerogatives of full sovereignty by the
interim Government that will take office by 30 June.

Brazil participated in a constructive spirit in the
negotiating process that led to the adoption of today's
resolution, because we kept in mind the importance of
the Security Council's decisions for the evolving
situation on the ground in Iraq, and also their great
relevance in terms of the expectations of the
international community for the multilateral work of
the Organization in general and of the Security Council
in particular. Our overriding objective was to make this
resolution a good one.

In that endeavour, together with Chile and Spain,
Brazil presented a number of amendments to the draft
text originally submitted by the sponsors. Those
amendments were aimed mainly at sharpening the text
of the draft resolution and at clarifying the nature of
the situation it would create by establishing a new
political and legal reality.
Among other points, Brazil has striven to stress
the following: the transfer of full sovereignty and
authority to the interim Government; establishing the
United Nations as a partner of the Government of Iraq
in the provision of assistance to that Government;
giving the United Nations a leading role in carrying out
its tasks; emphasizing the importance of fulfilling
international obligations in the area of human rights
and humanitarian law; clearly establishing Iraqi control
over the country's security forces, including its armed
forces; differentiating between the circumstances of the
presence of the multinational force in Iraq before and
after the end of the occupation on 30 June, by clearly
defining the scope of the presence of the multinational
force and the reach of its mandate as regards security.

During the negotiations, the delegation of Brazil
supported important proposals that were put forward by
other members, and we are glad that many of them are
reflected in the resolution we adopted today. I would
also like to express my delegation's satisfaction with
the flexibility shown by the original sponsors of the
resolution, particularly in these last days as the
consultation exercise was intensified.

The end result is not the best outcome
conceivable, as many have said, in particular as regards
the security arrangements involving the interim
Government of Iraq, the multinational force and the
protection force for the United Nations. However, in
practical terms, as Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi described the
political process he helped advance, this resolution is
possibly the best outcome of the negotiating process,
given the circumstances.

