Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): First of all, let me
express our condolences to the Russian delegation with
regard to the hideous terrorist act that took place today
in the centre of Moscow. Ukraine has always strongly
condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

I would like to join my colleagues in warmly
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I wish also to
extend our gratitude to your predecessor, His
Excellency Mr. Gaspar Martins, and his team for their
excellent performance last month.

Ukraine highly commends the initiative of
Bulgaria to hold this important debate on how to
improve the protection of war-affected civilians. I
would like to thank Mr. Jan Egeland for his first and
very comprehensive briefing to the Security Council as
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

The urgency and importance of today's debate are
underlined by the persistent violent and volatile
environments in which civilians find themselves, in
particular, as was outlined in Mr. Egeland's
presentation, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Iraq, Afghanistan, the Middle East and in West Africa
and Central Africa.

Over the past several years, we have witnessed
certain progress in the consideration of the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. Nevertheless,
there is still a lack of political will and of willingness
of parties to conflict to implement all relevant
international instruments.

The aide-memoire adopted by the Security
Council has become a practical tool that provides a
basis for improved analysis and diagnosis of key
civilian protection issues that arise out of conflict.
Therefore, we cannot but welcome the new improved
aide-memoire presented today. We hope that it will
further facilitate full realization of the United Nations
potential in the protection of civilians around the
world.

We also note with satisfaction the updated road
map presented today by Mr. Egeland.

I would like to touch upon some, in our view,
crucially important issues on the protection of
civilians.

First is humanitarian access to vulnerable
populations. Humanitarian assistance does much to
improve the protection of civilian populations and
prospects for a successful transition to reconciliation.
We consider that the cooperation between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council on those
issues should be further strengthened. We believe that
the Economic and Social Council has an important role
to play in areas that lay at the heart of peace-building.
Its enhanced cooperation with the Bretton Woods
institutions, as well as its capacity to engage other
stakeholders, such as non-governmental organizations
and the private sector, provides great potential for
mobilizing key players.

We also believe that the humanitarian dimension
of conflict requires coordinated action between the
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the Secretariat, relevant United Nations
bodies, regional and subregional organizations and
international financial institutions, as well as Member
States.

Individuals should be protected from crimes
against humanity, which occur most often in times of
armed conflict. This year the International Criminal
Court (ICC) became in reality a major building block
of the system of international security aimed at
effectively preventing and punishing various violations
of humanitarian law such as genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and the crime of aggression. We
must give a fair chance to the ICC to reach its potential
in countering impunity of persons responsible for
committing such crimes.

Situations of armed conflict are invariably
accompanied by a general breakdown in security and
law and order. The quick restoration of those spheres is
the foremost concern in most conflict situations. In this
regard, we commend the fruitful discussion at the high-
level meeting of the Security Council last September
on justice and the rule of law, and we hope that such
meetings will become regular in the future. I would
like to reiterate that, in such situations of transition, it
is crucial that law and order, including the functioning
of police, courts and prisons, be re-established quickly,
as a measure of utmost priority.

The fourth issue of importance to my delegation
is safeguarding the security of humanitarian personnel.
It remains a key challenge for the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners. Recent months have
witnessed ongoing threats and horrific attacks against
humanitarian personnel. Humanitarian workers became
deliberate targets for political or tactical purposes, thus
marking a disturbing trend of blatant disregard for
humanitarian principles. Those unlawful acts
ultimately aggravate the suffering of the civilian
population. Therefore, we welcome the adoption by the
Council of resolution 1502 (2003), which represents its
initial response to this problem, providing elements for
an effective protection mechanism.

Finally, I would like to raise another issue: the
issue of the protection ofjournalists, who, along with
the civilian population and humanitarian and United
Nations personnel, become targets in armed conflicts.
Being on the front line of conflict, they report
independently on the developments on the ground,
often making the ultimate sacrifice so that the world
can be fully informed on the realities of the situation.
However, despite the fact that journalists should be
protected under the Additional Protocols to the 1949
Geneva Convention, they continue to be exposed to
attacks, killings, torture and kidnapping. An estimated
half thousand journalists have been killed worldwide
during the last decade alone. In many cases, they were
victims of deliberate attacks by parties to conflict. I
believe that the issue of protection ofjournalists is our
common concern and should therefore be reflected in
the road map.

