Mr. Manj eev Singh Puri (India): Mr. President, I
would like to thank you for scheduling today's debate
on the situation in Afghanistan in the context of the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would
also like to thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin, the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for his
statement. We are grateful for the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/ 120) and are appreciative of
the briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura. May I also
take this opportunity to thank my colleagues from
Germany for strongly anchoring the negotiations.

The Kabul Conference last year marked the
beginning of the Kabul process - a new phase in the
partnership of the Afghan Government and the
international community. The hallmark of the Kabul
process is Afghan ownership and leadership in
realizing the shared pursuit of sustained and tangible
improvements in security, governance and development
in the country. The NATO summit held in Lisbon in
November 2010 provided a road map for the transition
to full Afghan security responsibility and leadership by
the end of 2014.

We could not agree more with the observations
made in the report of the Secretary-General that the
transition must be Afghan-owned; it must be planned
and implemented in a systematic manner; it must
ensure the protection and promotion of the human
rights of all Afghans; and it must be accompanied by
an inclusive political process and an intra-Afghan
dialogue.

It is important the transition be linked to the
realities on the ground rather than rigid benchmarks,
along with a constant assessment and review of the
evolving situation in Afghanistan. Building the strength
and capabilities of the Afghan national security forces,
along with adequate enablers, is imperative to the
transition of security responsibilities.

Afghan ownership and leadership are also critical
for development and reconstruction in Afghanistan.
This also implies greater coherence, coordination and

further streamlining of the international community's
development efforts, including the aligning of
assistance with Afghan national priority programmes
and increasingly working through Afghan institutions.
It is also important to strengthen the United Nations
own coherence and coordination among its various
bodies working in Afghanistan, in accordance with the
priorities of the Afghan Government.

India supports the Afghan Government's efforts
to reintegrate those individuals who abjure violence,
give up armed struggle, do not have links with terrorist
groups and are willing to abide by the values of
democracy, pluralism and human rights as enshrined in
the Afghan Constitution. It is important that we respect
the red lines for the process, as reaffirmed at the Kabul
Conference. Otherwise, we would run the risk of
Afghanistan sliding back to become a safe haven for
terrorists and extremist groups.

We appreciate the increasing collaboration
between the International Security Assistance Force
and Afghan national security forces, which has led to
security gains in southern Afghanistan and the
consolidation of security gains in Kabul. However, it is
a matter of deep concern that the overall security
situation continues to deteriorate in Afghanistan, and
there has, in fact, been a slight increase in security
incidents as compared to last year. The recent instances
of attacks on civilians in the Kabul Bank in Jalalabad
and suicide attacks in Kabul indicate a change in
tactics, wherein the Taliban and other opposition
groups are opting for soft civilian targets. They also
point to the existence of a virtual army of suicide
attackers who are being brainwashed, trained and
deployed - the scale, location, character and
magnitude of which has not been sufficiently analysed
in the urge to seek a political solution.

The continued resilience of the insurgents, their
changing tactics, their numbers and their spreading out
to areas previously considered safe are a grim reminder
that the security gains will remain transient unless the
international community is able to firmly deal with
safe heavens for terrorist groups outside Afghanistan's
borders.

For the security and stabilization of Afghanistan,
it is important to isolate and root out the syndicate of
terrorism that includes elements of Al-Qaida, the
Taliban, Lashkar e Toiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups operating from within and outside

Afghanistan's borders. In fact, the Jalalabad attack,
which bore the hallmark of a mini-Mumbai, pointed to
a fusion of techniques and ideology from Al Qaida and
Lashkar e Toiba, with elements from the Taliban. The
Afghan people must be allowed to rebuild their land in
conditions of peace and security, free from interference
from their neighbours, and they must be the arbiters of
their own destiny.

Afghanistan's stability and economic
development depend a great deal on its neighbours and
the region as a whole. Afghanistan has immense
potential as a land bridge linking Central, West and
South Asia to emerge as a trade, transport and energy
hub. The recent developments in regional cooperation,
including the signing of the agreement on the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline
project, will provide added impetus to regional
cooperation. Part of the solution lies in Afghanistan
being increasingly regionally integrated. Growing
economic interdependence would catalyse peace and
prosperity in the region at large and in Afghanistan in
particular. Afghanistan, as a member of the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
since 2005, is increasingly becoming active as a fellow
SAARC member. India, as a neighbour, will continue
its efforts towards the development of Afghanistan.

India and Afghanistan share a strategic
partnership based on the strong foundations of rich
historical and civilizational bonds and share the pursuit
of regional peace and prosperity. India remains
committed to partnering with the Government and
people of Afghanistan in the building of a peaceful,
stable, democratic and pluralistic nation.

Assisting Afghanistan in capacity-building and
skills for human resource development and building
Afghanistan's public institutions is a special area of
priority for India. India's cumulative development
assistance stands at $1.3 billion. In addition, India has
committed to providing 100,000 tons of wheat for the
Government and people of Afghanistan, in view of the
prevailing drought in the country.
The area of Afghanistan south of the Hindu Kush
and all the way up to the Ganges delta forms a part of a
single geographical and economic basin, with the
plains of India constituting the centre of its economic
gravity. It is by far Afghanistan's largest regional
market, a potential source of investment, skills,
training, technology and expertise and a model of
democracy and national institution-building in a
culturally comfortable context. Closer economic
integration with India and other countries in the region
is the key to Afghanistan's future and prosperity.

In conclusion, we hope that the international
community will continue to remain steadfast in its
support to Afghanistan as per the priorities of the
Afghan Government. We commend the good work
done by UNAMA. In accordance with the wishes of the
Afghan Government and as requested by the Secretary-
General in his most recent report, India supports the
renewal of the mandate of UNAMA for an additional
period of one year.

