Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour to have His Excellency President Touadera
present here at the Security Council. We would like
thank him most especially for his efforts to bring about
peace and stability in the Central African Republic.
We would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous and our colleague Ambassador Hilale,
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.
Uruguay would also like to commend the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Central African Republic, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.

Today is an excellent opportunity to reaffirm
the Council's commitment and engagement with the
Central African Republic, as well as to support the
consolidation of the situation through all means so that
it does not fall back into conflict. We would also to
highlight the fact that this briefing meeting promotes
transparency in our work and encourages members of
the Council to express their views publicly.

Just a few days after celebrating the first year of the
presidency of Touadera, the Central African Republic
is in a better situation, with a return to constitutional
order, a democratically elected Government, the
formation of a new Government and the establishment
of the National Assembly. A number of far-reaching
reforms are already under way, including reforms in the
security, defence and justice sectors, and programmes
are in place for national reconciliation, disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration of
former fighters. We must therefore commend the
Government of the Central African Republic and
reiterate our support to it, while encouraging it the to
continue along that path.

However, the recent events that took place in the
Central African Republic show that the Government
still has some significant challenges ahead. In that
regard, Uruguay would express its concern with regard
to the most recent report (S/2017/94) of the Secretary-
General showing that in recent months there has been
an increase in violence, including sporadic incidents in
Bangui, attacks on peacekeeping personnel, along with
ever-increasing confrontations between armed groups
outside the capital. Uruguay condemns in the strongest
terms the use of violence by the armed groups. We
would encourage groups that have not yet done so to
join the dialogue that was launched by the Government
to resolve current problems in a peaceful way.

The deterioration in the humanitarian situation in
the country is another source of concern. According
to the recent report of the Secretary-General, and as
Mr. Ladsous mentioned here in the Chamber, half
of the population in the Central African Republic
continues to need humanitarian aid, with many
suffering from extreme food insecurity. Against that
backdrop, it is crucial that the international community
continue encouraging and supporting the efforts of the
Government to bring about peace and stability.

The United Nations has renewed its commitment
to the country, particularly through the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and through
the activities of the Peacebuilding Commission. We
must highlight the vital role played by MINUSCA in
protecting civilians, promoting and protecting human
rights and international humanitarian law, as well as
the support that MINUSCA provides to the national
authorities for capacity-building, all of which put great
operational demands on the Mission.

The recent presidential decree of 5 November
created the institutional structure to apply, supervise
and evaluate the modalities to fulfil the Mutual
Engagement Framework and the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan. That will contribute
greatly to channelling the efforts of international
partners and to preserving the high-level political
commitment undertaken by the country and the
international community. In that regard, we reiterate that
for all forms of cooperation extended to the Central to
be successful, they must be done through consultations
with the Government and complement the measures
that are being implemented by the national authorities
in the search for reconciliation in the country.

