Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to congratulate you, Sir, on your last day as
President of the Security Council and to thank you for
having convened this important meeting. We also
congratulate your country, France, on its judicious
management of the Council's work this month.

This meeting is being held following the return of
the Security Council mission to several countries of
Africa, including my own, the Sudan, as we approach
the end of the transitional period on 9 July,
representing the final chapter of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). Just as
that historic Agreement has been extremely important
to the Government of the Sudan, so has been our
bearing of the responsibility to implement it as a
strategic objective. In practical terms, we have proven
to be the wiser and more restrained party to the
Agreement, in spite of the excesses of our partner and
all the obstacles to the CPA's implementation. Our
commendable record of acceptance of various
proposals and suggestions is ample testimony to that
effect. Thanks to all these efforts, we are now on the
threshold of the end of the transitional period, although
several issues remain pending that we had hoped to
settle definitively had our partner embraced a spirit of
commitment commensurate with ours.

As we discuss the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/314*) - which, inter alia, recommends the
establishment of a United Nations mission in South
Sudan following the drawdown of the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) - we must take into
account the main point of reference represented by the
establishment of that mission. In that regard, we recall
the letter we sent to the President of the Security
Council on 25 May 2004 (S/2004/425), in the light of
which the Security Council adopted presidential
statement S/PRST/2004/18 and resolution 1547 (2004),
mandating a political mission to assess the anticipated
role of the United Nations at that time in monitoring
the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.

With respect to resolution 1590 (2005),
mandating the establishment of UNMIS following the
signing of the CPA under Article VI of the Charter, we
reiterate our gratitude to the United Nations and its
vital role in the implementation of the CPA and in
assisting the two parties to the Agreement over the past
five years. We also appreciate the important role it has
played in monitoring various aspects of the CPA.

As we have repeatedly stressed, 9 July is a
landmark date that must be respected. We reiterate here
that the end of the transitional period on that day, in
accordance with the CPA and including the drawdown
11-35810
of UNMIS in northern Sudan, is of great importance to
us, pursuant as it is not only to the CPA but also to the
Constitution of the Sudan and the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, starting with resolution 1590
(2005) and ending with resolution 1978 (2011)
extending the UNMIS mandate until the end of the
transitional period on 9 July.

The Government of the Sudan has addressed a
letter to the Secretary-General to that effect, in light of
the contents of paragraph 80 of his report, in which he
urges the two parties to consider a three-month
technical rollover of the Mission. In the letter, the
Government of the Sudan stresses the importance of
ending the Mission on 9 July, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions.

Any attempt to use pending issues to justify the
continuation of the Mission is indefensible. The
so-called pending issues will be settled at the
negotiating table in the course of serious negotiations
between the two parties. There have been efforts at
mediation, such as those of President Mbeki, who is
working strenuously to assist the two parties in settling
pending issues. Council members will recall our
numerous appeals to the international community, and
the Security Council in particular, to assist the two
parties to settle the pending issues, including the matter
of Abyei. In our statements, we have spoken repeatedly
and at length on this matter, to the extent that some
have found us to be unnecessarily repetitive.

Current developments in Abyei have made clear
to all the need for the assistance we have sought. Those
developments are not surprising, given the earlier
violations by the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
(SPLM) in April, when it killed many Sudanese Armed
Forces soldiers. At that time, we exercised wisdom and
restraint, making possible the two Kadugli agreements
of 13 and 17 January, which stipulate the withdrawal of
all forces from the Abyei area, to be replaced by joint
forces of the two parties. However, the other party did
not commit to those agreements and left its forces in
the area, including 20,000 soldiers masquerading as
police officers.

Provocative attacks by such groups followed,
including the kidnapping of six members of the
Sudanese Armed Forces. In that instance, too, we
showed wisdom and restraint. The abducted six had
been deployed as members of joint integrated units
when they were kidnapped by the SPLM. On
11-35810
12 February, 12 northern merchants were killed and
their goods destroyed. At the time, the Political
Committee considered ways to contain the situation
and reasserted the importance of commitment to the
Kadugli agreements. However, members of the
Committee were pelted after the meeting.

The Joint Defence Board also held a meeting
about the situation, but was unable to contain it in the
face of continued provocations and attacks. SPLM
forces set a trap for the joint integrated units in which
14 soldiers were killed and 11 wounded. The
aggression did not stop there. SPLM. forces continued
in cold blood to attack joint integrated units that
included members of our armed forces. No violations
could be more glaring. United Nations elements were
also part of the units that were targeted in the attacks of
19 May, which killed 22 people, injured dozens more
and resulted in dozens of missing persons.

The time came to put a stop to the killing. As I
mentioned, we have always exercised restraint and
acted wisely. I chose to come personally to present all
this information to the Council, the Secretary-General
and the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and I have done so over the past days and
weeks. Regrettably, the violations have continued and
strong messages were not sent to put an end to the
attacks. Patience has its limits. Our armed forces could
not continue to be openly fired on without defending
themselves. Moreover, given all the violations, it was
necessary to restore security and the rule of law in the
Abyei area. That is what our armed forces have been
doing there. I would like to stress that our presence in
the Abyei area, as noted by the Under-
Secretary-General, is not permanent and will continue
only until a political and security agreement is signed
that guarantees an end to such provocations and attacks
by the SPLM.

I trust in the wisdom of the Council, because I
know for a fact that it always addresses the root causes
of any crisis and not just the symptoms. The armed
forces currently present in the Abyei area are 14 miles
to the north of the border of 1 January 1956. That is a
reflection of our full commitment to the provisions of
the CPA.

Meanwhile, the forces of the SPLM. are deployed
to the south of Bahr el-Arab, in flagrant violation of
the provisions of the CPA. Therefore, keeping the
status quo - that is, the Sudanese Armed Forces to the
5
north of Bahr el-Arab and the southern forces to the
south of Bahr el-Arab - would facilitate reaching a
new security and political agreement that would lead to
the redeployment of joint integrated units in the area.
Otherwise, a more effective mechanism could be found
to replace both the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA), taking into
account the proposal made by President Mbeki, head of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, to
deploy a joint African police force in the area that
would enable both parties to withdraw their forces. His
proposal also included the establishment of an
international mechanism in the area to monitor the
boundaries between the two parties. The proposal is
currently under consideration and proved its viability
before the signing of the CPA, when it was made by
Mr. Danforth. There are many precedents and lessons
learned that we can take into account in that regard.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate the fact
that the presence of our armed forces in the Abyei area
has been made necessary by the successive violations
by the other party. Moreover, as we have mentioned, it
is not a permanent presence. It will continue only until
mutual agreement is reached about a mechanism for
stability and security in the area. I would like to
confirm that our presence cannot by any stretch be
called an occupation. We are a sovereign country, and
movement of our troops from one area to another
within our country is simply movement; it is not an
occupation in any way.

At the same time, we would like to assure the
Council of our continued efforts to reach a peaceful
settlement of the pending issues, including the
boundaries and the mechanism for monitoring them,
assets and debts, citizenship, international agreements,
and so forth. No matter how many violations may be
committed by the other side, we will not deviate from
our main goal: to reach agreed settlements on those
issues in a way that allows for the establishment of a
secure and stable State in Southern Sudan enjoying ties
of cooperation with the North.

