I thank Special Representative Zerrougui for her briefing today. I would like to express my appreciation to Ambassador Abarry for his update on the status of the important work of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The United States is deeply troubled by rising levels of violence in North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri, which were characterized by clashes between armed groups; tit-for-tat militia attacks against civilians, including many women and children; and the continued brutal campaign of the Allied Democratic Forces. We must use all the tools at hand to work towards the peaceful resolution of historic drivers of conflict and an end to impunity. This is a policy priority for the United States. Our Ambassador to Kinshasa, Michael Hammer, travelled to North and South Kivu last week to meet with key officials and civil society to assess how the United States-Congolese partnership can benefit local people. With more than 1,300 civilians killed in attacks in the first half of 2020 alone, it is clear that the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) would benefit from additional operational support. The United States supports the Organization's efforts to add three new Quick Reaction Force units to the Force Intervention Brigade. These new units, together with the increase in the number of military staff officers and new intelligence capabilities, will equip the Mission to enable it to more effectively counter the threats that have contributed to the devastating death toll this year in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As President Tshilombo Tshisekedi said during his remarks to the General Assembly last month (see A/75/PV.5), boosting the Force Intervention Brigade's operational capacity can help to stop asymmetrical attacks on Congolese civilians living in insecurity for more than two decades now - two decades too long. We also welcome the President's call for increased efforts by international actors to dismantle armed group networks. As just outlined by Ambassador Abarry, we remind all armed group actors and their business associates that sanctions under resolution 1533 (2004) remain in place. We view appropriate, targeted and effective sanctions as an essential tool against actors and entities that undermine the peace and security of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The path to sustainable peace will require political solutions to localized conflicts, as well as improved governance. We were encouraged by the initial surrender of more than 450 Nduma defense du Congo Renove fighters in August, and would urge more progress on the Government's disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration of the Force de resistance patriotique de |'Ituri armed group. But sustainable peace can take root only when accompanied by broader political and economic reforms. To that end, we applaud the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the steps it has taken to improve governance and human rights, fight impunity and stop trafficking in persons and child soldier recruitment. We hope to see progress in reducing the number of human rights violations committed by State security forces and increased prosecution of both State and armed-group actors for human rights violations and abuses. We also urge more accountability for those with command responsibility and call for the improved prevention of sexual violence in conflict and stronger support and protection for survivors. We also congratulate President Tshilombo Tshisekedi for taking steps to professionalize the Congolese military by appointing new leadership this summer, as well as for appointing the first woman Constitutional Court judge and a new director of the country's financial investigation unit. While there is a long road ahead to sustain these gains, we think it is important to recognize progress to date. With that in mind, we are very concerned about the recent allegations of widespread sexual exploitation and abuse by personnel who claimed to be employed by international organizations and private relief agencies in North Kivu as part of the Ebola response. The United States takes these allegations very seriously and calls upon the organizations and agencies involved to conduct a thorough investigation and hold offenders accountable. The United States will continue to work with the United Nations to develop programmes and capabilities to conduct thorough investigations and prosecute these crimes. We remain concerned about similar allegations perpetrated by MONUSCO peacekeepers against civilians. Of all missions, this Mission continues to have the second-highest number of allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. We urge all troop- and police-contributing countries to enforce the Organization's zero-tolerance policy and swiftly and credibly address criminal allegations. We urge MONUSCO and the United Nations to take prevention seriously, including by repatriating contingents that display a pattern of abusive behaviour. Finally, as requested in the mandate adopted in December, we look forward to receiving - later this month - a joint exit strategy with measurable benchmarks for progressively transferring MONUSCO's tasks to the Congolese authorities, the United Nations country team and other stakeholders, with the goal of achieving a responsible exit of MONUSCO in the coming years.
