Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
would like to thank the Secretary-General for the sixth
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
which includes important recommendations for
strengthening the framework of protection that the
Security Council could offer, as well as the United
Nations system as a whole, to its activity on the
ground.

We are concerned to see that, even though the
number of conflicts has declined, the situations of
armed violence are still a threat to the stability of some
regions of the world and that civilians are still the
target of indiscriminate attacks, in direct contravention
of the obligations of States under international law. It is
crucial to look for new tools and to follow up on the
implementation of existing commitments in order to
allow the Organization to find effective responses to
comply fully with the task of safeguarding the human
rights of individuals, as well as full respect for
international humanitarian law.

The resurgence of the asymmetrical nature of
modern conflicts imposes additional challenges on the
protection of civilians in conflict. In this respect - and
we would like to stress this - the growing
participation of private security companies in these
conflicts should not allow for exceptions to the rule
that all parties to the conflict, regardless of their
nature, have the duty to submit to the rules of conduct
of hostilities and to respect the principles of distinction
between military and civilian targets.

The adoption of a progressive approach in the
conception of mandates for peacekeeping personnel is
proof of the urgent need to protect civilians and proof
of the capacity, adaptability and response of the
Organization, such as shown in the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 1674 (2006) and 1738
(2006) in regard to the mandates for the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad.

We hope that the study that is being carried out
jointly by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs with a view to reviewing the
incorporation in mandates of references to the
protection of the civilian population in armed conflicts
and the repercussions on the ground, could provide
valid lessons for future mandates and deployments.

We concur with the Secretary-General that, like
women and children, the elderly and persons with
disabilities are the most vulnerable sectors of the
population, most vulnerable to violence and extreme
deprivation in times of conflict. In this respect, Mexico
supports the call made by the Secretary-General for
States that have not yet signed or ratified the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
to do so in order that it could enter into force as soon
as possible. This measure would be a decisive step that
would help to guarantee the security and the protection
of persons with disabilities in conflict situations.

Mexico is convinced of the idea that, once all
means for a peaceful settlement have been exhausted
under the authority of the Security Council, the
international community should be able to take the
measures necessary to protect the civilian population
from serious violations of obligations that stem from
international law and international human rights law, in
accordance with the section related to the
responsibility to protect, coined in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document.

The denial of access of humanitarian personnel to
victims of conflict is a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law. For this reason,
Member States must pay greater attention to this
question in order to help such personnel deliver safely
and in a timely fashion the assistance that is required
by these affected populations. For Mexico, any
transgression of this principle entails, owing to the
very emergency and personal nature of the assistance
in question, an attack on the very core of the protection
of the individual recognized in human rights
instruments, international humanitarian law and
refugee law, and constitutes a violation of international
law when the means to prevent such access are harmful
actions, such as deliberate attacks on humanitarian
personnel.

We await with interest the analysis of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs on the causes and consequences of actions to
restrict access, a study that will make it possible to take
better decisions and to adopt measures in this area.
Likewise, we are convinced that sexual violence
against women and children is one of the greatest
challenges that the international community must face.
Although we have seen significant progress in this
area, as seen in the categorization of this crime as a
war crime or a crime against humanity, there is so
much that needs to be done to guarantee that these
crimes will not go unpunished, both nationally and
within the framework of this Organization. The fight
against impunity is a sine qua non prerequisite to
protect civilians in armed conflicts and to smooth the
way for lasting peace.

In this respect, Mexico acknowledges the added
value that is provided by cooperation to achieve these
ends, especially cooperation with the International
Criminal Court, so that it can comply with its mandate
of granting justice to victims of crimes under its
competence. We join the appeal made by the Secretary-
General for the Security Council to adopt the necessary
measures to promote and facilitate cooperation with the
Court. We believe it is necessary for such a framework
of interagency cooperation to be complemented by a
full implementation of the Rome Statute and article 17,
paragraph 3, of the 2004 Relationship Agreement
between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court when, having referred a case in the
exercise of article 13 (b) of the Statute, the State has
not cooperated with the Court.

Mexico acknowledges that the fight against
impunity is extremely important; peacebuilding
missions should place priority on efforts to rebuild
institutions for the administration of justice, the rule of
law and the prison system in order to guarantee the
rights and fundamental freedoms of civilian victims of
human rights violations during conflicts. In that
respect, Mexico welcomes the fact that the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations has established an Office
of Rule of Law and Security Institutions. Closer
coordination and cooperation between that Office and
the Peacebuilding Commission is crucial, in our
opinion.

Furthermore, Mexico welcomes the initiative of
the Secretary-General to convene, under the so-called
Arias formula, a meeting with the various relevant
actors in order to consider the topic of the right to
housing, land and property in countries in conflict. A
meeting of that nature would make it possible to
heighten the importance for Member States of
considering the views of civil society in a question of
extreme importance when it comes to protecting the
rights of the civilian population.

Cluster munitions are weapons that, through their
use, have been considered by a large part of the
international community as extremely harmful and as

having indiscriminate effects. Their use has led to
serious humanitarian consequences among civilian
populations and has resulted in a high number of
victims over recent years. It is estimated that more than
30 States have been affected by the use of that type of
weapon; their consequences extend over time and are
an obstacle to sustainable development. We support the
negotiation and conclusion of a legally binding
instrument on cluster munitions, whether within the
framework of the Convention on Conventional
Weapons or the Oslo process. As we have pointed out,
either process should consider the following aspects:
victim assistance; clearance of affected areas; the
destruction of stockpiles; international cooperation and
assistance; and measures for national implementation,
compliance, transparency and monitoring.

