Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We congratulate Pakistan on its initiative in holding
this Security Council open debate on peacekeeping
operations.

Cuba supports the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the States members
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Since the 1990s, multidimensional peacekeeping
operations have been the rule rather than the exception.
With the aim ofrestoring peace and stability, particularly
in regions with internal conflicts, the nature of the
mandates of such operations has evolved, as has the
complexity of their implementation mechanisms, thus
increasing the challenges the United Nations must
face. Peacekeeping operations have also become the
activities consuming the most resources within the
Organization. The current budget for peacekeeping
operations has reached a record $8 billion.

Extending the mandates of existing operations
and establishing new ones should be done in strict
conformity with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, particularly respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States and non-interference in their
internal affairs. Similarly, the basic principles adopted
by the General Assembly regarding such operations,
such as the consent of the parties, impartiality and the
non-use of force except in self-defence, must also be
respected.

For more efficient deployment of peacekeeping
operations, mandates should have concrete goals and
be clearly defined and able to rely on the resources
necessary for their implementation. The Security
Council should ensure that troop-contributing
countries participate fully and effectively in devising,
implementing and renewing mandates, since, for
example, they may be able to provide objective
assessments of the existing realities on the ground.
Those countries should participate as key stakeholders
in the policy- and decision-making processes and the
deployment of operations.

Cuba believes that a phased approach to establishing
mandates would be more effective, and that they
should not be adopted until Member States have made
firm commitments on the contingents to be deployed
and a clear idea of the resources necessary for their
deployment exists. Before an operation is approved and
deployed, it is essential that it have a clear exit strategy.
Peacebuilding activities begun during the early stages
of peacekeeping operations are an important tool for
helping countries emerging from conflict to develop
and strengthen their national sustainable development
strategies. Every peacebuilding strategy should be
based on national experience and planned in a coherent
and integrated manner to enable it to meet the needs of
the country in question, in accordance with the principle
of national ownership and the priorities established by
its authorities.

Establishing new and more complex peacekeeping
operations cannot be a substitute for addressing the root
causes of conflict. Such operations cannot be an end in
themselves, but a temporary measure aimed at creating
a security framework enabling the implementation of a
long-term sustainable economic and social development
strategy. Otherwise, the vicious cycle of new conflicts
and operations with high human and material costs can
never be overcome.

A significant number of peacekeeping
operations 4 eight, to be exact 4 include civilian
protection as part of their mandates. Cuba reiterates
that the primary responsibility for protecting civilians
rests with States. Civilian protection cannot be
used, under any pretext, to promote regime change,
military intervention or any other action contrary to
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
Guidelines and doctrinal documents drafted by the
Secretariat that may have an impact on the way Member
States engage in peacekeeping operations must be
agreed on beforehand through an intergovernmental
negotiation process.
It is important to continue to strengthen interaction
among host countries of peacekeeping operations,
troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat and the
Security Council. The efficiency of peacekeeping
operations and the credibility of the Organization
depend on developing such interaction.

Concerning the Secretariat's proposal to introduce
modern technologies and to use unmanned aerial
systems as an experiment in some operations, Cuba
considers that, given its implications, this issue should
be thoroughly discussed in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. The potential use of such
technology should in no way affect the basic principles
of peacekeeping operations.

