Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate you, Mrs. Soledad Alvear Valenzuela,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile, on your presiding
over the Security Council. Your initiative to hold this
meeting on such a relevant topic as "Post-conflict
national reconciliation: role of the United Nations" is
an expression of the effective way in which your
country is guiding the Council.

Post-conflict national reconciliation is a complex
national process that depends on the socio-political
conditions in each country and on the nature and
intensity of the conflict. However, by studying the
opinions of academics and experts and particularly the
practical experiences with reconciliation processes, one
can identify three fundamental preconditions for
national reconciliation.

The first element is truth. Given the need for truth
as an element of reconciliation, truth commissions have
been established. The merit of those commissions is
not a detailed and definitive narrative of all the violent
events in a civil conflict, because after a certain
amount of time it is very difficult to reconstruct exactly
what happened. Rather, the value of truth commissions
is to bring to light what was hidden and has not been
widely perceived and assimilated in a nation's
everyday political discourse. Michael Ignatieff,
professor of human rights at Harvard University, states
that "all that a truth commission can achieve is to
reduce the number of lies that can be circulated
unchallenged in public discourse" (Index on Censorship, May 1996). This is the value of truth as an
element of reconciliation.

The truth is so important to reconciliation that
truth commissions, which originated in a Latin
America traumatized by the massive violations of
human rights in the 1970s and the 1980s, have now
spread to other regions in the world where there have
been civil strife and massive human rights violations.
To date, more than 20 truth commissions have been
created throughout the world, and various prestigious
universities have created academic programmes to
study them.

In Peru, the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission was created in June 2001 with the task of
shedding light on the process, deeds and
responsibilities in the terrorist violence and the
violations of human rights during the 20 years between
May 1980 and November 2000. The Commission,
recently judged by experts to be one of the most solid
and exemplary such commissions in Latin America,
issued its final report in August 2003 after 24 months
of work and after receiving testimony from 17,000
individuals and the holding of public hearings
throughout the entire country, which were broadcast by
the State television network. The Peruvian Truth and
Reconciliation Commission has created a solid base for
the first element of reconciliation: to know the truth -
or at least bringing to light what was hidden - about
deeds that were not known by Peruvian society.

The second prerequisite for reconciliation is
compensation for the innocent victims and the
rehabilitation of the areas affected by conflicts. While
experience shows that, globally, truth commissions
have been supported by resources from civil society,
the United Nations and States committed to defending
human rights, this is not true in the case of
compensation to innocent victims and the rehabilitation
of the devastated areas, for which there are scarce
national resources and little international assistance.
For that reason, the United Nations should become
involved through special projects of the United Nations
Development Programme and its agencies. In addition,
the contribution of the World Bank and, we would say,
the flexibility of the International Monetary Fund are
needed.

Along with its final report, the Peruvian Truth
and Reconciliation Commission presented a
comprehensive reparations plan. One week ago, the
Peruvian Government began action on its Plan for
Peace and Development for 2004-2006, a mechanism
for collective reparations for the areas most affected by
political violence by means of projects to improve
infrastructure, increase production and productivity and
strengthen the presence of the State and the
participation of civil society. Needless to say, this plan,
like those of other developing States, requires the
resources of the United Nations and the international
community for its full implementation.

The third element of reconciliation is justice. If
truth is a prerequisite for reconciliation, then justice is
at once a prerequisite for and a result of that process.
Reconciliation does not mean forgetting or impunity. It
includes the value ofjustice, which means, specifically,
to bring the violators of human rights to justice. In
many cases, that requires thorough judicial reform and,
above all, the dissemination of a culture of human
rights in societies that have suffered violence so that
the crimes and atrocities committed are not repeated.

In the case of Peru, the special commission on the
comprehensive reform of the administration of justice
is working to strengthen and coordinate the actions of
the various entities comprising the justice system in
order to achieve the system's thorough reform,
ensuring its independence as an institution and the
protection of the rights of citizens.

At the international level, the need for justice has
also been a central concern in post-conflict situations.
The result of this was the Security Council's creation
of the international criminal tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda and, especially, the
establishment of the International Criminal Court,
which constitutes the world's greatest advance in the
fight against impunity. In that connection, we welcome
the commitment of Sierra Leone to create a special
court to judge crimes against humanity committed in
that country.

In the opinion of experts and academicians and
based on our empirical experience, reconciliation has
many interpretations. According to the minimalist
interpretation, reconciliation is only a sort of non-lethal
coexistence. For the maximalists, reconciliation is the
return to consensus or to social harmony. In truth,
neither interpretation is viable for true national
reconciliation because, as demonstrated by the
experience of reconciliation processes in various
countries, reconciliation implies going beyond peaceful
coexistence or returning to situations of social harmony
and consensus that never existed or that, on the
contrary, were really the origin of the civil conflict. In
all the countries where conflict has broken out,
reconciliation today signifies the process of building a
new social contract based on democratic institutions
aimed, above all, at eradicating social exclusion, which
is the breeding ground of civil conflicts of national
self-destruction.

The peacekeeping operations authorized and
carried out by the Security Council in the case of civil
wars are only the first step towards initiating the
reconciliation process. In fact, the ceasefires, the
separation of the belligerent parties and their
coexistence and mutual tolerance provide no more than
the foundation for national reconciliation. They create
a non-lethal coexistence, not reconciliation. That does
not constitute a true reconciliation process, which is
why we must move beyond peacekeeping and non-
lethal coexistence and enter the nation-building
process.

In the final analysis, the process of reconciliation
is an exercise in democratic nation-building that
surpasses the mandate of peacekeeping operations and
the recommendations of truth commissions throughout
the world. Reconciliation is a long and complex
process of restoring the political and social fabric of a
State and essentially requires the creation of authentic
democratic institutions and the eradication of the
scourge of social exclusion. Without democratic
tolerance and in the presence of permanent social
exclusion, there can be no reconciliation. Poor societies
will continue being affected by the germ of conflict.

In conclusion, the search for truth in the
reconciliation processes that are taking place in various
parts of the world have had the international support of
the United Nations and civil society through national
truth commissions.

Justice, the nexus of reconciliation, was also
significantly advanced with the establishment of the
International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda and in particular of the
International Criminal Court. However, I wish to stress
here that this has not been the case with regard to
compensation for innocent victims and areas devastated
by civil conflict. We therefore believe that the role of
the United Nations and international financial
institutions, in addressing post-conflict reconciliation
in the future, should centre on aiding in the processes
of compensation and support for civil society.

In conclusion, I have the following suggestions.
First, future meetings of the Council on post-conflict
reconciliation should address specific situations, in
particular those of States that, as a result of civil
conflict, are presently the focus of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Secondly, it would be
beneficial if a report was prepared on all that has been
said here today for the consideration of all States,
United Nations agencies and, especially, the
international financial institutions. The international
community, its actors and institutions must initiate
some serious thinking in order to give substance to the
very concept of reconciliation and to learn from the
experience of reconciliation processes currently being
carried out throughout the world.

