First of all, I would like to congratulate the Russian Federation on its accession to the presidency of the Security Council for the month of October 2020 and to thank its delegation to the United Nations for taking the initiative to organize today's meeting concerning the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations, for his determination and commitment to the cause of my country. I would like to associate these thanks with all the members of the Security Council for the attention they continue to pay to the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. My delegation took note of the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) (S/2020/919) and thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MONUSCO, for briefing us on it. I also thank Ambassador Abarry, Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for his briefing. Allow me to add the voice of my delegation to this discussion on the concerns raised by the report of the Secretary-General and to make a few comments, mainly on the security, humanitarian, human rights and economic situation in my country. The security situation, which has remained generally calm, has nevertheless been marked by attacks carried out by remaining and still active armed groups and other militias in the east of our national territory. In flagrant violation of human rights, these armed groups continue to attack MONUSCO peacekeepers, the civilian population and the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) in well-identified localities in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. They commit kidnappings, massacres and killings - often in reprisal against civilians. As we have repeatedly reminded the Council, the conflicts imposed by the armed groups in this part of my country have caused significant loss of human life, massive destruction of property and infrastructure and numerous violations of human rights. Worryingly, some of these groups, which showed signs of losing steam after the recent offensive launched by the FARDC, are unfortunately resuming recruiting young people into their ranks. This represents a real danger for the future - one that we must quickly stop; youth must be used for building the future of the country, not for its destruction. In this regard, the FARDC is determined to continue its offensives, with the support of its partners, including MONUSCO, until the complete eradication of these negative forces. Furthermore, and as described in paragraph 11 of the report before us today, looting and control over natural resources increasingly seems to be the main motivation behind these conflicts and the proliferation of armed groups in the east of my country. Indeed, as stated by His Excellency Mr. Felix Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo, President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, these armed groups, which are engaging in unconventional and asymmetrical warfare, have the means that allow them to continue their activities, and these means often come from the illicit exploitation of natural resources flowing outside the Democratic Republic of the Congo through well-established networks and with the help of certain accomplices. In this context, my delegation would like to reiterate the appeal launched by the President of the Republic to the international community through the General Assembly for appropriate, targeted and effective sanctions against these armed groups, networks and other accomplices, which, through their harmful activities, are destroying all our efforts aimed at conservation and the sustainable management of biodiversity and the protected areas located in the east of our country. It is true that it will be very difficult to the Democratic Republic of the Congo to completely neutralize these armed groups without eradicating their sources of supply and support, namely, these networks and other accomplices. My country's Government welcomes the support of MONUSCO, in particular the logistical facilities provided to the FARDC and the Congolese national police in their effort to restore order and security. My Government also welcomes the ongoing collaboration between its experts and those of MONUSCO in their discussions within the framework of the dialogue on, and strategic review of, the transformation of the United Nations presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, as also underlined by the Head of State, prior to agreement on the final contours of the future of MONUSCO on the national territory, the Democratic Republic of the Congo wishes to see the strengthening of collaboration within MONUSCO units and with the FARDC on the ground during the period when MONUSCO is preparing its departure, so that the firepower expected to protect the population and restore peace, security and the full authority of the State over the entire national territory, including in localities where the presence of armed groups is still visible, is effective. In the meantime, the Government is also continuing to explore, with the help of certain partners, the options for non-military solutions for dealing with both national and foreign armed groups in order to bring peace definitively to the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. Respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms is a constant concern for the Government, which guarantees respect for freedoms linked to the democratic space and which strives to strengthen its action in the fight against impunity, unethical acts and human rights abuses, including the fight against sexual violence and in favour of access to justice for victims, the improvement of prison conditions, the professional supervision of public demonstrations and the resolution of intercommunal violence, in particular through the creation and implementation of transitional justice mechanisms. It is with this objective in mind that the country's Agency for the Prevention and the Fight against Trafficking in Persons, the National Committee for the Prevention of Torture and the Agency for the Prevention and Fight against Corruption were created, with a view to strengthening policies to prevent corruption among those in charge of the executive and the private sectors and to put an end to certain bad practices in the management of public affairs. With respect to the rights of women - and of young girls in particular - the Government has been tirelessly stepping up efforts aimed at promoting and protecting them, in particular by combating all forms of sexual and gender-based violence through the promulgation of several legal and administrative instruments. In addition, the Democratic Republic of the Congo would be happy to see the United Nations and the contributing countries concerned follow up on investigating the allegations of sexual abuse of Congolese girls and women committed by MONUSCO peacekeepers, in accordance with the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on this matter. In the context of the fight against violations of human rights and international humanitarian law committed against children in territories affected by conflicts, a road map has been drawn up with a view to putting an end to recruitment and the use of children in armed groups and ensuring their protection against sexual violence. With this road map, which has been signed by a dozen commanders of armed groups, more than 553 children have been freed from the hands of the warlords. The humanitarian situation remains dire in the east of the country, as does the security situation following the multidimensional crisis triggered by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic as well as by the numerous displacements of populations fleeing atrocities in conflict zones. Moreover, as was stated in the Security Council meeting held on 17 September 2020 on this subject (S/2020/930), and specifically in connection with the follow-up to resolution 2417 (2018), after decades of armed conflict, the escalation of violence is again driving worrisome levels of food insecurity and hunger in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. For its part, and in order to meet the varied and complex challenges that have been brought about by the pandemic in the health, economic and security sectors, the Government has set up a multisectoral committee and a technical secretariat that have developed a structured response plan against COVID-19 and an emergency multisectoral programme to mitigate the impacts of the pandemic, which was launched by the President of the Republic on 18 June 2020. It is through these efforts that my country has been able to reduce the case fatality rate of the pandemic from 10 per cent in the early days of the outbreak to less than 2.5 per cent today. As stated by the Secretary-General in paragraph 8 of his report, the economic situation has been further weakened by the collateral effects of the coronavirus pandemic. Indeed, the current context marked by COVID-19 represents a real challenge that slows the pace of achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. Also, as I just mentioned, the Government has developed an emergency multisectoral programme to mitigate the impacts of COVID-19 in order to cushion the shock associated with the health crisis on the socioeconomic environment and to support the revival of economic activity. In addition, in order to stabilize the situation, the Government signed a stability pact with la Banque Centrale du Congo, which has already started to bear fruit. With regard to the 1533 Committee, the Government took note of the appointment in July of the new team from the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and intends to work in close collaboration with the 1533 Committee and the new team for the fulfilment of their mandates, with a view to seeing an improvement in the situation in the country. I would like to reaffirm the determination of the President of the Republic and the entire Government of my country to put an end to the vicious circle of armed conflict and insecurity in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and to bring about a return to normal life in that part of the national territory and the region after more than two decades of conflicts. To that end, they would like to count on the support of all partners without distinction, including the United Nations and the Security Council, in the achievement of this objective. Finally, I could not take the floor today without saluting the memory of all those who have lost their lives for this cause, in particular the MONUSCO peacekeepers.
