Mrs. Holguin (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, my delegation would like to start by
congratulating you on your presiding over the Security
Council for the month of March and for convening this
open debate on an issue so important for the
international community. We would also like to thank
you for introducing a resolution on this subject. We
believe that this is a very positive and timely debate,
taking place a few months before the conference to
review progress made in the implementation of the

Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. My delegation hopes to see
progress this year.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Guyana on behalf of the
Rio Group.

One of the worst tragedies affecting humankind
today stems from the illicit use of and trade in small
arms and light weapons. It is a fact that conflicts are
fuelled, sustained and worsened by the difficulties
entailed in effectively combating the illicit trade in
those arms. The prospects for negotiating a way out of
those conflicts appear to diminish in the face of the
ever-growing flows of those weapons of war, which
spread death and destruction wherever they are used.

I should now like to refer to the report of the
Secretary-General, for the introduction of which I
would like to thank Ms. Hoppe.

Following the pattern established by previous
reports on the matter, the 12 recommendations
contained in the report can be divided into those that
can be directly implemented by Security Council -
such as those pertaining to peacebuilding and conflict
prevention - and those to be implemented by Member
States, which the Council can encourage to act.

Last November, the Member States adopted in the
General Assembly the International Instrument to
Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light
Weapons, which is referred to in recommendation 1.
My country expressed its disappointment with regard
to the non-binding nature of the Instrument and the
failure to include munitions in its text. Although, in the
spirit of compromise, Colombia joined the consensus
in the working group, it is worth recalling our belief in
the need for a future legally binding instrument on the
tracing and marking of illicit small arms and light
weapons that includes minimum standards, such as
those already in place in the Americas as a result of the
Inter-American Convention against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials,
to which my country is a party.

My delegation is greatly concerned about the lack
of significant progress with regard to legislation on the
regulation of the import, export and trafficking in illicit
small arms and light weapons. We are equally
concerned about the lack of progress in the area of end-
user certificates, which is referred to in
recommendation 9. That was evident during the second
Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
which took place in July 2005. Only 100 countries,
Colombia among them, submitted national reports at
that gathering. To date, only a limited number of the
countries that submitted national reports have
legislation in place to regulate imports and exports; an
even smaller number is abiding by the provisions
pertaining to end-user certificates. More worrying still
is the situation as regards brokering, given that fewer
than 20 countries had, by the holding of the Meeting,
put in place regulations on brokering, which is part of
the chain of illicit trafficking.

With regard to recommendation 3, my delegation
believes that it is urgent to establish effective national
systems on end-user certificates. We also think it is
crucial to strengthen the existing mechanism for
information exchange and verification known as the
United Nations Coordinating Action on Small Arms.
Only through frequent and timely exchanges of
information among members can regional strategies be
agreed to combat the problem and the groundwork be
laid for the adoption of future additional measures,
such as post-loading verification of exports and
double-checks on the authenticity of end-user
certificates.

We also believe it important to exchange
information and to develop clear policies on agreeing
minimum standards on the civilian possession of
weapons. It is also important to pursue efforts to reach
an international agreement on the transfer of arms.

With regard to issues pertaining to small arms,
my delegation is concerned that there has not been

more interaction between the General Assembly and
the Council in developing long-term strategies in the
context of conflict prevention and peacebuilding, to
which recommendation 4 refers; nor has there been
significant progress with regard to existing links
between the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, and no progress at all regarding links to the
illegal trade in narcotics, to which recommendation 6
refers. As regards Colombia, the latter is of crucial
importance.

Small arms and light weapons, which every year
cause millions of deaths around the world, are true
weapons of mass destruction. It is therefore truly
paradoxical that most conflicts in which small arms
and light weapons are used take place in the
developing world, and that most of those weapons are
produced in the developed world. That is a terrible
paradox that merits the application of a principle that
has already been accepted in the fight against the illicit
trade in narcotics, namely, that of shared responsibility.
My delegation has made that proposal on previous
occasions. As the Security Council has previously
acknowledged, arms-exporting countries have an
obligation to act with the highest degree of
responsibility in such transactions, and it is the duty of
every country to prevent the diversion and illegal re-
exportation of small arms and light weapons to illicit
channels.

