Mr. Chicoti (Angola): As I take the floor, allow me,
in the first place, to thank the United States Government for
dedicating this meeting of the Council to Angola.

Your initiatives, Mr. President, are not only highly
valuable to Angola, but also to Africa in general, where the
struggle for life, democracy and development has become
a major challenge for the international community.

Only a few days ago, the United States contributed
$200 million to the fight against AIDS in Africa, which -
apart from armed conflicts, poverty and
underdevelopment - is another devastating factor against
the African population. This important gesture of your
Government, Mr. President, shows that the world can do
more to respond to some of its major problems, provided
that there is more solidarity and understanding.

As we enter the new millennium, Africa has to be at
the centre of the world's attention. Otherwise we are
condemned to disappear or to fail before so many
challenges if we do not act quickly. The world should not
forget that in the last millennium sub-Saharan Africa was
not only totally conquered militarily, but that it was also
humiliated through the long and devastating slave trade,
which affected more than 100 million people, followed by
the difficult experience of colonization. We were divided
into pieces of land belonging to our colonial masters
without our own cultures and history being taken into
account.
The African continent faced one of the worst
expressions of racism in the apartheid regime and its
consequences. Although Africa finally became independent,
it was generally too late and under very difficult
circumstances that have ongoing repercussions on our social
and political structures today. The burden is a big one, but
I think that the world community has a chance to make the
world a better place to live in for all. It is now important to
leave behind the negative heritage of the past millennium.

Angola is one of those difficult examples in Africa.
We have had the longest experience of slave trade, from
approximately 1500 to approximately 1950. The colonial
domination of Angola lasted approximately 400 years.
Another particularity of Angola is that, while
independence was granted to other African countries
through peaceful means, we had to wage a long war of
liberation, which became the continuation of the cold war
immediately after independence, in 1975.

Angola then continued to suffer aggression for
another 16 years, not only by the apartheid regime but
also by those, including Mr. Savimbi, who felt that our
political choice was wrong. About 1 million Angolans
died between 1975 and 1991, while more than 50,000
were left mutilated. Most of the Angolan economic
infrastructure was destroyed through unprovoked attacks
by the apartheid regime in a clear attempt to disrupt the
Angolan economy and create social destitution among the
Angolan people.

There was in fact strong support from the
international community, which led this organ - the
Security Council - to adopt resolutions calling on the
apartheid regime to pay more than $10 billion in
reparations to Angola, but this was never done. However,
the end of the cold war and, consequently, of apartheid,
brought hopes that made possible the signing of the
Bicesse Accords between the Angolan Government and
UNITA under the auspices of the United States of
America, Russia, Portugal and the United Nations. The
dynamics of democratic pluralism and political transition
were engaged.

Elections were held and declared free and fair for
all. Twelve political parties participated and gained seats
in Parliament. Only Mr. Savimbi found reasons to go
back to war. The Angolan Government was asked by the
international community to accept new negotiations with
UNITA and to form a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation starting in 1994. Mr. Savimbi was himself
offered the position of Vice-President, but again he chose
the military option, which continues to claim the lives of
many innocent Angolans. This represents a crime against
humanity, because all chances have been offered to Mr.
Savimbi and yet he has ignored them. Can the
international community allow Mr. Savimbi to continue
to kill people for all these years without being indicted
for his crimes? Are we not setting a double standard and
a dangerous precedent?

Mr. Savimbi's military activities against the civilian
population have caused one of the most serious
humanitarian catastrophes in the world. More than 3.7

 

million people are affected within Angola's borders, while
many refugees have crossed into neighbouring countries.
More than 2 million people have died in this 25-year-old
conflict created by Mr. Savimbi's obstinate efforts to
acquire political power by force. The placing of landmines
by UNITA close to human settlements has deprived people
of access to farmland, thus increasing their conditions of
starvation.

The Angolan Government realizes the seriousness of
the problem and has responded to the humanitarian situation
with $56 million and expects to increase its contribution
during this year. May I take the opportunity to thank
members of the donor community that have responded to
the 1999 Appeal of the United Nations. The commitment of
the United Nations, and of the Council in particular, has
been very crucial in trying to bring peace to Angola, as
well as in responding to the humanitarian strife. The
Consolidated Appeal for this year will require $250 million,
and in this regard we are counting on the continued
understanding of the donor community.

As to the political situation, my Government is
concerned at the fact that, despite the existence of several
important resolutions that impose sanctions on Mr. Savimbi
and his followers, many countries and organizations are
determined to continue to break them and to allow
UNITA's acquisition of new and sophisticated weapons.

This is not acceptable to the Angolan Government,
and we therefore urge States Members of the United
Nations to respect the resolutions. The Angolan army has
undertaken military activities to destroy UNITA's military
hardware and extend Government authority throughout the
country. As a result of these operations, Government forces
have extended authority to Andulo, Bailundo, Jamba and
other places during the last half of 1999. Large quantities
of sophisticated weapons were captured.

The Angolan Government recognizes and encourages
the investigative work of the sanctions Committee of the
Security Council, and expects that its report will in the near
future provide important elements that will allow the
Council to take new and important measures to discourage
those countries that, by supporting Mr. Savimbi's war, have
over the years contributed to the strife in Angola and to the
suffering of the Angolan people.

My Government remains committed to a democratic
and reconciled Angola through the Lusaka Protocol and will
continue to cooperate with the United Nations and other
institutions. As I speak before the Council today, the
Angolan Parliament is ratifying the new Agreement
between Angola and the United Nations, which will create
the conditions for a new relationship.

May I, at this point in time, commend the
Secretary-General for his patience and for his personal
commitment to this Agreement. This Agreement
represents the will of the Angolan Government to work to
improve the human rights situation, which has gradually
deteriorated due to the war imposed upon us by Mr.
Savimbi. The Government of Angola believes, however,
that there must be greater participation by civil society in
Angolan national affairs through open political debates
and elections. In this regard, President Jose Eduardo dos
Santos has initiated consultations that will allow the
elaboration of an electoral calendar by the year 2001.

As I conclude my statement, let me express one
wish. The past millennium was disastrous for Africa and
particularly for Angola. Therefore, as we start this
millennium, let us now make the commitment to bring
about peace and development by addressing the true
causes of conflict and strife in Angola, which sometimes
have been ignored. We are a peace-loving nation that asks
for nothing less than understanding and recognition of our
history and values. As a Government, we have fulfilled
our share of responsibilities, and we are ready to work
with the international community to foster new ways of
achieving peace, provided that there is fairness in the
appreciation of the true causes of conflict in Angola.

May I thank all members of the Council, the
Secretary-General and all United Nations and non-
governmental organization workers who over the years
have worked in Angola under difficult conditions, risking
their lives in order to respond to the needs of the Angolan
people. My final thought of appreciation goes to you, Mr.
President, and to the Government of the United States of
America, who have been able to do so much for Africa
and Angola in just a few days of your presidency.

