Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, I want to
convey the condolences of the Angolan delegation to
the Russian Government and to the families of the
victims of yesterday's terrorist bomb attack in Grozny,
Chechnya.

We are grateful for the convening of this meeting
on the situation in Timor-Leste. We welcome and thank
Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for presenting the report on the
activities of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET).

We welcome the participation in this meeting of
the Security Council of Mrs. Ana Pessoa Pinto,
Minister of State and Minister in the Presidency of the
Council of Ministers of Timor-Leste. We also express
our agreement with the statement that the
representative of Brazil will deliver on behalf of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries.

We are gratified by the contents of the report
portraying remarkable achievements by the Timorese
people in building their country in such a short period
of time. It is our belief that those achievements lay
solid grounds for the further involvement and
cooperation of the international community with
Timor-Leste. My delegation reiterates Angola's
commitment to the objectives set by the Timorese
people and by the international community of
establishing a truly self-sufficient State based on the
rule of law, on respect for human rights and on
democratic values.

The Secretary-General's report mentions
important steps recently taken by the Timorese
Government towards the consolidation of the Timorese
State. Taking into account their structural impact, we
deem of great importance the steps taken in preparation
for the first elections and the legislative reforms
associated with it; the adoption of legislation for key
public institutions, such as the Superior Council of
Defence and Security, the Interior Ministry and the
national police; the addressing of serious crimes
committed in 1999; and the continued strengthening of
the institutions of political and public administration.
We are encouraged by the very positive nation-building
developments in Timor-Leste at a moment when the
country has reached a dramatic threshold and when,
with every passing day, the Timorese are assuming
further responsibilities in the conduct of their own
affairs.

The political and institutional progress achieved
by Timor-Leste over the past two years is impressive; it
shows the great wisdom of the Timorese people and of
its leadership. We note with appreciation the increased
stability in the security situation in Timor-Leste. We
fully share the Government's assessment of its limited
ability to cope with internal and external security
challenges. We further share the Secretary-General's
conclusion, highlighted in his report (S/2004/333), that
Timor needs more assistance from the international
community in order to guarantee the consolidation and
long-term sustainability of its administrative institutions,
the rule of law and its territorial sovereignty.

The emerging institutions - principally the
public administration, the justice sector and the
national police - are still fragile. We think that Timor-
Leste will need the continued support of the United
Nations and of the international community at large.
The continued presence of UNMISET gives confidence
to the Timorese people and contributes to the
maintenance of security and stability.

My delegation acknowledges that this is a crucial
moment in the history of Timor, and that the
international community should be prepared to sustain
the efforts it has been deploying in favour of Timor-
Leste for quite some time, and in so doing to ensure the
best possible conditions for the sustainability of the
peace-building process in Timor-Leste.

My delegation supports the recommendations set
out in the report of the Secretary-General on the role,
size and format of UNMISET and on key national
support programmes. It is our belief that the revised
multifunctional mandate of UNMISET, when fully
implemented, will result in better functioning of
national institutions, ensure the development of the
rule of law, promote better security and stability and
ensure a self-sustainable Timor-Leste. My delegation
supports the extension of UNMISET's mandate for a
further one-year consolidation phase and believes that
decisions on the future presence of a United Nations
mission should be taken in due time and in accordance
with circumstances on the ground.

The relations between Timor-Leste and its
neighbours - particularly Indonesia and Australia -
are an important factor in the situation in the country.
We praise the commitment made by those two key
countries to the future of Timor-Leste, the constructive
dialogue they are undertaking on issues of mutual
interest, in particular those concerning the demarcation
and management of the common border. My delegation
encourages bilateral donors to continue to provide
timely and appropriate assistance for the consolidation
of peace and the development of Timor-Leste.

In conclusion, we commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, and UNMISET for the
role they have played, and we reiterate our confidence
that the Timorese will build a stable, prosperous and
democratic society.

