Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Michael Kafando, and Ambassador of Switzerland,
Mr. Jiirg Lauber, in his capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their briefings.

Bolivia values and supports the efforts of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to pursue the
inter-Burundi dialogue in an inclusive environment.
In this regard, we see as significant progress the
recent meeting in Bujumbura among Mr. Kafando
and the Burundian authorities, the Ombudsman,
the Archbishops of Bujumbura and Gitega, and the
accredited diplomatic corps in the country, as well as
the Special Envoy's visit to Dar es Salaam in Tanzania.

Bolivia also encourages all parties to support the
mediation being carried out by former President of
Tanzania Mr. Benjamin Mkapa and by President of
Uganda Mr. Yoweri Museveni, in accordance with
the Arusha Accord, which must continue to be the
cornerstone of this process. In the same way, we call
on the parties to implement the road map proposed by
Mr. Mkapa in order to achieve consensus and generate
the conditions necessary for a peaceful environment
during the upcoming elections to be held in 2020.

With that in mind, we believe that inclusive dialogue
is a prerequisite to solving the crisis. We therefore call
on all parties to engage in dialogue and to take steps
to restore trust and promote national reconciliation.
It is also important that the parties implement the
agreements and especially that they work together in
order to reach a negotiated political settlement. In this
connection, we acknowledge the efforts and work of
the East African Community (EAC), the Special Envoy
of the African Union, the President of the Burundi
configuration in the Peacebuilding Commission and
the United Nations country team.

We encourage them to continue with that work and
to strive to coordinate their efforts in order to achieve
better cooperation. We reiterate that all efforts should
take place in the context of respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Burundi.

We appreciate what was stated in the the
communique of 19 October of this year at the seventh
Summit of Heads of State the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, which mentions the
improvement of the security situation in Burundi and
the support of the Summit for the inter-Burundian
dialogue led by the EAC. In that regard, we note the
efforts of the Burundi Government to re-establish
peace after the 2015 crisis, and we highlight the fact
that the security situation in the country has improved.
We encourage the Government to continue to build a
peaceful environment that contributes to the stability
and development of its country in the context of respect
for human rights.
In addition, we highlight the cooperation of the
Government of Burundi with the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General during his visit. We also underscore
the fact that both parties have designated ad hoc
teams to negotiate and to finalize the cooperation
agreement between the Government of Burundi and the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
in Bujumbura. We also recognize the efforts of the
Government and the Ombudsman in raising awareness
with regard to the refugees. In that regard, we welcome
the voluntary return of 15,000 refugees to Burundi.

We encourage the international community to
continue to step up the funding of the humanitarian
response plan in Burundi. We call on countries that have
imposed sanctions to consider lifting them, since the
sanctions have proven to have negative consequences for
the lives of groups in situations of vulnerability, such as
women and children. Moreover, it should be taken into
account that unilateral sanctions constitute a violation
of international law. The sanctions have a negative
impact on the implementation of the Goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. I reiterate that
they violate the Charter of the United Nations.

In conclusion, we believe that the full and committed
involvement of the international community, and of all
parties, is of the utmost importance given the complexity
of the process. In that regard, it is vital to continue to
consolidate the bases for achieving lasting stability in
Burundi in the context of the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

