Mr. Puri (India): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council.

I would also like at the outset to place on record
our deep appreciation for the excellent work of the
three distinguished Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004), as well as for their briefings
and the sharing of their experiences while carrying out
the work of those Committees.

Terrorism is the most abhorrent and heinous
crime against humanity as a whole. It continues to be a
pervasive and insidious threat not only to global
security, but also to the core values of the United
Nations. It is our firm conviction that no belief,
justification, political cause or argument can be used to
justify acts of terrorism. We condemn terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, irrespective of its
motivations, as criminal and unjustifiable.

There are deep concerns about the potential nexus
between clandestine proliferation and terrorism and the
ever-present danger of such weapons or vulnerable
nuclear materials falling into the hands of non-State
actors. As a victim of terrorism and the worst sufferer
for the last many decades, India fully supports all
efforts for greater and more meaningful international
cooperation to counter and combat the scourge of
terrorism.

We support the anti-terrorism mechanisms
established by the United Nations, including Security
Council resolution 1267 (1999) related to sanctions
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban; resolution 1373
(2001), which led to establishment of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee; and resolution 1540 (2004),
which addressed the issue of non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

We support measures to strengthen the review
process of the listings on the Consolidated List through
the Office of the Ombudsperson, pursuant to resolution
1904 (2009). At the same time, we are concerned that
the process of listing and de-listing in the Consolidated
List continues to be subject to political will and
pressure - a scenario we can ill afford in our united
fight against terrorism.

We fully support the efforts of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to play a
more effective role in countering terrorism. As the
CTED mandate comes up for renewal next month, the
endeavour should be to enhance coherence and synergy
among the various counter-terrorism structures that are
dealing with the issue of terrorism within the United
Nations. We appreciate the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's efforts to organize thematic briefings,
streamline its working methods and give more focus to
substantive and analytic work.
We have also taken note of the recommendations
made in the report of the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
(A/HRC/10/3 and Add.1). It requires careful
examination and further consideration.

We support efforts of the 1540 Committee to
handle assistance requests by countries and to find
means to address the most commonly found gaps in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). However, it is
important that those activities are performed at the
request of Member States while keeping in mind their
varying national capacities, procedures and systems.

We look forward to greater efforts to bring
together interrelated aspects of the operational
mechanisms of the 1267 Committee, the 1540
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee. In
that context, the institutionalization of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) in 2009
was a positive step to strengthen United Nations efforts
to counter terrorism by providing an umbrella under
which different United Nations entities can effectively
work in a coordinated and coherent manner.

India has an abiding interest in expeditiously
concluding the long-pending comprehensive
convention on international terrorism. An early
adoption of the convention is in the interests of all
Member States and would provide impetus to
multilateral and collective action to counter
international terrorism. In his latest report on the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (A/64/818), the
Secretary-General has rightly pointed out, in paragraph
139, that the comprehensiveness of implementing the
Strategy will not be complete without the conclusion of
a comprehensive convention on international terrorism.

It is important to bear in mind that successful
implementation of counter-terrorism measures requires
not only the fullest collective effort of the entire
membership, but also their fullest participation in
processes that affect the collective security of all
nations equally.

We will be privileged to serve on the Security
Council from January 2011 onwards, and we intend to
work very closely with the counter-terrorism
mechanisms. It will be our endeavour to strengthen
ongoing efforts to promote open dialogue and
interactive discussions in order to ensure wider
participation of the membership.
