Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
thanks the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Augustine Mahiga, for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/549) and for
his update on the political developments, as well as the
security and the humanitarian situations, in Somalia.
We also welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, Prime Minister of
Somalia, and Ambassador Boubacar Gaoussou Diarra,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union (AU) Commission for Somalia, and we
thank them for their encouraging statements this
morning.

South Africa welcomes the political progress
made in the implementation of the Kampala Accord
signed on 9 June, and commends the efforts of Special
Representative Mahiga and President Museveni to
facilitate this important agreement. We welcome the
appointment of Mr. Ali as the new Prime Minister of
Somalia, and the approval by Parliament of the Cabinet
appointed by him.

Equally commendable is the outcome of the
consultative meeting held in Mogadishu from 4 to
6 September and the agreement reached by the Somali
stakeholders on the road map to implement the key
transition tasks over the next 12 months. We encourage
all Somali's to take ownership of the road map, which
sets out clear benchmarks, timelines, responsibilities,
resources and compliance structures for the key
priority areas that must be achieved before the end of
the transition. These positive political developments
are critical, as the unity of the political leadership of
Somalia is indispensable to addressing the security and
humanitarian challenges that confront the people of
that country. We echo the call by the AU and regional
leaders for the international community to provide
timely support and resources for the implementation of
the road map.

South Africa commends the recent military
successes achieved by the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the forces of the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and the subsequent
withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from large parts of
Mogadishu, as announced on 6 August. The tide has
turned and every effort must be employed to ensure
that the control of the TFG forces and AMISOM. over
Mogadishu is maintained and expanded.

The control of the TFG in Mogadishu has
stretched the resources of AMISOM. and the TFG
forces. In this regard, the full deployment of AMISOM
to its authorized strength of 12,000 would be critical to
consolidating the military gains achieved thus far. We
commend the Governments of Uganda and Burundi for
their contribution to AMISOM.

South Africa fully supports the request of the
African Union Peace and Security Council in its
communique of 13 September for the United Nations
to reaffirm its commitment to authorizing the
deployment of a United Nations operation to take over
from AMISOM. in Somalia. In the meantime, we
reiterate the call of the Peace and Security Council for
the United Nations to authorize the enhancement of the
support package provided in the areas of self-
sustainment of troops, the reimbursement of
contingency-owned equipment, the provision of
requisite enablers, including helicopters, the
deployment of formed police units, logistical support
for the civilian component, as well as the creation of a
guard force of 850, in addition to the 12,000 authorized
personnel of AMISOM. We cannot allow a security
vacuum to develop in Mogadishu. We must keep the
momentum and strengthen the security capacities of
the TF G forces and AMISOM. to prevent any reversal
of the security gains.

On the humanitarian front, we note with concern
the sad and deadly impact of the drought in the Horn of
Africa region, and in Somalia in particular, where an
estimated 4 million people face starvation and its
impact on the whole region. We call on the
international community to contribute generously to
the appeals funds to enable humanitarian organizations
to respond adequately to the hunger crisis in the Horn
of Africa region. In this regard, we commend the recent
African Union pledging conference convened on
25 August, which raised over $350 million to respond
to the relief effort in that region. South African
continues make its contribution to the response to the
humanitarian crisis confronting Somalia.

With regard to piracy off the coast of Somalia, we
note the reduction in hostages and ships held. Despite
this positive development, the international community
must continue its efforts to holistically address the
challenge posed by the scourge of piracy, including its
underlying causes relating to the collapse of State
authority, the illegal exploitation of marine resources
and the dumping of toxic waste.

In conclusion, South Africa encourages Special
Representative Mahiga to continue to work with the
AU and regional leaders as we collectively seek to
bring peace and stability to Somalia. South Africa
appeals to the international community not to abandon
Somalia in this critical period. Despite its immense
challenges, Somalia today offers the international
community a window of opportunity that should be
exploited to consolidate the political and security gains
recorded in recent times. Failure to do so and to exploit
today's opportunities will merely postpone and
compound these challenges in the future. The time to
act is now.

