Mr. Lucas (Angola): First of all, we would like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, a deeply destabilized
region where conflicts rage and where finding solutions
to the conflicts has been a tragic, failed endeavour.
We welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand, Mr. Murray McCully, and thank him for his
thoughtful insights.

We endorse the statement to be made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

As Security Council members and States Members
of the United Nations meet once again for this statutory
quarterly debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, the overall political
climate in the region has shown some signs of progress,
however weak or elusive. The deal closed in 2015 with
the adoption of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
on the Iranian nuclear programme was undeniably a
landmark in a region where diplomacy has been unable
to score any meaningful success in the last quarter of
a century. The glimpse of hope that we now witness in
the region, with some apparent progress in the search of
political solutions to the conflicts in Syria and Yemen,
is, we hope, more than a residual by-product of the
agreement reached with Iran and the understanding
among great and regional Powers in solving that
extremely complex issue.

Political will and determination were instrumental
to reaching a solution. It is our view that now great
and regional Powers must build on the agreement with
Iran and make it a real game-changer. In particular, the
regional Powers should set aside their rivalries, stop
fuelling conflicts in the region and take into account
the wake-up call of terrorism at their very doorstep.
We furthermore think that it is incumbent upon world
and regional Powers to share responsibility and use
their leverage to solve the outstanding conflicts in the
Middle East, which are a major source of international
friction and human suffering on an unbearable scale
and an affront to any moral standards.

The Middle East has been a breeding ground for
terrorism. In last week's open debate (see S/PV.7670)
on threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts a consensus was reiterated that terrorism
and violent extremism are global threats that transcend
cultures and geographical boundaries. In order to
effectively counter this rising threat, we must base our
actions on the shared values embodied in the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and international human rights law and
humanitarian law. Unfortunately, these basic principles
are violated time and time again, resulting in failure
to build a world order based on the rule of law and the
peaceful coexistence among nations and peoples.

This state of affairs hampers the capacity to
effectively address such drivers of violent extremism
as the lack of proactive and just engagement with
key communities focusing on conflict prevention
and resolving long-standing grievances in conflict
situations. One such long-standing conflict, which is an
unfortunate example of the international community's
shared incapacity to find a just and lasting solution, is
the conflict in Palestine.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has become a
most painful and divisive issue since the prospects
of reaching a solution seem to be further and further
away. The heavy-handed and discriminatory strategies
employed by the Israeli Government have been
revealed to be counterproductive by further alienating
the two communities and fuelling radical and extremist
elements on both sides. We note with concern that the
reconciliation talks held recently between Fatah, Hamas
and other Palestinian factions reached no consensus on
the Palestinian issue. We regret the Palestinian divide,
as it hampers the ability of the Palestinians to engage
constructively in a search for peace, while the rhetoric
of incitement to violence becomes an additional element
detrimental to the prospects for peace.

However, the reality is that Israel is the occupying
Power, and its tactics continuously undermine the
possibility of a two-State solution that meets the
international community consensus as the most realistic
and appropriate way to find a just and long-lasting
solution to the conflict. The unreasonable way that
the Israeli Defence Forces deal with the Palestinians,
including arbitrary arrests and detentions, the targeting
of civilian social infrastructure, collective punishment
action through home demolitions, rendering Palestinian
families homeless and destitute and, most damaging
of all, the continuing settlement expansion, are clear
demonstrations of a systematic unwillingness to
facilitate the return to negotiations and the resolution
of the conflict based on two States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security.

The report recently issued by the Office ofthe United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process underscores that the demolition of Palestinian
homes and livelihood structures more than doubled
in the reporting period, and that the demolitions as of
mid-April already exceed the total of the previous year.
On numerous occasions, Security Council members
have stressed the illegality of settlement activity and
expansion while agreeing that they constitute the single
most damaging factor to a viable Palestinian State.
Despite such judgments, some relevant members of
the Security Council, while expressing condemnation
of such practices, do not use their leverage upon Israel
to stop the settlement expansion, which is in flagrant
violation of international standards of human rights and
international law.

Since we joined the Security Council in 2015,
there have been a number of initiatives, namely, the
revitalization of the Middle East Quartet, proposals
addressing the issue, including consultations with
both sides, the convening of an international support
group, the French initiative to hold an international
conference to restart talks, considering the option of
international protection for the Palestinian people,
and pursuing legal, diplomatic and economic means to
make it too costly for Israel to continue with its illegal
settlement policies. However, none of these proposals
were accepted or followed through upon.

This systematic lack of direct and unified action
by the international community and by the Security
Council deliberately sidelines the issue and has
continually diminished prospects for a solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We call upon the Security
Council to uphold international law, fulfil its duties
to advance a solution for the conflict and assist the
Palestinian people to finally realize the freedom, rights
and justice they have been unjustly denied and achieve
Israeli-Palestinian peace, security and coexistence.

In conclusion, we will continue insisting on the
need for consensus and decisive action on clear and
sustained policies for resolving this protracted conflict.
The current situation in the Middle East and North
Africa makes it imperative that the United Nations, and
the Security Council in particular, demonstrates unity
of purpose and act accordingly. We have the collective
responsibility to deploy all efforts to see that policies
favouring the resumption of negotiations are applied
and that Israelis and Palestinians reach tangible results
in agreeing to a two-State settlement, with Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security.

