Mr. Mamabolo: It is an honour for me to update the
Security Council once again on the situation in Darfur
and the work of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), in particular
the mission's reconfiguration and drawdown process.
Detailed information on those issues is contained in the
Secretary-General's report on UNAMID (8/2018/912)
published on 12 October, which covers the period
ll June to 8 October.

With the adoption of resolution 2429 (2018),
on 13 July, we embarked in earnest on the mission's
reconfiguration and drawdown. In accordance with the
joint special report of the Chairperson of the African
Union (AU) Commission and the Secretary-General
(8/2018/530), we are in the process of relocating the
mission's headquarters from El Fasher to Zalingei,
and the Joint Special Representative to Khartoum.
The mission, together with the United Nations country
team in the Sudan, is in the process of finalizing the
concept of state liaison functions, which will facilitate
collaboration for the duration of the mission's transition
and eventual exit.

The mission is on course to reduce the military
component by 3,265 personnel by December and another
1,420 personnel by 30 June 2019. The police component
will remain at an overall strength of 2,500 personnel.
The military component will continue to maintain its
presence in the redefined areas of responsibility in the
greater Jebel Marra area, while focusing on traditional
peacekeeping functions and maintaining the flexibility
to respond in the rest of Darfur when the situation
demands it. Concomitant with the reduction in the
military component, the abolishment of 1,184 civilian
personnel positions by 30 June 2019 is being finalized.
That total comprises 189 international, 935 national and
60 United Nations Volunteer positions. If approved by
the budgetary board bodies, the proposed abolishment
will be undertaken in three phases, with 385 positions
to be abolished by 31 December, 89 by 31 March 2019
and 710 by the end of June 2019. Commensurate with
troop and staff reductions, five teams are proposed
for closure in October - three in November and two
in December 4 and three sector headquarters - in
Nyala, El Daein and El Geneina - by 30 June 2019.
We continue to monitor the impact on the security and
protection of civilians in areas from which UNAMID
has withdrawn. So far, we have not witnessed any
adverse impact.

As required by the mission's two-pronged approach
to its operations, UNAMID and United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes have engaged the
Government of the Sudan in the finalization of the
transition concept for areas outside the greater Jebel
Marra area. It is based on holistic United Nations
system collaboration through joint analysis, planning
and delivery, with the aim of achieving stabilization
in order to avoid a relapse into conflict. As Council
members may recall, as described in the joint special
report of the Secretary-General and AU Commission
Chairperson, the concept envisages that common
United Nations system state liaison offices will be
established in the capitals of North Darfur, South
Darfur, East Darfur and West Darfur.

Accordingly, UNAMID and the United Nations
country team have agreed on elements of a concept of
State liaison functions that envisages the joint delivery
of programmes to build on the efforts undertaken by
UNAMID over the years. The State liaison functions
concept provides a common understanding between
UNAMID and the United Nations country team on the
way ahead during the two-year transitional period.

Our gathering today will also be considering
realistic and achievable exit benchmarks, in accordance
with the redefined priorities of UNAMID, for the
protection of civilians; monitoring and reporting human
rights and the facilitation of humanitarian assistance;
mediation of intercommunal conflict and other local
conflicts; as well as measures to address root causes
and mediation between the Government of the Sudan
and non-signatory movements.

Council members will have noticed that details
of these well-defined benchmarks and the progress
made towards the achievement of the strategic
priorities of UNAMID are provided in the report of
the Secretary-General on UNAMID of 12 October. It
is noteworthy that the new set of indicators for these
proposed benchmarks reflect the positive changes in
the security situation in Darfur in particular and the
Sudan in general. The indicators are not only realistic
and measurable time-wise, but they are also centred
on the Government of the Sudan, as ultimately the
Government is responsible for the provision of basic
services to its citizenry in Darfur.

I am pleased to report, as indicated in the reports
of the Secretary-General in recent months, that the
current situation in Darfur remains relatively calm
and peaceful, with the exception of pockets in the
Jebel Marra area where armed conflict between
Government and rebel forces continue. In addition, a
low level of intercommunal clashes has been reported.
However, despite all this progress, UNAMID has
recorded an increase in tensions between herders and
farmers - mainly internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and returnees - over land and resources.

The Council may also take note that, for the
first time, the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid
(SLA/AW) also declared a three-month unilateral
ceasefire from 20 September to 18 December to allow
unhindered humanitarian access to areas affected
by landslides in Jebel Marra. However, on 20 and
21 September, the Sudanese Armed Forces reportedly
attacked SLA/AW positions in Saboon el Fag, Gur
Lumbung, Kuilla and Amra, all located in the area
north-east of the Kass team site in South Darfur. Three
SLA/AW members were reportedly killed.

Between 12 and 14 October, infighting broke out
between two factions of SLA/AW in two villages located
some two kilometres east and north-east of the G010
temporary operating base over differences relating to
participation in the signing of a peace agreement with
the Government of the Sudan. The infighting resulted
in eight deaths and the situation in both villages
remains tense. I wish to put on record that during the
recent mudslide disaster in the Tagulei area of Jebel
Marra, UNAMID and the United Nations country team
joined forces to deliver humanitarian aid and received
the cooperation of the Government of the Sudan and of
the SLA/AW elements in the areas under their control.

I must note, however, that despite the improved
security situation there is continuing concern among
IDPs regarding systematic attacks, assaults, farm
destruction, harassment, land occupation issues and
livestock theft. During this period, six intercommunal
clashes over land and livestock theft, resulting in 18
fatalities, were reported. UNAMID continues to focus
on early warning, preventive measures, capacity-
building and efforts to address the root causes of the
conflicts, in collaboration with Government authorities,
the United Nations country team, community leaders
and relevant institutions.

Humanitarian partners continue to provide
assistance to people in need across the five States
of Darfur, despite limited resources. There were
challenges in accessing some areas in Jebel Marra
localities in South and Central Darfur due to ongoing
armed clashes and the rains, which have rendered some
roads impassable, resulting in civilian displacement
and the destruction of homes and assets in West,
South and Central Darfur. Details of the numbers of
vulnerable people who received assistance, those who
were displaced during the reporting period and those
who were verified and registered are contained in the
special report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations (S/2018/530).

Human rights concerns will continue to be an
important benchmark that the Government of the
Sudan, UNAMID, the United Nations country team
and the international community must seriously
address. During the reporting period, there was a
decrease in the number of new cases of human rights
violations and abuses, with UNAMID documenting
134 new cases involving 304 victims, as compared to
169 cases involving 508 victims during the period from
16 February to 10 June. These violations were largely
assaults, killings, criminal activities, abductions and
sexual and gender-based violence, thereby creating a
hostile environment in and around IDP camps. Our focus
should be on building the capacity of the Government
of the Sudan to deal squarely with these challenges
and to discharge its primary responsibility to protect
civilians and IDPs, provide security and address the
lack of confidence in reporting cases to authorities and
the lack of adequate law enforcement authorities, as
well as the inability to provide basic social services.

UNAMID continues to work with the Government
of the Sudan in building capacity for members of the
criminal justice chain to ensure the effective discharge
of their duties. I wish to inform the Council that
preparations are under way to start a constructive
discussion with the Government of the Sudan on the
need to establish a country office of the Office of the
High Commissioner on Human Rights in the Sudan, as
called for by resolution 2429 (2018).

The implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur continues, albeit at a slow pace due
to being undermined by capacity- and resource-related
constraints. A board meeting of the Darfur Internal
Dialogue and Consultation project was held in Khartoum
on 13 August, at which it was decided to extend the
project until 31 December. The meeting noted that
funding and the ongoing UNAMID reconfiguration are
major challenges to the process.

On 23 September, I met with the Commissioners of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur Commissions
in Khartoum and discussed the way forward towards
the full implementation of the Doha Document. The
Commissioners agreed that there was a need to explore
other funding opportunities and ways of bringing
more donors on board. That meeting was a follow-up
to the recommendations of the 13th meeting of the
Implementation Follow-up Commission, held on 11 July
in Doha.

In my capacity as Joint Chief Mediator, I have
continued to engage with the Government of the Sudan
and the non-signatory movements, the SLA-Minni
Minawi and the Gibril Ibrahim faction of the Justice
and Equality Movement in support of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel (AUHIP) to
bridge their differences so that they can agree on and
sign a prenegotiation framework that would facilitate
the signing of a cessation of hostilities agreement and
the resumption of political negotiations based on the
AUHIP road map. Engagements with the non-signatory
movements is continuing. I continue to appeal to the
movements and the Government to engage in earnest
in the finalization of the negotiations. I shall continue,
in collaboration with the AUHIP and the Government
of Qatar, to exert pressure that, I hope, Will lead to the
successful conclusion ofthe road map. We have received
extensive support from the German Government,
the Berghof Foundation and the United States and
British Governments.

I recently briefed the African Union Peace and
Security Council on 19 September and announced that
all efforts to bring the leader of the Sudan Liberation
Army, Abdul Wahid Nour, into the peace process have
failed so far. I urge the Council to consider stern action
against the SLA leader because, by all accounts, he
prefers belligerence and armed struggle to the cessation
ofhostilities and a political process. It is highly unlikely
that he will change that position any time soon. The
Security Council may wish to consider what actions to
take against the SLA leader.

