Mr. Akbaruddin (India): It is a privilege to see
you, Sir, presiding over this important open debate.
As a long-standing and traditional peacekeeper, we
welcome your initiative.

We thank the Secretary-General and the briefers
for their insights.

Peacekeeping today is in the domain of a vaguely
defined no-man's-land. It lies somewhere between
trying to keep the peace in fragile environments and
trying to enforce the maintenance of peace where
there is none to keep. Operational concepts for such
objectives are being put in place. It is also necessary
to have properly equipped and well-trained personnel
to meet the expectations of deployment in challenging
environments in order to fulfil a range of mandates.
Responses to new security environments cannot merely
ratchet up traditional methodologies. They require a
willingness to adapt abilities to meet emerging realities,
as envisaged in the Secretary-General's Action for
Peace initiative.

As a country with a long tradition of peacekeeping,
we offer the following suggestions to enhance
performance and improve capacities.

First, to ensure performance in peacekeeping, the
Secretariat needs to carry out a realistic assessment
of the contingents being selected and deployed in
mission areas. Troop competencies need to be a
critical requirement of selection criteria. On the other
hand, accountability for troop-contributing countries
should entail adherence to training plans, including
predeployment and in-mission training, so that key
mission tasks are not left to be learned on the job.

Secondly, capacity-building and training
benchmarks relating to the prevention of sexual
exploitation and abuse, gender sensitivity, requirements
of conduct and discipline and environmental standards
are key ingredients. It was with that intent that last year
India commenced its funding of the United Nations
Pipeline to Peacekeeping Command Programme, with a
focus on conduct and discipline. Over a period of three
years, the Programme will help develop the capacity of
future commanders and managers to lead by example
and raise awareness of United Nations standards of
conduct among personnel.

Thirdly, we welcome initiatives such as mobile
training teams and the training of trainers, which pool
instructors from Member States. They are an innovative
effort to impart training to new troop-contributing
countries. In that way, United Nations experience can
be shared with minimal financial implications.

Fourthly, as the importance of logistical support
and enablers grows, capacity-building for enablers
requires attention. Specialized units, such as field
hospitals and engineering and signal companies, that
are already deployed in missions can provide training
to core groups within mission areas, thereby enhancing
capacities through in-mission training.

India employs its United Nations peacekeeping
experience to partner with other Member States
in capacity-building initiatives in a very tangible
manner. One such example is our successful recent
co-deployment initiative with Kazakhstan in the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. India's Centre for
United Nations Peacekeeping conducts mission-specific
predeployment training to ensure the highest standard
of performance for the troops being deployed. It also
conducts international courses based on United Nations
guidelines, with the goal of enhancing the capacity
of military observers, contingent officers, staff and
logistics officers and female officers. In order to
enhance effectiveness, peacekeepers are also trained in
French and Arabic. India has recently concluded a field
training exercise on United Nations peacekeeping with
18 African countries. We are planning to do more.

Training is not only a prerequisite to fulfil mandates;
it is a must to ensure safety and security in difficult
environments. Let me conclude by rephrasing the well-
known military adage to suit current peacekeeping
requirements - the more peacekeepers sweat in times
ofpeace, the less they bleed in situations of conflict.

