Ms. King (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's briefing. I would like to thank
Foreign Minister Kozhara for his briefing and welcome
him to the Security Council for the first time in his
capacity as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

As the world's largest regional security organization,
the OSCE has much to offer the Council, particularly its
expertise in arms control, counter-terrorism, conflict
prevention and post-conflict resolution. As members
of the Council are aware, close cooperation between
the Council and regional organizations, including the
OSCE, can be a decisive component of our efforts to
maintain international peace and security. It is clear
that one of Australia's priorities during its term on
the Council is to further encourage such cooperation,
and the OSCE provides a good illustration of what is
possible.

To point to one example, Australia acknowledges
the OSCE'S strong contribution to the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, where it
leads the important third pillar of democratization and
institution-building. Wejoin the OSCE in commending
the leadership in both Belgrade and Pristina for
the recent positive steps they have taken towards
normalizing their relationship.

Australia enjoys a strong partnership with the
OSCE. As an Asia partner country of the OSCE since
2009, we work through the organization to address
security challenges that span borders. Australia
supports OSCE projects designed to enhance local,
national and regional capacities to combat the effects of
human trafficking and help protect vulnerable groups in
Central Asia, which we are pleased to hear is among the
priorities of the OSCE under Ukraine's chairmanship.

In March, Australia was pleased to co-chair
the 2013 OSCE Conference of Asian Partners for
Cooperation, which took place in Australia. Under the
theme "Improving the Security of Women and Girls",
the Conference brought together Government and
civil society to examine the successes and failings of
international efforts in the fight against gender-based
violence and human trafficking, as well as efforts to
increase the economic empowerment of women. That
reinforces the work of the Council on the women and
peace and security agenda and the priority that we
attach to that work.

Australia also endorses the OSCE vision of
comprehensive security that includes the integral role
of human rights and economic and environmental issues
alongside the politico-military dimension. Protecting
and empowering people is essential to shaping long-
term and effective responses to multidimensional
threats to security. It builds capacity, understanding
and resilience among individuals and communities.

Australia congratulates the OSCE on its long-
standing commitment to non-proliferation. We
commend the OSCE leadership in preventing the
spread ofillicit small arms and light weapons among its
members and beyond to regions that face conflict and
instability. That leadership contributed to the adoption
of the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in 2001.

The adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT)
by the General Assembly on 2 April was another
significant development in that area, and we
appreciate the contribution of the OSCE membership
to the achievement of a strong outcome. Effective
implementation of the ATT will now be critical to
preventing the illegal and irresponsible trade in arms
and reducing human suffering. We look to the OSCE
once again to play a leading role in ensuring the
signature of the Treaty by its members on 3 June and its
effective implementation within the OSCE region and
others that need implementation support.

I thank Mr. Kozhara for his observations on
Afghanistan. Along with other members of the
Council and the international community, Australia
is committed to Afghanistan's long-term stability,
security and prosperity, which will in turn benefit
from the constructive engagement and support of its
neighbours. Australia supports efforts to that end,
including regional confidence-building measures
through the Heart of Asia initiative. We welcome
the OSCE's continued constructive contribution to
international efforts to support Afghanistan's security
and stability.

Australia also shares with the OSCE and other
members of the Council an abhorrence of terrorism and
a determination to combat that threat wherever it occurs.
The OSCE's counter-terrorism work is impressive.
Australia welcomes the organization's cooperation
with United Nations agencies, has been pleased to
support a number of OSCE counter-terrorism projects,
and wishes to build on that partnership. We appreciate
the determination and international cooperation that
the OSCE brings to the global stand against terrorist
ideologies and tactics.

In conclusion, close engagement between the
Council and regional organizations is an essential
component of securing international peace and security,
and we encourage the Council to continue to look for
opportunities to work closely with the OSCE in that
endeavour.

