The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.

First of all, I thank Judge Meron, President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY); Mr. Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
ICTY; Judge Joensen, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR); and Mr. Jallow,
Prosecutor of the ICTR, for their briefings. I also wish
to take this opportunity to congratulate Judge Meron
on his appointment as President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, as well as
Prosecutor Jallow on his appointment as Prosecutor of
the Mechanism.

With respect to the work of the two Tribunals, I wish
to make the following points. First, the relevant Security
Council - resolution 1966 (2010) - requires that the
two Tribunals complete their work by the end of 2014.
That timeline must be complied with.

My delegation is delighted to learn that the ICTR
is expected to complete its work by the target date,
and welcomes the substantial progress it has made in
referring cases to Rwanda.

As for the ICTY, its compliance with the timeline
continues to face challenges. We encourage the ICTY,
under President Meron's leadership, to continue to
implement relevant reform measures and to further
accelerate the pace of the trials of its cases. At the same
time, we are pleased to note that the reform measures
have already yielded initial results.

Secondly, international cooperation remains
critically important. We welcome the continuing
respective cooperation extended to the two Tribunals
by Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and other
States of the former Yugoslavia, as well as by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya and other
countries of the Great Lakes region. We call upon those
countries to cooperate with the two Tribunals on the
handover of persons who have been sentenced and on
the relocation of those who have been acquitted. We
hope that the relevant United Nations agencies will
continue to explore flexible and feasible ways to resolve
the difficulties encountered by the two Tribunals relating
to staff retention.

Thirdly, efforts must be made to ensure the
smooth transition by the two Tribunals to the Residual
Mechanism. The Rwanda Branch of the Residual
Mechanism will soon be operational, with the ICTY
Branch to be launched next year. To ensure the timely
and smooth functioning of the Residual Mechanism, the
two Tribunals, the United Nations Office of Legal Affairs
and the Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals have already accomplished a
tremendous amount of work. We hope that those bodies
will continue their efforts aimed at resolving outstanding
issues as soon as possible.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Before giving the floor to representatives of
non-members of the Council, I wish to request all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than four
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.

I now give the floor to the representative of Croatia.

