The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

I should like to join others in thanking Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Farid
Zarif for his comprehensive briefing on the situation in
Kosovo and the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

I also want to thank His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremic', Foreign Minister of the Republic of Serbia,
for his statement. We have also carefully listened to the
statement of Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

The Secretary-General's report on UNMIK
(S/201l/514) has brought out in detail the ground
situation in Kosovo. We are happy to note that UNMIK
is pursuing its mandated priorities to promote security,
stability and respect for human rights in Kosovo and
the region, while continuing to provide transitional
administration to Kosovo, as mandated by resolution
1244 (1999). In furtherance of these objectives, it has
actively engaged with Pristina and Belgrade, the
communities in Kosovo and regional and international
actors.

We also note with satisfaction that the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) have continued to
perform their important roles within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999), and to cooperate and
coordinate with UNMIK. We hope that the resumption
of talks between Belgrade and Pristina, scheduled for
next months in Brussels, will build the necessary trust
and confidence between the two sides.

India has always believed that the Kosovo issue
should be resolved peacefully through consultation and
dialogue between the concerned parties. We agree with
the Secretary-General's view that this dialogue process
has the potential to bridge the differences between the
two sides and resolve a series of longstanding issues
that affect the lives of people on the ground. We urge
both parties to show flexibility, understanding and
creativity in order to achieve tangible results. The
positive engagement of both sides in the formal and
informal dialogue processes could pave the way for
further progress in their relations. In that connection,
we appreciate and support UNMIK's continued role in
facilitating that dialogue process, and urge the parties
to cooperate fully with it.

We also support UNMIK's efforts to facilitate the
work of the Reconstruction Implementation
Commission and the Working Group on Missing
Persons. The continued voluntary return of refugees
recorded by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees is heartening. The number
of voluntary returns has, however, remained very low,
and appropriate solutions must be found to address the
persisting tensions between receiving communities and
returnees, as well as the successful integration of all
the returning communities.

We are concerned about the recurrence of threats
to the premises of the UNMIK office in Mitrovica and
the growing number of incidents affecting international
personnel and assets, including the growing tensions
and recent border incidents in northern Kosovo. We
call on the parties to resolve sensitive issues through
peaceful means on the basis of consultations and
engagement with all communities, avoiding any
unilateral action.
26

We have noted with concern the Secretary-
General's View that the Kosovo authorities remain
fundamentally sceptical about UNMIK's facilitation of
their engagement in international and regional
initiatives. We hope that they will not seek to
undermine UNMIK's role, mandated by the Security
Council, and will instead cooperate fully with UNMIK
and other United Nations and European Union
institutions. In this connection, we deeply regret the
Council's failure to adopt a presidential statement on
recent developments in Kosovo.

While we welcome the efforts made by EULEX
to investigate allegations of inhuman treatment of
people and illicit trafficking in human organs in
Kosovo, we have noted Serbia's continued interest in
the role of the Security Council in this investigation.
We continue to support the proposal for the creation of
a mechanism that enjoys the support and confidence of
all stakeholders.

In conclusion, let me reiterate India's consistent
position that all issues concerning Kosovo should be
resolved peacefully through consultation and dialogue
between the concerned parties, without resort to
destabilizing unilateral action. Only in this way can the
aspirations of all the peoples concerned be met and
lasting peace and stability established in the region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30 pm.
11-48292
