Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, Switzerland thanks you for this debate,
and we thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs for the frank briefing that he
presented to the Security Council this morning. We
welcome the efforts of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to strengthen
international action in the ten priority areas the Under-
Secretary-General described. I take the opportunity
presented by this debate to state Switzerland's position
on some current challenges.

First, concerning the strategy to be pursued in
order to ensure the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts, my country advocates an approach based on
respect for international law. Existing laws must be
respected in all circumstances. They form an adequate
basis for facing most current challenges. It is true that
certain contemporary conflicts have created new
threats to civilians, and that these threats must be
addressed through the development of new policies or
strategies of protection. However, such strategies
should be defined in such a way as not to erode
existing laws. On the contrary, they must contribute to
the strengthening of law by gradually raising the
minimum level of protection required.

Secondly, Switzerland stresses in this context the
importance of fighting impunity, at both the national
and the international levels. As long as impunity
remains endemic, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict remains precarious. Switzerland recalls the
proposals to combat impunity made in the last report of
the United Nations Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians (S/2004/43l). We also invite the Security
Council to stand ready to use the authority it has under
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court to
refer cases to the International Criminal Court.

Thirdly, Switzerland considers sanctions to be an
essential tool for responding to certain threats to
international peace and security. In recent years,
significant progress has been achieved in defining
sanctions that are more effectively targeted, thus
minimizing their negative impact on civilian
populations. However, further efforts are still required.
The United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has developed a methodology for
evaluating the humanitarian impact of sanctions and
recently published a manual on that subject.
Switzerland and Canada jointly contributed to the
development of that methodology. Switzerland invites
the Security Council to make use of that very useful
instrument for evaluating the impact of sanctions and
improving them.
Fourthly, internally displaced persons are a
category of the civilian population that is particularly
exposed to the agonies of war. The protection of such
persons must be a priority for the countries concerned
and for the international community. Switzerland
welcomes the recent efforts of the Emergency Relief
Coordinator to improve the quality of the response by
humanitarian organizations on the ground to the needs
of displaced persons. We also welcome the
appointment of a new Representative of the Secretary-
General on the human rights of internally displaced
persons. We invite the members of the Security
Council to support him in accomplishing his mandate.

Fifthly, one of the current challenges is
persuading non-State armed groups - which are
essential actors in contemporary internal conflicts - to
comply with their obligation to respect humanitarian
law and to shoulder their responsibilities in the
protection of civilian populations. Switzerland recently
held an international workshop aimed at identifying
means to improve the involvement of non-State actors
in the banning of anti-personnel mines. Several
practical methods have been identified. We intend to
maintain our strong commitment to that important area.

Finally, in order to develop a comprehensive
strategy, we should also take into account the role of
the private sector in conflicts. We are of the view that,
although voluntary action and self-regulation have had
positive effects in recent years, clear rules regarding
the responsibility of the private sector should
nevertheless be established. Such rules should be
specific and based on a broad consensus. Thus, we are
of the view that a more active policy, aimed at a more
sensitive approach to conflicts, should be developed by
the Security Council.

