Mr. Arnault: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Council on the implementation of its resolution
2366 (2017), of 10 July 2017, in which it which decided
to establish, at the request of the Government of
Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia-People's Army (FARC-EP), the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, to begin its
activities in two weeks, on 26 September.

But prior to doing so, let me underline what is,
politically speaking, the culmination of the ceasefire,
cessation-of-hostilities and weapons laydown process
that has unfolded since the signing of the Final Peace
Agreement on 24 November of last year, namely,
the formal transformation, after 53 years of armed
conflict, of the former Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia-People's Army into a political party, whose
founding congress took place in Bogota two weeks ago.

The Congress, which elected the party's new
leadership and executive secretariat and adopted its
political platform, took place exactly one year after
the declaration of the bilateral and definitive ceasefire,
on 29 August 2016. This gives us a measure of the
momentous developments that have taken place in the
past 12 months and of the intense political will that was
required from both sides to drive this process forward.

The resolution requested that the current mission
should begin provisional verification activities
anticipated by the Verification Mission, and the Council
will soon receive, together with the Mission's last report,
our initial verification of the FARC's reintegration and
the implementation of security guarantees in the areas
hardest hit by the armed conflict.

The Council also requested that we initiate
preparations now, including on the ground, to ensure
the smoothest possible transition to the Verification
Mission. Allow me therefore to supplement the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/745) on the size,
operational aspects and mandate of the new mission
with a summary of the measures taken since 10 July to
fulfil the Council's request.

These include the establishment at all levels - local,
regional and national - of transitional teams with
civilian personnel and observers, who have begun
verification related to the new Mission's mandate; the
identification of staffing needs for the next Mission and
the advertisement ofpriority positions pending approval
of the Secretary-General's report by the Security
Council, and the decisions of the General Assembly;
and the careful selection of observers from the current
Mission who would be retained for the upcoming
mission so as to ensure adequate representation of
current contributing countries. In doing so, we have
placed special emphasis on retaining women observers
with both military and police background. This will
ensure an unprecedented percentage of women among
the observers of the Verification Mission.

A deployment plan has also been finalized
that ensures an appropriate skill set, geographical
distribution and gender balance at the local, regional
and national levels. Reconnaissance visits have taken
place to all prospective team sites and sub-offices, in
particular with a View to identifying possible areas
of collocation with the United Nations country team.
Potential logistics contractors have been contacted
in connection with the new Mission's transport and
accommodation needs. In addition, a request was
made to United Nations Headquarters for a series of
exemptions and measures to facilitate the smooth
transition between the two Missions.

Finally, in response to the Council's call for
coordination with the United Nations system, we
have already put in place the joint working groups
on reintegration and security guarantees between the
Mission and the United Nations country team to ensure
full consistency between the implementation and the
verification sides of the United Nations in Colombia. In
summary, although the time frame was tight, the sum
total of these efforts carried out under the Council's
authority have put us on track to start the Verification
Mission on time. It will be in a position to fulfil its
mandate on day one.

One pending issue is the settlement of accounts
deriving from the cost-sharing arrangements between
the United Nations and the Government of Colombia
related to the operation of the tripartite Monitoring
and Verification Mechanism. In cooperation with the
Colombian Government, United Nations Headquarters
and the Mission are working hard towards resolving
outstanding issues before the completion of our
Mission's mandate.

As the Council is aware, last week, on 4 September,
the Government of Colombia and the National Liberation
Army reached agreement on a temporary ceasefire
that would start on 1 October and end on 12 January
2018. The ceasefire should be accompanied by a series
of measures aimed at improving the humanitarian
situation of communities in the conflict areas. The
agreement provides that the United Nations would
assist with the verification of the commitments made. I
met with both heads of delegations who have confirmed
their interest in the United Nations involvement and
members of the Mission have already engaged with the
technical commitmentission on the ceasefire. Further
discussions starting this week will hopefully enable
the Secretary-General to make recommendations to the
Council in the very near future.

In the past few days, before millions of Colombians
assembled in several cities, Pope Francis delivered
a very strong message in favour of reconciliation,
forgiveness and confidence in the future to a society
that bears the scars of decades of conflict and struggles
to imagine a Colombia free from ubiquitous, relentless
violence. Thankfully, over the past months the peace
process between the Government and FARC-EP has
slowly but steadily tipped the scales in favour of hope.

We trust that the presence of the United Nations,
the work of the United Nations system and the support
of the Security Council can and should shore up further
the confidence of Colombian society in the stable peace
to which its citizens so ardently aspire.

