Mr. Faki Mahamat (spoke in French): Today's
debate on conflict prevention takes place at a time
when the international order is faced with a series of
diverse and grave threats. Whether related to climate
change, migration, the rise in racism and xenophobia,
transnational crime or terrorism, such threats exacerbate
current situations and could transform latent tension
into open conflicts.

Today's debate addresses an issue that is extremely
sensitive for Africa, as well as for the rest of the
world, because it is true that the challenges in question
transcend borders and continents. Today's debate is
also crucial for the Security Council, whose credibility
and legitimacy can be heightened only if it is able to
effectively address international crises. I commend
Cote d'Ivoire for convening a debate on this issue. The
commitment to silencing the guns by 2020, which is one
of the flagship projects of Agenda 2063 of the African
Union, not only entails settling current conflicts; but
also building peace where it has already been achieved
and preventing new crises, in particular in Africa.

The need for sustained action in the area of conflict
prevention is indeed one of the issues that enjoy the
broadest consensus within the international community.
Very often, however, such consensus exists more in
theory than in practice. There are many challenges to
effective preventive action. In my opinion, two arise
most frequently. The first is linked to the reticence
of States that view any early intervention as a threat
to their sovereignty. The second lies in the culture of
urgency, which ends up tainting international action in
several areas.

An awareness of that situation led to the development
of the Protocol Relating to the Establishment of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, which made
prevention one of the African Union's top priorities.
Since the adoption of the Protocol, the African
Union has significantly strengthened its capacity
to prevent, manage and settle conflicts. There is no
better illustration of that encouraging development
than the progress made on the deployment of African
peacekeeping operations. In recent years, experience
has clearly shown that such operations are useful tools
for curbing violence and preventing its escalation. They
are part of the range of instruments at the disposal of
the African Union in the area of preventive diplomacy.

The issue of funding such operations has been
on the agenda of the Security Council for more than
a decade. We are pleased to note that, throughout
this time, the international community has become
increasingly aware. Everyone acknowledges the fact that
international crisis-response mechanisms are not suited
to today's challenges. The reasons for that situation
are well known and linked to the nature of conflicts,
which are often intra-State rather than inter-State, the
high number of actors involved, extreme violence, the
scourge of terrorism and organized crime. Those are
the many factors that have shaken the very foundations
of peacekeeping operations, including the conditions
of their deployment. The situation on the ground has
become so complex that waiting to fully restore, build
and keep the peace often means being unable to help
people in danger.

That is the context in which the division of labour
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in particular the African Union, has evolved. The
African Union has demonstrated that it can intervene
rapidly in complex environments to curb violence,
facilitate peace and create the conditions for keeping
it. The partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations has evolved to allow for creative
negotiations on current security challenges. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the
transitions in Mali and the Central African Republic
from African missions to United Nations missions,
and the considerable support that the United Nations
provides to our mission in Somalia are illuminating
examples in that regard. We should ask ourselves if
the situation in the countries concerned would have
arisen had the international community opted only for
orthodoxy and conservatism instead of the innovation
required by the circumstances.

It is up to us to go even further. Those extra steps
are not a leap into the unknown. They represent the
extension of what we have already experienced, the
lessons learned from the multifaceted support provided
by the United Nations and the resolutions already
adopted on the issue. The approach of adopting a
resolution on sustainable and predictable funding
for African peace operations, which was solemnly
reiterated by the African Union Peace and Security
Council at its meeting three days ago, is important. I
must underscore that such operations are possible only
with the consent of the Security Council. The Security
Council must be allowed to more effectively assume
its primary responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security by using all the resources offered
by the Charter of the United Nations. Furthermore,
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union must be further cemented by ensuring
a better distribution of the financial burden that comes
with promoting peace.

Over the years, we have taken several initiatives
precisely to shoulder our share of the responsibility in
that area. African leaders have agreed to fund up to
25 per cent ofthe continent's peace and security agenda.
We have revitalized the African Union Peace Fund.
More than $80 million has already been raised and its
Board of Trustees has just been established. We have
taken concrete steps to ensure greater accountability
and respect for human rights in the conduct of our
operations. Admittedly, additional efforts are required,
but the foundations for a Security Council decision
have already been laid.

The renewed determination of Africa to play a
greater role in the promotion of international peace and
security must find support in this Council Chamber.
Now is not the time to hesitate with respect to our
continent, still less so at a later time. The draft resolution
for Africa proposed by the three African members of
the Security Council sets out a framework that in no
way prejudges subsequent decisions by the Council on
a case-by-case basis and does not have any financial
impact at this stage. It preserves the authority of the
Security Council. I would even say that it reinforces
it, because it gives it more effective control over the
conduct of African operations partially supported by
the United Nations. We call for consensus on texts, on
the understanding that this one should not empty them
of their substance. I would like to acknowledge the
outstanding work done by the three African members
in this regard. It was a truly consultative approach that
guided their efforts.

Today we are at a turning point. We must seize
the opportunity to better address the challenges
of peace and security. That is what our continent
expects, as do many other members of the international
community - of that I am sure. In an unpredictable
international environment where threats that are
becoming more serious and complex every day, we
cannot adopt a wait-and-see attitude. Sooner or later we
will pay dearly for such an attitude.

I have come to the Security Council to express
Africa's renewed faith in the United Nations and its
hope in its ability to meet the challenges of the day. I
have come to say that the African Union is determined
to play its rightful role in the collective endeavour to
strengthen our shared Organization and make it more
effective in promoting peace and security. I have come
to acknowledge the need to work with a strong sense of
urgency towards the advent of an international peace
and security architecture that is in line with the threats
of today and tomorrow. May this faith and hope come
out of this debate stronger than before.

