Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): In my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/
Da'esh, Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, I am pleased to report to the
Council on the overall activities ofthe Committee since
the previous briefing, on 11 May (see S/PV.7936). I will
focus my remarks on four main elements: the evolving
threat to international peace and security posed by
ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and affiliates; foreign terrorist
fighters; the Committee's actions; and the Committee's
engagement with Member States.

First, the threat emanating from ISIL (Da'esh),
Al-Qaida and affiliates has further evolved. The
Monitoring Team reported that ISIL core members in
Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic continue to adapt to
the sustained military pressure levied upon it, including
delegating decision-making responsibility downwards
to local commanders and switching to encrypted
communication. ISIL continues to emphasize external
attacks perpetrated by its members and sympathizers as
part ofits response. Those individuals may act alone or in
small groups, using simple methods and equipment that
are difficult to trace. Increasingly, ISIL is transforming
from a territorially grounded organization into a terror
network of cells around the globe.

Despite military pressure and decreasing revenues,
ISIL core members continue to send funds to its
affiliates worldwide, using a combination of money or
value-transfer services and the transport of bulk cash
via money couriers. However, the movement of those
funds are dependent upon transit routes, and many
of those routes are now being cut off. Against that
backdrop, ISIL core members have increasingly urged
its affiliates to become more financially self-sufficient.

While ISIL is being weakened in the physical world,
its presence in the virtual world is entrenched and
increasingly poses a serious threat to international peace
and security. ISIL continues circulating propaganda
on the Internet for the radicalization and recruitment
of fighters and sympathizers through sophisticated
manipulation and brain-washing techniques.

Secondly, the Monitoring Team further reported
that the overall flow of foreign terrorist fighters to
Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic appeared to have
slowed as a result of military pressure and measures
put in place by Member States, ranging from increased
information sharing to improved border control. The
regional analysis that follows is based on the reports
and assessment of the Monitoring Team.

Military and financial pressure on ISIL compels
foreign terrorist fighters to return home or transfer
to third countries and other conflict zones. Returnees
and relocating fighters present a growing challenge
to international security, as they have the potential to
re-energize pre-existing terrorist networks, as well as
spur the growth of new ones, presenting a resurgent
threat in various regions. ISIL is also reportedly
sending money to regions where it currently does not
have a presence, in an apparent attempt to build up its
network. Returnees and relocators who hold multiple
nationalities remain an issue of particular concern. The
Monitoring Team highlighted the constant need for
enhanced information sharing among Member States
in that regard.

In Europe, Member States have significantly
increased the exchange of information on foreign
terrorist fighters through the European Union Agency
for Law Enforcement Cooperation and/or INTERPOL.
However, the continuing efforts of ISIL followers in
Europe to conduct attacks demonstrate the potential
for ISIL to recruit and motivate its followers. Member
States also report that European foreign terrorist
fighters present an income stream for ISIL.

In Central Asia, according to Member States, the
flow ofnew fighters to the conflict zones has been slowed
owing to disruptive operations by law enforcement
agencies and measures to counter radicalization and
recruitment. However, Member States are concerned
that returning foreign terrorist fighters from Central
Asia might bring terror home and to other countries.
Some relocators originating from Central Asia have
already been involved in terrorist attacks in Turkey and
European countries.

South-East Asia continues attracting foreign terrorist
fighters. According to Member State information, in
addition to Malaysians and Indonesians, fighters
from North Africa, the Middle East, the north
Caucasus region of the Russian Federation and even
Central America have died in fighting in the southern
Philippines. Once fighters arrive in one of the countries
of South-East Asia, the porous nature of the maritime
borders in the region allows movement between the
Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia without detection.

In North Africa, Foreign Terrorist Fighters continue
to pose a threat, in particular in Libya and Tunisia. The
Tunisian region of Kasserine and the Libyan-Tunisian
border area continue to be destinations for both
returnees and relocators. In the Arabian peninsula,
Member States are monitoring the return and relocation
of foreign terrorist fighters to Yemen and other places
in the region, and they believe that there is an ongoing
risk of a clandestine infiltration of fighters along the
coast of the Arabian peninsula.

Afghan authorities assess the total number of foreign
terrorist fighters in that country at several thousand.
According to official Afghan sources, ISIL, despite
pressure from the Afghan army and security services,
has recovered quickly and currently numbers around
2,500 fighters and supporters, of which 80 per cent are
foreigners. Reports are coming in on the deployment of
ISIL from the eastern parts of Afghanistan to northern
regions closer to the borders with Central Asia.

On the subject of the Committee's actions to
enhance the full and effective implementation of the
sanctions, the Chair has undertaken visits to selected
countries. In that context, I visited Malaysia and
Singapore from 28 to 31 August and Afghanistan from
28 to 31 October. I also visited Krasnodar in the Russia
Federation to participate in the sixteenth Meeting
of Heads of Special Services, Security Agencies
and Law-Enforcement Organizations, and Tashkent,
Uzbekistan, to attend the fifth meeting of the scientific
and practical conference of the regional anti-terrorist
entity of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. That
meeting was held under the them "Fighting terrorism:
cooperation without borders". Such visits help the
Committee to obtain first-hand accounts regarding
the implementation and effectiveness of our sanctions
measures and to promote enhanced dialogue with and
engagement of national authorities with the Committee.

The Committee strives to ensure that its sanctions
list is as updated and accurate as possible in order to
facilitate the implementation of the sanctions measures.
As of today, there are 256 individuals and 80 entities
on the ISIL, Da'esh and Al-Qaida sanctions list. Since
the beginning of 2017, the Committee approved the
delisting of 12 individuals, the listing of 12 individuals
and 5 entities, and the amendment of 19 entries on
the list, including 17 individuals and 2 entities. In
addition, the recommendation of the Ombudsperson
to remove one individual from the sanctions list is
under consideration by the Committee, and the Office
of the Ombudsperson currently has one case in its
information-gathering phase.

With respect to the Committee's engagement with
Member States, on 17 October I held an open briefing,
as the Chair, on the overall work of the Committee
for all Member States. I plan to continue to hold
such open briefings regularly. I encourage Member
States to share any queries and concerns with the
Committee and the Monitoring Team. I would like to
take this opportunity to call upon Member States to
continue their engagement with the Committee and the
Monitoring Team, as that is essential for maintaining
an updated and dynamic sanctions list and fundamental
for the effective operation of the sanctions regime. I
encourage all Member States to continue to actively
propose individuals and entities for listing under the
ISIL, Da'esh and Al-Qaida sanctions regime, including
foreign terrorist fighters, so as to ensure that the
sanctions list adequately reflects the current threat and
is therefore fit for purpose. Only if the list includes the
relevant individuals and entities can it fulfil its full
potential as an operative instrument in the global fight
against terrorism emanating from ISIL and Al-Qaida.

In that regard, I would like to note that the Committee
is in the process of concluding its current annual review
for 2016, which evaluates whether names on the list,
especially those not reviewed for three years, remain
pertinent. We are addressing cases where sufficient
identifiers do not exist, individuals are deceased or
entities are defunct. I thank the Member States that have
provided information, as it has proven challenging to
obtain responses from all relevant Member States. We
urge all Member States to engage with the Committee
in a timely manner during the next annual review in
order to support that key due-process function.

In addition to the regular reviews, the Monitoring
Team updates entries on the list based on information
provided by Member States. We encourage Member
States to keep the Team informed. I also urge those
Member States that have not done so to submit their
implementation reports mandated under the relevant
resolutions. I would like to reiterate my gratitude
to all Member States for their cooperation with the
Committee, its Monitoring Team and the Office of
the Ombudsperson.

