Mr. Korneliou (Cyprus): At the outset, allow me
to commend you, Mr. President, for having organized
this open debate.

Cyprus subscribes to the statement delivered by the
European Union and would like to add the following in
its national capacity.

The Charter of the United Nations puts the people at
the vanguard of the Organization's purpose and vision.
A peaceful and safe world is the principal yardstick
of our collective failure or success. Civilians are the
primary victims in most of today's armed conflicts.
They are being indiscriminately killed or injured and
often deliberately targeted. The data indicate that more

than 90 per cent of those killed or injured in populated
areas are civilians.

Beyond human loss, the consequences extend to the
separation of families, the destruction of communities
and of cultural heritage, deprivation of education and
health care, displacement and alienation of peoples
from their ancestral lands and the continuous migratory
outpouring in search of shelter and a safe future. It is
extremely alarming that more than 2,500 targeted
attacks have been carried out in the last four years
against patients and health-care workers.

Echoing the need for urgent action, Cyprus
co-sponsored resolution 2286 (2016), by which the
Security Council strongly condemned attacks on
medical personnel in conflict situations today. It
deplored the long-term consequences of such attacks for
the civilian populations and health-care systems of the
countries concerned and demanded an end to impunity
for those responsible and respect for international law
on the part of all warring parties.

The protection of civilians must be at the core of the
Security Council's agenda, not only in connection with
peacekeeping missions explicitly mandated to protect
civilians, but as an integral part of a comprehensive
approach encompassing all aspects related to
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding and the
promotion of international peace and security. Cyprus
endorses the concept of encompassing the whole
spectrum of peacebuilding activities, from contributing
to a return to normal conditions and thus providing
secure environments, to monitoring human rights and
facilitating the implementation of peace agreements.

The protection of civilians in conflict should
not be seen merely as a duty deriving from explicit
peacekeeping mandates but as a mission-wide task
extending to the whole spectrum of peacekeeping
operations in a specific context.

Let me give one example from a peacekeeping
mission. The United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP) - hosted in my country for the
past 53 years - is not explicitly mandated to protect
civilians but is performing important tasks in this field.
According to an agreement reached between Greeks and
Turkish Cypriots in 1975, the Turkish side undertook to
give the enclaved Greek Cypriot population every form
of help to enable them to live a normal life, including
facilities for education and for the practice of their
religion, as well as medical care by their own doctors
and freedom of movement in the north.

In practice, the Cypriot enclaved were subjected
to constant harassment. Their living conditions since
1974 and despite the aforementioned agreement can be
demonstrated by a simple recount of their numbers. In
July 1974, after more than 100,000 Cypriots were forced
to flee their homes, a significant number amounting to
20,000 have remained enclaved in the occupied part. In
43 years, this number has diminished to only 403.

Even though due to the help of UNFICYP the
Turkish side allowed certain minor improvements in
the lives of the enclaved, their living conditions remain
deplorable and unchanged. This conclusion is fully in
accord with the findings of the European Commission
of Human Rights and of the European Court of Human
Rights, which examined the plight of enclaved as
part of the fourth inter-State application of Cyprus
against Turkey.

The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), released
in 2015, observed a growing gap between what is
expected of peace operations and what they deliver,
particularly recognizing this gap in the area of the
protection of civilians. This shortcoming is to a large
extent a result of the gap in many missions between
resources and mandates, yet another pertinent issue
in the light of ongoing discussions on the financing of
peacekeeping operations.

In concluding, let me underline that strengthening
the ability of the United Nations to respond to people
undergoinghardshipremainsourfundamentalchallenge.

