Mr. Mladenov: I thank Mrs. Marsudi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, forjoining us today.

As 2019 begins, we should have no illusions about
the dangerous dynamics in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, which continues to unfold before our eyes.
In the past few months, understandably, our focus has
been on the tragic situation in Gaza. Today I would
like to return to the broader questions of peace and a
sustainable resolution to the Palestinian question.

Over time, the possibility of establishing a viable,
contiguous Palestinian State has been systematically
eroded by facts on the ground. During the reporting
period, Israeli authorities advanced, approved or
tendered over 3,100 housing units planned in Area
C settlements, including plans for approximately
2,500 units that were advanced and tenders for about
650 others. Nearly half of them are to be built deep
in the West Bank, many in isolated settlements in
the Nablus area and near Hebron. One of the plans
effectively legalizes the outpost of Ibei Hanahal as a
neighbourhood of the Ma'ale Amos settlement in the
Hebron governorate.

Meanwhile, we have seen additional attempts to
pass legislation that would directly apply Israeli law to
the territory of the occupied West Bank, raising fears
of future annexation. In December, the Government
endorsed a bill to advance the legalization of 66 illegal
outposts throughout the West Bank within two years.
In the interim period, authorities must provide the
outposts with funding, electricity and other services
and freeze the implementation demolition orders.

While in early January Israeli security forces
evacuated dozens of settlers from mobile homes
illegally installed at the site of the former Amona
outpost, at the same time a Government team has
been tasked with legalizing outposts and housing
units built illegally in settlements, including under
Israeli law. Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-
owned structures also continued across the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Twenty-five structures were
seized or demolished, citing the absence of Israeli-
issued building permits, which are nearly impossible
for Palestinians to obtain. As a result, 32 people were
displaced. With only 13 per cent of East Jerusalem
designated for Palestinian construction and an
estimated 13,000 outstanding demolition orders issued
in Area C communities, demolition and displacement
is a constant threat. I reiterate the United Nations long-
standing position that settlements are illegal under
international law and an obstacle to peace.

On the Palestinian side, there are growing pressures
on the foundations of the future Palestinian State, many
of them imposed by decades of occupation and internal
divisions. Despite the tireless efforts of Egypt and the
United Nations, hopes for a genuine intra-Palestinian
reconciliation are fading by the day as the sides blame
each other for the lack of progress.

As ever, ordinary Palestinians bear the brunt of the
suffering. The gap between Gaza and the West Bank is
widening again. The early January arrests by Hamas
of dozens of Fatah members in Gaza were particularly
alarming and led to the Palestinian Authority's
withdrawal of its personnel from the Rafah crossing
on 7 January. Those developments are a very serious
blow to the reconciliation process. I call on Palestinian
leaders to engage constructively with Egypt and act
decisively to resolve the political impasse by ensuring
the full implementation of the 2017 Cairo agreement.
One thing is certain: Palestinian sovereignty and
statehood will remain an impossibility without genuine
unity. There can be no State in Gaza, and there can be
no State without Gaza.

Meanwhile, economic growth in the West Bank
is insufficient to keep the Palestinian economy afloat
in the face of Gaza's dramatic economic contraction,
the occupation and diminishing external support. The
numbers speak for themselves - the West Bank gross
domestic product (GDP) grew by 1.2 per cent in the
third quarter of last year, while it contracted by 6.5 per
cent in Gaza. As a result, the total GDP of Palestine
contracted by 0.5 per cent in this period.

In other developments affecting Palestinian
democratic foundations, on 12 December 2018,
the Palestinian Constitutional Court declared the
Palestinian Legislative Council dissolved and requested
President Abbas to call for legislative elections within
six months. I am concerned by the continuing vacuum
of a functioning elected Palestinian legislative body
until credible elections can take place.

There has also been a dangerous security dynamic
unfolding in the West Bank over recent months, as a
series of deadly terrorist attacks have taken place and
the risk of destabilization has increased. The period
witnessed an increasing number of Israeli military
operations in Areas A and B of the West Bank. In
Ramallah, for example, and elsewhere, the almost daily
confrontations with Israeli security forces fuel anger
and have raised questions among Palestinians as to
the viability and relevance of the structures created
under the Oslo Accords. Such operations disrupt the
lives of civilians, increase tensions and undermine the
Palestinian public's trust in their own security forces,
as well as the morale of their personnel.

It has been over 25 years since Oslo opened a
pathway to peace. The core of those agreements was
long ago enshrined in a number of United Nations
resolutions and bilateral agreements that remain valid
to this day. They also define the final-status issues that
can only be resolved through negotiations between
the parties with the goal of a two-State outcome. Over
time, however, those agreements have eroded as the
prospect for credible negotiations has dimmed, only to
be replaced by the lack of hope and the growing risk of a
one-State reality ofperpetual occupation, as outlined in
the Quartet report of 2016 (S/2016/595, annex). If both
sides were able to re-commit, with the support of the
international community, to the basic tenets enshrined
in bilateral agreements and to the principle that core
issues can be agreed only through negotiations between
the parties, that should provide hope for the future and
impetus for peace and stability. A quarter of a century
of investment in peace and State-building must not
be allowed to wither under the pressure of violence,
radicalization and suffering.

The agreements and the principles that have been
established over the past 25 years must be respected by
both sides if peace is to have a chance. The Palestinian
economy must be allowed to grow through expanding
opportunities for free trade; fiscal leakages must be
fixed by modernizing existing arrangements; and the
Palestinian Government must be able to expand the
services it provides to its people. Security coordination
should also continue. Those are just some examples
of small steps that can be taken to strengthen the
Palestinian institution-building effort and that must be
supported by the international community, including
through the mechanisms of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee (AHLC). Those steps are not an alternative
to final-status negotiations, which can be based only
on international law. They are not, and cannot be, an
alternative to statehood. Engaging in them, however,
should provide some of the much-needed political and
economic space that people need in order to regain their
faith in a peaceful and just resolution of the conflict.
For the international community, it is also important
to know that both sides remain committed to existing
bilateral agreements and arrangements.

The challenging dynamics I mentioned are
unfolding as violent incidents have continued in
Gaza and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Eight Palestinians were killed during the reporting
period by the Israel security forces, including during
demonstrations, clashes, military operations and other
incidents. No Israelis were killed by Palestinians during
this period.

Protests at the Gaza perimeter fence continued
during the past month, with seven Palestinians killed
by live Israeli fire. The launching of incendiary devices
into Israel also resumed after a lull of several weeks, and
two rockets were launched by militants towards Israel. I

reiterate my call on Israel to use lethal force only as a last
resort and in response to an imminent threat of death or
serious injury. At the same time, Hamas in Gaza must
also stop the indiscriminate launching of rockets and
mortars and ensure that protests remain peaceful.

Meanwhile, the upsurge in settler violence over
the past year continues to be a serious concern. On
Christmas Eve, the convoy of Palestinian Prime
Minister Hamdallah was attacked with stones in the
same location that a Palestinian woman, Aisha Rabi,
was killed by Israeli stone-throwers in October. I urge
the authorities to uphold their obligation to protect
Palestinian civilians in the West Bank and to hold
accountable those responsible for such attacks.

I would like to turn briefly to the ongoing
humanitarian crisis in Gaza. While the current
temporary boost in the electricity supply has led to a
general improvement in living conditions, including a
40 per cent reduction in the need for United Nations-
provided emergency fuel, the situation remains
desperate. Recent funding cuts by donors have forced
the World Food Programme to suspend food assistance
to approximately 27,000 people and reduce rations to
another 166,000 beneficiaries.

At the September AHLC meeting, member States
emphasized the need for increased efforts to revitalize
Gaza's economy, including through cash-for-work
programmes. The implementation of the package of
urgent interventions continues. Donors have committed
approximately $90 million of the $210 million needed
for six months. Electricity supply to households has
increased from three to 10 hours. About 4,200 jobs
have been created and essential medicines have been
delivered by the United Nations. I encourage donors
to continue supporting our work, which is critical to
avoiding another escalation.

Notwithstanding the enormity of the political
challenges, the United Nations is working with the
Palestinian Authority and all the relevant stakeholders to
address some ofGaza's most pressing needs. The United
Nations has also significantly enhanced its capacity to
support project implementation on the ground. It is
currently working with all key stakeholders to advance
the package of socioeconomic and humanitarian
interventions and to monitor ongoing projects. I urge
donors to support all of our efforts. I would also like
to take a moment to reaffirm our support for the
critical work being done by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East in Gaza, the West Bank, including east Jerusalem,
and across the region. I also urge donors to continue
their support for the essential services provided by
the Agency.

Turning to Lebanon, the country has been without
a Government for over eight months. The formation
of a cabinet seemed to be within reach but failed to
materialize over political disagreements in December.
I reiterate our call for all stakeholders to resolve
their differences so that Lebanon can address the
many pressing challenges it faces, including that of a
struggling economy.

In the meantime, the situation in southern Lebanon
and along the Blue Line remained calm but tense. The
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
was able to confirm that at least two of the tunnels
discovered by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) crossed
the Blue Line, and thereby constituted violations of
resolution 1701 (2006). To date, UNIFIL has not been
granted access to the confirmed entry points ofa tunnel
near Kfar Kila, on the Lebanese side. On 13 January,
the IDF also announced that it had discovered a sixth
tunnel near Zarit, south of the Blue Line, in the vicinity
of Ramyah, in Sector West. On 9 January, the IDF
initiated T-wall construction south of the Blue Line
close to the Lebanese reservation area near Misgav Am.
The construction featured prominently in the tripartite
meetings on 10 January and 17 January.

On the occupied Golan, the ceasefire between Israel
and Syria has been maintained, with relative calm and
low levels of military activity in the areas of separation
and limitation on the Bravo side. The United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) attributes
that activity to controlled detonations of explosive
ordnance as part of clearance conducted by Syrian
security forces. The relative calm in the UNDOF area
of operation was interrupted by events that occurred on
25 December and, most recently, on 20 and 21 January.

On 25 December, UNDOF observed a helicopter
on the Alpha side fire four rockets that impacted on
the Bravo side. On that day, UNDOF also heard and
observed surface-to-air missiles, anti-aircraft defence
guns, rockets and heavy machine guns fired on the
Bravo side, but could not observe the points of origin
or impact.

On 20 and 21 January, UNDOF observed and
heard an increase in air activity over, and the firing
of missiles into, the areas of separation and limitation
on the Bravo side. UNDOF liaised with both sides to
de-escalate the situation. The observations of military
activity coincided with open-source reports of Israel's
confirming that it had conducted a series of air strikes
on targets in Syria in response to a missile fired from
Syria and intercepted by Israel.

Such events demonstrate the volatility of the area
and risk jeopardizing the long-standing ceasefire
between the two countries. It is critical that both parties
to the 1974 Disengagement ofForces Agreement respect
it at all times to prevent escalation across the ceasefire
line and actions that undermine progress towards
stability in the area.

Returning to the Palestinian question, I have said
this many times, but let me repeat it once again - those
who believe that the conflict can be managed in
perpetuity are wrong. There is no status quo; there is
only a deterioration that, if left unchecked, without a
vision and the political will for peace, can lead only
to endless conflict and the steady rise of radicalization
on all sides. I am concerned that, within the current
political landscape, those on both sides who seek to
bridge the gap between Israelis and Palestinians are
being undermined. Despite that, civil society continues
to carry out critical work to find common ground and
work towards resolving the conflict. Their efforts are
inspiring and should be applauded and supported by all.

