Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank our former colleague
Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his comprehensive briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on UNMIK (S/2018/981). I also
reiterate our full support to him in carrying out his
mandate. We highly value the vital role that the United
Nations has played over the past years in helping
Kosovo build its institutions and implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
1244 (1999). I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Her Excellency Ms. Vlora
Citaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the United States in
Washington, DC, and thank them for their statements.
I will focus in my statement on political and security
developments in Kosovo.

With regard to political developments, we welcome
and support all the efforts and endeavours of the
Republic of Kosovo to promote its stability, security,
the rule of law, justice, development and the building
of State institutions in the country. We also support its
efforts to conduct dialogue with the European Union
and achieve integration with it, as well as to implement
all signed agreements between Kosovo and Serbia to
reach permanent solutions to pending problems and
establish good-neighbourly relations while attaining
regional security and stability.

We commend the recent steps taken by Kosovo
to achieve rapid and more consistent progress in the
implementation of the European reform agenda. We also
commend its full commitment to meeting its obligations
under this agenda, especially that Kosovo has met all
requirements to become part of the Schengen Zone,
which was announced on 18 July by the Commissioner
for Migration, Home Affairs and Citizenship of the
European Commission.

We urge Pristina and Belgrade to work together to
finalize the establishment of the association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities, as that is extremely
important for building trust and confidence between
both parties. The high-level European Union-facilitated
dialogue in Brussels between Belgrade and Pristina
remains the most appropriate framework for settling all
outstanding issues. It is the principal means for reaching
lasting, just and consensual solutions. We look forward
to the work of both parties over the coming months
with regard to adopting a legally binding agreement
under international law to normalize relations between
Belgrade and Pristina, in particular concerning the
delineation agreement. We call for the inclusion of all
social groups in that process.

With regard to security developments, we are
concerned about renewed tensions between the Serbian
Orthodox Church and the Government of Kosovo caused
by construction in the protected zone neighbouring the
Visoki Decani Monastery. We call on both parties to
commit to the protection of religious heritage, and we
stress the need to address such issues in line with the
legislation and decisions of Kosovo's Implementation
and Monitoring Council.

We note with concern the failure to reach any
findings concerning the death ofKosovo-Serb politician
Oliver Ivanovie, on 16 January, which will prevent
fostering trust among all communities across Kosovo.
We look forward to seeing cooperation between both
parties that will ensure the return of refugees, the
recovery of their property, allocation of land to build
houses, establishing security and providing social and
economic opportunities - the absence of which will
negatively affect sustainable return.

In conclusion, the international community must
continue to make efforts to urge Pristina and Belgrade
to overcome their differences in order to reach
consensual, mutually acceptable, sustainable and just
solutions leading to peace and stability in the region.
UNMIK must continue its constructive work with
Pristina, Belgrade and all parties in Kosovo to promote
security, stability and respect for the human rights.
Kosovo will need to make further efforts to strengthen
the rule oflaw and end corruption and organized crime,
as well as settle bilateral disputes and establish dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, while complying with
the strategy of the European Commission on the
Western Balkans.

