Mr. Vieira de Mello (spoke in French): May I
first of all, a bit belatedly, congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your appointment to New York, and
may I thank you for having been willing to give me this
opportunity under your presidency to report on the
situation in East Timor.

The United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET), the Timorese and the
international community continue to make progress
towards reconstructing East Timor. The summary sheet
that I have distributed to the Council recapitulates
some of the activities that we have been undertaking in
certain key areas. It may be that the principal
achievement thus far is that we are now much more
aware than we were at first of the uniqueness,
magnitude and complexity of UNTAET's mission, and
of the fact that our long-term success will certainly
depend on the extent to which the Timorese themselves
will be able to participate in and take over the
transition process. It seems to me that our main
interlocutors understand better and better that, as far as
they are concerned, the exercise of power does not
mean simply influencing the decision-making or
participating in it; it also means assuming
responsibility for their choices. This is the general
context in which we have recently been discussing the
ways and means of making progress in the transition, a
question that I would like to elaborate on today for the
Council.

Before I enter into the heart of the subject, allow
me a short digression. Many others before me have
emphasized that resolution 1272 (1999) was innovative
in its ambitiousness and in the breadth of the mandate
given to UNTAET. Although this deserves to be
emphasized, words can but weakly describe the
challenges we have been facing every day in East
Timor, and I must note that in many respects we are
very poorly equipped to face those challenges. In fact,
the United Nations has almost everything to learn at
the same time as it is trying to build and manage a
country - a task that we have never had to accomplish
before. The experience that we are gaining in UNTAET
shows that we are going to have to review both our
thinking and our administrative mechanisms if we want
the United Nations to be able to undertake any other
operations of this type and scope in the future.

To review, UNTAET is entrusted with a
governance operation without precedent in the history
of the United Nations; preceding missions have only
shared this responsibility or partially exercised it.
UNTAET is starting from scratch, and quite rightly a
great deal of rapid, appreciable progress is expected of
it. This new type of mandate compels the United
Nations to confront pressures never before faced in the
field. The need for speed comes up against the need for
consultation; the need for sound financial management
comes up against demonstrations opposing increases in
gasoline prices and unemployment; the need to recruit
locals comes up against the reality that there is almost
a complete dearth of qualified candidates; accusations
that the United Nations staff is too comfortable comes
up against the fact that more UNTAET staff have fallen
ill than those of any other United Nations mission. We
are beginning to confront the realities of governance,
but I must admit that it has taken us a good deal of time
to accomplish this.

If I may be frank, let me say that it is yet more
striking how the scope of UNTAET's mandate has
revealed weaknesses in our administrative rules and
procedures that considerably reduce our ability to
respond flexibly to the needs of the Timorese in the
framework of resolution 1272 (1999). Something is
clearly not right if UNTAET can cost $692 million,
whereas the entire budget of East Timor comes to a bit
over $59 million. Can it therefore come as a surprise
that there is so much criticism of United Nations
extravagances, while the Timorese continue to suffer?
The criticism will continue as long as our
administrative rules prevent United Nations engineers
from dealing with public buildings that are not used by
United Nations officials but rather by Timorese
officials. Something is certainly not right in a budget
that does not provide for border and customs services,
nor for operating either the airport, prisons or courts. It
is hard for us to accept that the budget does not allow
for the purchase of a boat or two to fight contraband at
a time when we are being asked to increase income.

Rather than going over grievances, my intention
today is to draw the Council's attention to the real
problems that we need to deal with every day on the
ground. May I also emphasize that we need to be given
the authorization to use the regular budget as flexibly
and pragmatically as possible. The tasks that resolution
1299 (1999) assigns to UNTAET are not impossible,
although they will require a great deal of effort, but we
can carry them out effectively only if our
administration procedures can be adapted so that we
have the necessary resources.

Let us now take up the heart of the subject. In
recent weeks UNTAET has endeavoured to take stock
of the situation and determine the minimum criteria
that we need to fulfil in order to move successfully to
independence. It is not a question of drawing up an
exhaustive list, but rather of pointing out the essential
objectives to be attained before independence. These
are ensuring security during the transition period and
facilitating the establishment of the mechanism that
will be needed to maintain security after independence;
remedying the poverty of refugees in West Timor and
helping them be repatriated in a free and orderly
fashion; establishing a credible judiciary system that
respects basic human rights and that can appropriately
maintain law and order; ensuring sufficient
reconstruction so that the public services can function;
establishing a financially viable administration under
the direction of the Timorese; and ensuring the political
transition to independence, by the adoption of a
Constitution and fully democratic elections.

The first four points, on which I will quickly
provide the Council some information, are
prerequisites for the last two.

As regards security, it is remarkable that so soon
after last year's violence, East Timor is now a country
at peace. The internal security situation is normal.
While security conditions on the whole are improving,
serious incidents are continuing to occur here and
there, including a grenade attack that was launched
against a border post at the end of May, in which an
Australian soldier was wounded. I also regret to have
to inform the Council that on the morning of 21 June
six grenades were launched against quarters where
seven Australian soldiers were being lodged. Light-
weapon fire followed this attack. Fortunately, no one
was wounded. I note that all these incidents occurred
along the border.

Nonetheless, good relations have been established
between our forces and the Indonesian armed forces -
especially following the signing, on 11 April, of a
memorandum of understanding between our Force
Commander and General Syahnakri. In addition, talks
aimed at improving cooperation in the framework of
investigations of border incidents and of putting an end
to infiltration are under way.
Taking into consideration the security situation on
the ground and the capacity of our civilian police to
establish law and order, the reduction of the military
force has already begun, and proposals for further
reductions have already been submitted to the
Secretary-General. Nonetheless, these proposals
concern only the infantry in the eastern sector. At the
same time, we have identified a need for specialists and
logistical experts. A range of proposals in this respect
will be presented to the Council in the July report of
the Secretary-General. In the meantime, we continue to
review the composition of our military component, and
additional proposals in keeping with the conditions on
the ground will be presented on a regular basis.
Furthermore, it should be possible to devote the
savings that would result for the United Nations budget
to concrete projects that would have tangible benefits
for East Timor- for example, providing patrols to
fight against contraband or repairing some of the road
damage that has been done by the intensive circulation
of heavy military vehicles.

As for future defence needs, we are awaiting the
arrival of an assessment team from King's College in
London, which I visited last week. We hope that their
visit will make it possible for us better to determine the
means of arranging for effective security after the
transition. To do this, we need to begin to prepare as of
now. While the Armed Forces for the Liberation of
East Timor are remaining remarkably disciplined, it is
nonetheless undeniable that they are showing signs of
growing agitation and impatience, undoubtedly due to
the fact that they are idle and uncertain about their
future. We are considering provisional measures that
could be taken to improve the situation in the short
term.

On the diplomatic front, remarkable overall
progress has been made to resolve pending questions
with Indonesia. Jakarta has opened a diplomatic
mission in Dili. President Wahid made an extremely
fruitful visit to East Timor on 29 February last. Xanana
Gusmao and I travelled to Indonesia on several
occasions, and on 29 February, also in Dili, I signed a
communique regarding a diverse range of questions
jointly with the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Shihab.

Nonetheless, a great deal does remain to be done,
especially to follow up on the key provisions of this
communique. Towards that end, I travelled to Jakarta at
the end of last month to meet with President Wahid and
Mr. Shihab. In particular, I encouraged them to move
forward in creating a transit corridor between the
Oecusse enclave and the rest of East Timor, and to seek
ways of allowing those Timorese who were part of the
Indonesian civil service to obtain their pensions and of
creating favourable conditions for Timorese students in
Indonesian universities.

It is important to resolve the question of pensions
in order to encourage the return of remaining refugees.
In this respect, we are continuing to encourage
increased contacts between East and West Timor.
Recently the Governor of West Timor went to Dili, and
the Bishop of Baucau this month visited West Timor.

Furthermore, recently we had a visit from a
former high official of the militia so that he could see
for himself the situation in East Timor, and the head of
my Office last week went to West Timor to meet with
the Governor, the military commander and other
Indonesian officials of that province, following the
fruitful visit of the Governor to Dili.

I hope that these ongoing contacts will enable us
to overcome the remaining obstacles and persuade the
refugees and the remaining integrationist leaders in
West Timor that their future lies in East Timor. The
violence faced by officials of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees some days ago in a refugee
camp in Kupang- the capital of West Timor- is
intolerable, and once again we appeal to the Indonesian
authorities to neutralize, once and for all, the extremist
elements that remain in those camps.

Upon my return to Dili, it is my intention to
examine, together with Xanana Gusmao and the
National Consultative Council, the question of refugees
in all of its aspects - political, security and
humanitarian - in order to rethink it and to find the
best ways of speedily resolving this problem. The
international community will have to - and I said this
in Luxembourg on the occasion of the most recent
meeting of the General Affairs Council of the European
Union - the international community will have to help
Indonesia appropriately to resettle the refugees who
wish to stay in Indonesia.

(spoke in English)

The broader humanitarian question is perhaps the
area in which most progress has been made to date.
Having completed the emergency phase of its work,
UNTAET's humanitarian pillar will merge with the
governance pillar by the end of this year.

Moving now to the justice system, court hearings
are beginning even as the courts themselves are being
rebuilt. The recruitment and training of judges,
prosecutors and defenders continues, and the Police
Training College is proceeding with the moulding of an
East Timorese police force. In April, together with
Attorney-General Marzuki Darusman of Indonesia, I
signed a memorandum of understanding on cooperation
on legal, judicial and human rights-related matters.
This is a far-reaching document which will allow both
East Timor and Indonesia to move forward in seeking
legal redress for the crimes of the past. We are
expecting a visit from the Attorney-General's office in
early July in pursuit of this aim. Finally, efforts are
under way to develop a national reconciliation
commission to help heal the wounds of the recent past.

While the law and order situation remains
relatively calm, I am concerned by attacks on minority
communities, namely the Muslims, the ethnic Chinese
and the Protestants. The targeting of these communities
often appears to be less religious or racial than political
or economic, and it focuses on perceptions that these
minorities were unduly close to the Indonesian
authorities. One Chinese woman my colleagues spoke
to has been accused of supporting Indonesian military
intelligence. She told us that many Chinese were
caught in the middle under Indonesian rule and had to
make regular contributions to both sides. This woman's
dilemma was not unique, but rather was a product of
the tumultuous times which East Timor has recently
experienced. It highlights the need for mature thinking
on how to deal with the wounds of the past. UNTAET
is working with local communities, and, in fact, my
Deputy for Governance, Mr. Jean Cady, met with all of
the components of UNTAET yesterday and will be
meeting soon with East Timor political and church
leaders to ensure that the message of tolerance
frequently expressed in public statements becomes
more than a rhetorical refrain.

The area of reconstruction is the most
exasperating one for us all. The process has begun, but
I am as frustrated as the East Timorese are over its
slow pace. More, much more, remains to be done in the
raw task of physical reconstruction. I visited Suai, a
southern district, in the wake of the heavy flooding
which took place there at the end of May. What I saw
was truly depressing. The district is now cut off from
Dili by land and is likely to remain so for at least six
more months. The people, already traumatized by the
violence of last September, of which they bore the
brunt, must now also face the reality that even their
temporary homes and remaining few possessions have
been destroyed, washed away by the floodwaters.

We must accelerate our rate of reconstruction,
and I will continue to depend on the generosity of the
international community in this area while at the same
time seeking to develop East Timorese capacity to
address the problem. Much of the problem, though, has
not been due to a lack of generosity on the part of the
donors but rather to a relatively slow rate of
disbursement into the World Bank Trust Fund and
indeed on our part. I believe that this problem is now
being rectified.

The Lisbon donor conference, held last week,
came as a major fillip to us all, particularly through the
clear vote of confidence we received for the East Timor
consolidated budget. Once again, I thank all those who
attended for recommitting themselves to supporting the
ongoing needs of East Timor. Under this budget,
quarterly performance information will be provided to
the donors. Further, we are moving towards
establishing a committee-based process - with full
East Timorese participation - which will plan,
prioritize and approve development proposals from all
sources.

Let me now turn to the establishment of an East
Timorese administration. In virtually all areas the sheer
lack of qualified human resources is acute. To address
this problem, capacity-building in East Timor has
focused on two areas. First, general training requires a
functioning educational system, which, while still in its
infancy, is rapidly being rebuilt. We hope to resume the
normal school calendar from this coming October.
Furthermore, bilateral funding is being sought for a
human resources development centre which would
offer training in a range of skills. UNTAET has also
placed considerable emphasis on the training of civil
servants. This is a particularly steep challenge as,
hitherto, virtually all management positions in the
administration had been held by Indonesian officials.
The Civil Service Academy has commenced language
training and will soon increase the range of courses on
offer, and the United Nations Development Programme
presented to donors in Lisbon an ambitious
programme, which we fully endorse, to provide
training for management positions in the new
administration.

Finally, it is worth highlighting the considerable
amount of on-the-job training that exists within the
mission. UNTAET staff work side by side with East
Timorese civil servants in all fields, from human
resources management personnel to water workers, and
from health specialists to payroll officers, with East
Timorese representation in the Administration
scheduled to increase dramatically through an active
recruitment drive that will begin in the next couple of
weeks. Training is bearing fruit as independence
approaches.

Let me conclude by referring to the political
transition. An effective political transition has two
components. The first is a constitutional process
culminating in democratic elections. The second is the
development of a culture in which the political
leadership makes transparent decisions for which it is
willing to take responsibility.

The ground rules for both the constitutional
process and the elections are simple: the final say in
both cases will lie with the East Timorese; human
rights must be adequately protected; and the system
adopted must be democratic. Following discussions
with Xanana Gusmao and other East Timorese political
leaders, I feel safe in predicting, as announced at the
Lisbon conference last week, that elections- and,
possibly, independence - will take place next year, at
some point between 30 August and December 2001.
The final decision will no doubt largely depend on how
fast progress is being made in attaining the key
benchmarks to which I have just briefly alluded and
which the Secretary-General requested us to develop
when he visited Dili last February. The elections will,
in all likelihood, be for a constituent assembly. Prior to
that, the political coalition known as the National
Resistance Council of East Timor (CNRT) is likely to
recommend the establishment, following its congress in
August this year, of a broad-based constitutional
commission which will, together with UNTAET,
engage in a wide consultative process with the East
Timorese on the drafting of a Constitution.

Increasingly, we and the East Timorese have
come to the realization that the transition will require
much more than UNTAET's simply assisting in
designing institutions and in recruiting and training
administrators. Capacity-building should not be
restricted to the technical level but, rather, should also
embrace the level of political leadership. In short, it
has been our thinking in recent weeks- and the
subject of widespread discussion- that the East
Timorese should not only staff the Administration and
Government but also take political responsibility for it.

At the end of May, in a former military barracks
outside Dili, a week-long conference was held on the
reconstruction and development of East Timor. At that
gathering, I presented two options as to how UNTAET
could proceed: the technocratic and the political. The
first was basically a continuation of the current
strategy, namely, to steadily "Timorize" the
Administration at all levels so that a fully national civil
service would be in place at the point of independence
when an elected East Timorese Government assumed
power. The political model would continue the
"Timorization" of the civil service but would also share
governmental responsibility with the East Timorese. In
short, I proposed a coalition Government of sorts, in
which several portfolios would be held by East
Timorese political figures who would also, for the first
time ever, enjoy political responsibility for their
decisions. I also pointed out that this would be a mixed
blessing, in that the East Timorese leadership would,
from then on, have to join UNTAET in a kind of
coalition "punching bag" in sharing the blows
delivered by our critics for the decisions we take.

The CNRT leadership accepted this concept - in

fact, it welcomed it enthusiastically - with the
portfolios to be shared equally between UNTAET and
the East Timorese. Consequently, internal

administration, infrastructure, economic affairs and
social affairs would be managed by East Timorese
appointees, taking into account the dominant role of
the CNRT, whereas finance, justice and security and
political, constitutional and electoral affairs would
remain with UNTAET. Furthermore, a new national
legislative council will be constituted to replace the old
quasi-cabinet/legislative hybrid National Consultative
Council. It will be expanded to render it more
representative and will comprise only East Timorese.
There will be 33 members: one from each of the
districts, seven from parties within the CNRT, three
from other political parties, and one each representing
youth and students, local non-governmental
organizations, the Catholic Church, the Protestant
Church, the Muslim community, the professions,
farmers, labour and business.

Nothing in this proposal will alter the
fundamental tenet of resolution 1272 (1999), namely,
that UNTAET is endowed with overall responsibility
for the administration of East Timor. Indeed, this
proposal will further advance one of the priority tasks
set by resolution 1272 (1999): to support capacity-
building for self-government. The structure has been
agreed upon - an organigram has been distributed to
you, Mr. President - and it is our hope to implement it
as from next month, July. This will afford the East
Timorese the opportunity to benefit from a period of
co-government with UNTAET, just as the civil service
is currently benefiting from working side by side with
international personnel. It will render the transition to
independence less sudden and help the concept of
governmental responsibility assert itself in East Timor.

In conclusion, may I invite all Council members
to visit us in East Timor and see for themselves the
unique nature of the task with which the Council has
entrusted us. We would be able to benefit from their
experience and advice, and they would have the
opportunity to appreciate the complexity of our work. I
can assure the Council that such a visit would be
extraordinarily stimulating for us. Members would see
both that which is uplifting and that which is truly
depressing. Above all, however, they would see up
close the enthusiasm of the East Timorese for
determining their own future, and they would see how
the United Nations is helping them to realize that goal:
not perfectly, perhaps - far from it- but in a
committed and pragmatic manner.

