Ms. Al-Khalifa (spoke in Arabic): I am pleased
to address the Security Council once again at an open
debate. I wish to express my sincere appreciation to the
President of the Security Council for the month of June
2007, Mr. Karel De Gucht, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Belgium, for inviting me to participate in today's
substantive debate.

At the outset, I would like to stress that my
participation in today's thematic debate, in my capacity
as President of the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session, confirms the need for greater cooperation and
coordination between the General Assembly as the
chief deliberative, representative, and policymaking
organ of the United Nations, on the one hand, and the
Security Council as the organ with the primary
responsibility for issues related to the maintenance of
international peace and security, on the other.

In that context, I welcome this opportunity to
provide the Council with the perspective of the General
Assembly regarding the issue at hand. I believe that the
various and complex aspects of the relationship
between natural resources and conflict should be
addressed through the collaboration of all organs,
namely, the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council.

I wish to commend the Kingdom of Belgium for
the concept paper it has prepared to serve as a basis for
our discussions in today's debate under the theme
"Maintenance of international peace and security:
natural resources and conflict".

The linkages between natural resources and
growth and development cannot be overstated.
Furthermore, the linkages between natural resources
and the potential conditions for conflict are becoming
ever more apparent and better documented.

One very important aspect in that regard is the
ownership of natural resources and their revenues.
Questions relating to the distribution of revenues
among the various national groups in many countries
provide fertile environments for initiating or
prolonging conflicts. Furthermore, overdependence on
natural resources is not conducive to viable
development strategies in many poor countries and
may lead to the eruption of internal conflicts. While I
agree that there must be a distinction between the
successive phases of a conflict, we must all agree on
the responsibilities of Member States, as well as of the
various organs of the United Nations, to deal with
those phases.
The sustainable and equitable management of
natural resources lies at the heart of today's debate. I
agree with the idea set forth in the concept paper to the
effect that improving management of natural resources
in the absence of conflict is not the primary
responsibility of the Security Council. While
respecting the sovereign rights of all Member States,
we have to encourage a more rationalized and effective
use of natural resources. That has to be clearly linked
to the development agenda of the international
community.

In post-conflict situations, the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council should collectively and clearly debate on how
best to develop, through the Peacebuilding
Commission, a development-oriented approach to
foster the factors of stability and prosperity and to
prevent the relapse of countries into conflict.

We all stand to gain from working together to
address the many aspects of this issue. Member States,
the United Nations, regional organizations and
groupings, the private sector, multinational
corporations and non-governmental organizations have
a role to play in the different phases of addressing the
issue. The Kimberley Process provides a good example
of how everyone can work together to stop the illicit
trade in natural resources - especially, in this
instance, of conflict diamonds.

I look forward to seeing the results of the
deliberations of today's thematic debate, which I hope
will provide an important input into the collective work
of the United Nations and all its organs on the issue of
natural resources and conflict.

