Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We commend the
Japanese presidency for its choice of very timely
and critical issues for consideration on this month's
agenda, including today's important debate, which we
believe will result in greater awareness and action. We
welcome and congratualte you on your stewardship,
Mr. President, and cordially wish you and your country
a very fruitful presidency.

We also extend a warm welcome to Her Excellency
Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovie, President of the Republic
of Croatia, and Her Excellency Ms. Nela Kuburovic',
Minister for Justice of the Republic of Serbia. My
delegation expresses its appreciation to President
Agius, President Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz for
their important briefings.

Kazakhstan notes with satisfaction the progress
achieved over the past six months in the work of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
especially in effectively implementing the strategy
to close the Tribunal towards the end of 2017 despite
serious challenges posed by staff attrition. We highly
appreciate the stewardship of President Agius in
ensuring the proper functioning of the Tribunal under
very difficult circumstances. All pending tasks have
been completed on time, notwithstanding the challenges
and setbacks encountered. It is commendable that
efforts have also been made to assist the Victims of
some of the most inhumane crimes and that due justice
will be served.

We acknowledge the measures taken by the
Office of the Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to locate and
arrest fugitives and, at the same time, to reform and
strengthen its fugitive-tracking activities. Despite its
limited resources, the fact that the Mechanism has
endeavoured to build the capacities of national judiciary
systems to prosecute war crimes - particularly its
focus on the Great Lakes region and East Africa, where
important training will be held in Kampala in mid-
2018 - is praiseworthy.

Kazakhstan appreciates the commitment of
the Tribunal and the Mechanism to ensuring the
administration of international justice. We see the value
of the significant role played by international judicial
and quasi-judicial bodies in preserving our faith in
international law and the inevitability of punishing
the perpetrators of serious crimes. My delegation
commends the respect for and strict adherence to the
important principles of objectivity, independence and
impartiality. The experience and legacy of the Tribunal
must be considered seriously, while taking into account
the work that the other tribunals need to accomplish
in order to fulfil their primary task of bringing all
perpetrators to justice in an accountable manner.

To conclude, I would like to thank the Permanent
Mission of Uruguay, ably led by Ambassador Elbio
Rosselli Frieri, for his tireless efforts as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
and we cordially wish his successor, Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Permanent Representative of
Peru, every success.

