Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the

outset, we welcome your presiding over this important
meeting, Madam President. We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto; Ms. Habiba
Sarabi, Deputy Chairperson of the Afghan High Peace
Council; and Ms. Mariam Safi, Executive Director of
the Organization for Policy Research and Development
Studies, for their valuable briefings.

The State of Kuwait appreciates the work of
UNAMA. We value the vital role of Mr. Yamamoto,
as well as the sincere efforts and dedication of United
Nations staff in Afghanistan as they support the people
of Afghanistan in these difficult circumstances. We
welcome the adoption today of resolution 2405 (2018),
extending the mandate of UNAMA.

Over the past four centuries, Afghanistan has
suffered from political and security instability that has
negatively affected the lives of the people. The critical
political conditions in Afghanistan require all those
who are wise and all the heads of political parties to
give priority to national interests over partisan ones in
order to provide the Afghan people with a decent life
after years of war and conflict. We in the Council must
continue to step upp our efforts to support the political
process and to encourage the timely holding of the
parliamentary and presidential elections. I would like
to address the following points.

First, concerning the political situation, we
welcome the efforts of the Independent Election
Commission and the progress made towards the
holding of the parliamentary elections next July,
despite the recent domestic unrest in Afghanistan. The
Commission has continued with its work and appointed
a new management structure. It has prepared the voter
registry and linked it to the polling stations. It has also
approved national identification cards - tazkz'ras - as
part of the voter-registration process. We hope that
these preparations will lead to broad participation on
the part of the Afghan people. There is also a need to
focus on encouraging women to actively participate in
the upcoming elections.

As the parliamentary elections draw near, we note
with regret the increasing political tensions among the
various political parties and coalitions in Afghanistan.
This puts more pressure on the National Unity
Government and has led to delays in the implementation
of the national reform agenda.

Secondly, concerning the security situation, the
State of Kuwait supports the call of the Secretary-
General to lower the level of threat in Afghanistan
and Central Asia. However, the security situation in
Afghanistan is unstable. Conflict continues between
the Government of Afghanistan and opposition forces
in most of the country. The United Nations recorded
23,744 security incidents in Afghanistan in 2017, 63 per
cent ofwhich were due to armed conflict in Afghanistan.
Suicide attacks have increased by 50 per cent compared
to 2016. Those figures underscore the fact that the
Afghani Government and the international community
are facing a very daunting task. The Taliban and
Da'esh continue to launch terrorist attacks against
unarmed civilians. We are all aware that those attacks
have caused many civilian casualties. Last year alone,
UNAMA recorded 10,453 civilians killed or injured
in violent acts, in addition to damaging homes and
property and the displacement of families.

Third is the issue of human rights. When we speak
about human rights we should recall the fact that today's
meeting coincides with the International Women's Day.
Women, and mothers in particular, make up half of
the society and contribute significantly to raising new
generations that can shoulder their responsibilities. We
believe in the great role of women in our societies. They
must be guaranteed all their political and civil rights.
That is a basic demand all over the world, including
in Afghanistan. The Government of Afghanistan has
taken steps to improve gender equality in the civil
service. We also welcome the enactment of by the
Afghan Parliament of the new Law on the Elimination
of Violence against Women, which is awaiting the
President's approval to enter into force. We appreciate
and commend the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan to implement the new Law and resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. We hope
that the Afghan Government will pursue such efforts in
order to uphold the best interests of Afghan society.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait believes that
lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan and the
region can be achieved only through a negotiated
diplomatic settlement. History teaches us that military
solutions do not lead to lasting peaceful settlements. We
therefore urge all parties to participate constructively
in the efforts to achieve peace through diplomacy in
the interests and well-being of the Afghan people. Such
diplomatic efforts should be coupled with significant
and genuine investment in education, with which any
true societal reform begins. Many nations torn apart by
war, conflict and destruction have been able to recover
and join the ranks of developed countries because they
invested in the education of future generations and
allocated resources to education without discrimination
between men and women. I think the best way to
conclude my remarks would be to quote Nelson
Mandela, the late former President of South Africa,
who said, "Education is the most powerful weapon we
can use to change the world".

