Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important meeting on peace and
security in the Sahel region. I am also grateful to the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel
region for her tireless efforts in mobilizing support to
implement the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel, which has three main pillars requiring an
integrated regional response to the various challenges
facing the region.

The deteriorating political, economic and cultural
situation in the Sahel have made it fertile ground for
terrorism. The growth of terrorist activity in the Sahel
by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram,
Ansar Eddine, the Movement for Unity and Jihad in
West Africa and Al-Murabitun, as well as the spread
of organized transnational crime and of arms and drugs
have had a servere negative impact on the security of
individuals and societies in West Africa. Economic
vulnerability, extreme poverty and the lack of food
security suffered by more than 20 million people in the
area, as well as the impact of climate change and weak
governance and institutions, are extremely complex,
intertwined issues that are exacerbated by racial
conflicts and regional tensions. The suffering is tragic,
while the impact on democratic transitions and regional
coherence has been dire.

Peace and security in the region can be established
only through regional cooperation that paves the way
for appropriate solutions to all the overlapping and
intertwined problems in the region, particularly in
northern Mali. A comprehensive political analysis of
the Sahel would be the key to understanding the scope
of the crisis in Mali and to facilitating its transition.
On this basis, we must activate and operationalize
preventive diplomacy and redouble our coordination
efforts to promote dialogue and negotiations, while
respecting the unique cultural and linguistic identities
of the countries of the region. Marginalizing those
elements would lead to increased conflict. Therefore,
no long-term solution will emerge without consensual
social participation.

In that regard, we reiterate the importance of
the role of regional organizations in implementing
measures aimed at achieving stability in the region,
particularly by coordinating security between the
countries of the region, supporting Government efforts
to deal with structural challenges, and coming up
with mechanisms for building institutional capacities
through an integrated vision, so as to operationalize the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and
ensure its success in forming a regional system that can
grapple with the challenges in the region and achieve
peace and security there.

