Mr. Sun Lei (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Ambassador Oh Joon for his briefing. China
appreciates the great deal of work done by Ambassador
Oh Joon and his team over the past two years at the
helm of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

Currently, the international fight against proliferation
faces a new and complex situation amid the rising trend
of non-State entities engaing in proliferation activities.
Prevention efforts are entailing higher costs and
greater difficulties. In the face of the new challenges,
the international community should strengthen the
regulation and control of proliferation at its source,
tackle both the symptoms and the root causes, work
to eliminate the motivation behind proliferation and
address security and development issues in a balanced
manner.

As the first resolution of the Security Council on
the subject of non-proliferation, resolution 1540 (2004)
is of great importance in terms of denying non-State
entities access to nuclear, biological, chemical or
other weapons of mass destruction. It is essential that
all countries, while capitalizing on the opportunities
afforded by the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004), continue to dedicate themselves
to its univeral, full and balanced implemetation.

The Committee has recently done productive
work in boosting international cooperation, expanding
outreach and promoting assistance. China supports
the Committee, in accordance with its mandate, in
continuing its main work of collecting implementation
reports, compiling effective implementation practices
and promoting international assistance and cooperation.

China takes seriously the important roles played by
the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts. We have
participated with a constructive attitude in the work of
the Committee. Not long ago, as Chair ofthe Committee,
Ambassador Oh Joon headed a delegation to China.
Comprehensive exchanges of views were conducted on
the implementation of the resolution and the work of
the Committee, with satisfying results. As a reflection
of China's firm commitment to combat proliferation,
the visit helped to deepen the cooperation between
China and the Committee and its Group of Experts.
China stands ready to work with the various parties to
promote international efforts against proliferation.

