Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate South Africa on
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January, as well as to welcome you,
Madam Minister, as you lead the Council in its
discussions today. I also wish to thank your country for
having organized this meeting, in which
representatives of the African Union and countries of
the subregion are taking part, specifically Kenya and
Uganda. I welcome the presence of their distinguished
representatives in the Chamber. Finally, I wish to thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs and
the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union for their briefings.
Togo welcomes the fact that Somalia is truly a
central concern of the Security Council, which last year
held several meetings and adopted a number of
resolutions on issues related to that country.

The situation in Somalia, which has long been
unstable, has recently been taking a positive turn in the
political, security and humanitarian assistance areas, as
detailed in the most recent report of the Secretary-
General, issued on 9 December 2011 (S/2011/759).

My country welcomes the adoption, by the
Transitional Federal Institutions, of the road map for
ending the Somali transition by 20 August. The success
of that comprehensive programme depends on the
willingness of the various political actors to work
together. My country urges them to do so. Obviously,
that success is also contingent on the provision of
sustained and meaningful financial support by the
international community.

While the future seems promising for Somalia,
the present still remains a cause for deep concern in
terms of the security situation. In his report, the
Secretary-General confirms that the capital city of
Mogadishu, which is now controlled almost entirely by
the Transitional Federal Government, is not safe from
indiscriminate attacks carried out by armed elements
and former Al-Shabaab fighters wearing Transitional
Federal Government uniforms.

Suicide attacks are terrorizing the population and
justify the deployment of additional troops to control
the 16 districts of the capital. However, Mogadishu is
obviously not the only city in Somalia. Somalis are
being targeted by Al-Shabaab in other regions of the
country. In that regard, we are pleased that the
countries deploying troops to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), as well as other
countries of the region, agreed to continue joint
planning activities in order to develop options for tying
together all ongoing military operations in Somalia into
a coordinated and coherent effort against Al-Shabaab,
as well as to extend the authority of the Transitional
Federal Government beyond the capital.

The execution of that ambitious plan, in a country
where weapons are in wide circulation and can be
bought for next to nothing, requires troops and
additional resources. That is why the African Union
Peace and Security Council is justified in requesting
that the Security Council increase the number of
AMISOM. troops, which could reach a strength of
17,000.

Togo welcomes the conclusions of the meeting of
the African Union Peace and Security Council held on
5 January, in which formal recommendations were
made to expand the force as a necessary step towards
improving the security situation in Somalia and
achieving peace and reconciliation by implementing
the Kampala Accord and the Mogadishu road map.

The fight against insecurity in the world is being
waged, as evidenced by the measures currently under
consideration by the Security Council. Nevertheless,
insecurity on the high seas persists. Although the
frequency of acts of piracy has diminished to some
extent, several ships and dozens of hostages remain in
the hands of pirates.

The fight against piracy should be merciless, as
the success of that phenomenon in Somalia is being
emulated elsewhere, in particular in the Gulf of
Guinea. The fight should be coordinated. Any
assistance provided to the countries of the subregion in
patrolling their coastlines must effectively confront the
pirates. In that context, Togo welcomes the dynamic
steps taken by the European Union, NATO and
Combined Task Force 151, a multinational coalition
naval force, which have reduced the number of attacks
on and seizures of ships.

Togo reiterates its support for the relevant
Security Council resolutions on the issue of piracy and
invites the States of the region to join forces with the
international community, not only to hunt down the
pirates but also, most important, to cut off their means
of support. It is encouraging to note that the United
Nations has become very much involved in that fight
by cooperating closely with such international
organizations as the International Maritime
Organization (IMO). In the course of the twenty-
seventh session of its biennial Assembly, on
30 November 2011, the IMO adopted a resolution on
piracy and armed robbery against ships in waters off
the coast of Somalia. By doing so, the IMO renewed
the commitment of its members to effectively continue
the combat that scourge with a view to eliminating it
entirely, while at the same time respecting international
law. But it also called upon countries whose ships are
flying their flag to adopt precautionary measures to
help prevent attacks and to provide security for ships.
We feel that it is important to point out that the
support provided to the Transitional Federal
Government authorities to tackle such criminal acts
should not only be focused on material means, but also
on capacity-building and judicial assistance in order to
make it possible to prosecute the pirates who have been
arrested.

It is clear that all the sacrifices made by
AMISOM's soldiers, all the hardships experienced by
the Somali people and all the material and financial
commitments made by the international community
will only be rewarded by peace in Somalia if the
measures taken by the Security Council are upheld by
all States. Violations prevent a swift settlement of the
matter, which would only worsen the hardship felt by
the Somali population.

Togo believes that the countries of the Horn of
Africa should overcome their differences and pool their
efforts with a view to freeing neighbouring Somalia
from the tyranny of interest groups and to allow the
subregion as a whole to enjoy peace, security and
stability.

I would like to conclude by briefly referring to
the humanitarian situation, which, although tragic a
few weeks ago, has improved gradually thanks to the
action taken by humanitarian organizations and to the
aid provided by several countries, which Togo
welcomes. Protection and support for refugees should
continue to be of major concern for the United Nations.

