At the outset, allow me to thank France for hosting this important meeting. I also thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF for their very thorough briefings. The adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict constitutes a landmark moment in the Security Council's history. Today, 15 years after the establishment of the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we can say that the United Nations has played a pivotal role in advocating for children and working towards a world in which our children can live and grow away from conflict, suffering and despair. Afghanistan shares the concerns reflected in the Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2020/525) about the high number of cases of child casualties reported over the past year. Afghan children casualties continue, primarily as a result of despicable attacks carried out by the Taliban, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups through roadside improvised explosive devices, suicide attacks, ground engagements and the use of civilian locations and human shields. One example of these barbaric terrorist attacks took place at a Medecins Sans Fronti¢res maternity ward in Kabul on 12 May, where terrorists mercilessly shot and killed expectant mothers and newborns. Instead of being able to attend school, children continue to be the victims of the decades-long ongoing conflict in Afghanistan. Such acts are unacceptable and must be stopped. The Afghan Government is fully committed to the protection of children in conflict and strongly condemns and opposes all forms of violations against children, including recruitment, killing and maiming, rape and other kinds of sexual violence, abductions, attacks against schools or hospitals and denial of access to humanitarian assistance. As a ratifying country of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, as well as other conventions and obligations on the matter, Afghanistan has been actively engaged in reforming its institutions through the adoption of policies and laws, including the law on juvenile delinquency and the signing of the joint action plan in 2011 and the subsequent road map towards compliance, in 2014, to ensure that children are protected and not engaged in conflict. That includes zero-tolerance measures on the prohibition of the recruitment of children in all sections of the Afghanistan National Defence and Security Forces and throughout relevant ministries working to protect our children from the threats of the Taliban, ISIL and their affiliates. We have also adopted a national policy for civilian casualty prevention and mitigation in order to avoid civilian casualties during military operations, and passed a new penal code in 2017 that sets punishments for those perpetrating sexual violence against children and a child protection law endorsed by a decree signed by President Ghani in March 2019. Despite Government efforts, the Taliban, ISIL and other terrorist groups continue to violate the rights of children, using them as human shields and enlisting them as child soldiers to carry out many of their heinous attacks. Their crimes and their blatant disregard for the lives of children, as indicated by the six grave violations assessed by the United Nations, is a contravention of human rights and international humanitarian law. We strongly reiterate our insistent call to halt those actions and further stress that guaranteeing the rights of children, particularly girls, remains a strong imperative of the Government of Afghanistan in their peace talks with the Taliban. The Government continues its committed efforts for a prompt start of direct talks with the Taliban and supports the Secretary-General's call for a humanitarian ceasefire that can stop the bloodshed, particularly as we also deal with the threat of the coronavirus disease pandemic. In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Afghanistan's strong position as a committed partner for the protection of children in armed conflict. We will continue our firm work and commitment to creating a new Afghanistan of opportunities for children to grow and flourish into the leaders of tomorrow.
