Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura (Brazil): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this open debate. It allows the wide
membership a rare opportunity to formally hear from
the chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Council and to
provide valuable inputs to their activities.
Inclusiveness and cooperation are essential in the fight
against terrorism.

Let me also take this opportunity to commend the
Chairs of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and
the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004) for their work and the
reports presented today.

Brazil's strong condemnation of terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations and our commitment to
fighting it are well known. They have been stated and
reiterated in numerous forums and on many occasions.
Just as importantly, my country has acted accordingly.
The Federal Police and the Brazilian Intelligence
Agency have implemented effective measures to
prevent the planning, preparation and execution of acts
of terrorism and other forms of transnational crime
within our borders and beyond. Another key feature of
Brazil's counter-terrorism policy is the effective
operation of mechanisms against the financing of
terrorism and related crimes. In addition, the Brazilian
Government has been cooperating with international,
regional and subregional actors, as well as with other
countries, in areas such as intelligence-sharing and
technical assistance.
3
Brazil has also duly submitted all the reports
requested by the Committees. Brazil has submitted to
the Counter-Terrorism Committee a total of six reports
in accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), as well as
that requested pursuant to resolution 1624 (2005).
Furthermore, the Brazilian Government has provided
the CTC with additional information regarding the
national implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

Since late last year, there has been considerable
progress in the work of all three Committees. In the
1267 Committee, the key aspect of due process related
to the listing and de-listing of individuals and entities
is being seriously addressed. We welcome the update
of its guidelines, the development of procedures for
reviewing all names contained in the consolidated list,
and the preparation of summaries with the reasoning
for listing each entry. In our view, these are
fundamental steps to enhance not only the transparency
and legitimacy of the sanctions regime, but also its
effectiveness worldwide. No victory over terrorism
will ever be truly effective or sustainable if it comes at
the expense of the rule of law.

Regarding the 1540 Committee, the programme
of work adopted this year demonstrates that the
Committee understands the challenges facing
implementation and shows its willingness to address
them. The success of the comprehensive review of the
status of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) will
depend, to a large extent, on involving as many
Member States as possible in the exercise. In that
regard, we welcome and look forward to the open
meeting planned for later this year.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee has also made
significant progress in assessing the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), facilitating technical assistance
and paying visits to Member States. The Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
has played a valuable role in gathering information
from Governments and assisting them in that regard.
The adoption of adequate standards and criteria for
determining implementation by Member States is
crucial to ensuring consistency in the work of the CTC
and CTED and thereby securing the permanent support
of Governments.

My delegation read with interest the most recent
report (S/2009/245) elaborated by the sanctions
Monitoring Team. We share most of the views
expressed in the report. Regarding resolution 1267
(1999), as I stated earlier, we agree that there have
been significant improvements in the implementation
of the sanctions regime. However, we also believe that
the Committee could further enhance its procedures, in
particular with regard to transparency and the right of
individuals and entities to present their defence before
the Committee. We also concur with the View that the
1267 Committee may consider useful the opinions
expressed by national courts. Even though the
Committee is not bound by a national legal decision, it
should give adequate weight to it as the members of
the Committee review a particular entry.

One last point I wish to raise relates to the need
to improve overall coordination among the three
Committees. In our view, the Committees and their
respective subsidiary bodies could find additional ways
to improve coordination, not only among themselves
but also with other bodies, including those related to
the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Additionally, we should
strengthen coordination among the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force of the General Assembly
and the three Security Council Committees. Operating
on several parallel tracks may prove unnecessarily
burdensome, especially for smaller States, and it may
lead to either duplication or diminished effectiveness.

Much progress against terrorism has been
achieved since the adoption of resolution 1267 (1999)
a decade ago. Our biggest challenge has always been to
devise ways to prevent and fight terrorism while
upholding democratic principles and protecting human
rights. We do not have the luxury of failing on either of
those two fronts.

