Mr. Laptenok (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): First
of all, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
as Ukraine is a country with which we have special
ties.

The Republic of Belarus has, for the last few
years, unswervingly emphasized the need for the
expansion of the practice of convening high-level
meetings of the Security Council, so that the decisions
of the Council can be more universal in nature and
reflect a policy that has been arrived at collectively.

Like the other participants in this meeting, we
would like to thank your delegation, Mr. President, for
your timely initiative, which has made it possible for
virtually all interested States to participate in the
discussion on the preliminary results of the
implementation of the summit declaration of the
Security Council.

The Council's September summit, which focused
attention on Africa, yielded specific ways to strengthen
peacekeeping operations. However, unfortunately,
despite a number of positive changes, Africa today
continues to require the most intensive attention from
the Security Council, and not only in the context of
peacekeeping operations.

This part of the world has inherited an extremely
difficult legacy. In September 2000, a great deal was
said to the effect that changing reality can be done only
through rapid, collective and effective action. Belarus
is evaluating its potential in the area of the effective
mobilization of resources. Its specific characteristic is
that, as a country located in the centre of Europe, as an
integral part of the general European political and
economic space, and as a member State of the Non-
Aligned Movement, Belarus has a highly developed
sense of the needs and requirements of many of our
partners in the Non-Aligned Movement which in recent
years have been overcome by crisis situations. Among
other things, we believe that Belarus still has great
unexploited potential to offer in the process of
resolving many of the issues considered by the
Council.

For that reason, we have decided significantly to
expand our participation in the non-military
components of peacekeeping operations. The relevant,
concrete steps are now being worked out by the
highest-level State organs in Belarus. In January 2001,
Belarus paid in full all of its assessed contributions
with respect to the financing of peacekeeping
operations begun after 1 January 1996, and paid in full
the sums assessed to the account of the two
international tribunals.

We have begun to establish our own basis for
readying personnel for participation in peacekeeping
operations and are prepared to engage in broad
cooperation in this field with all interested parties.

The growing attention that is being devoted by
the Security Council to measures to resolve and
prevent inter-State and regional conflicts is a product
of today's realities. In the light of recent events on the
Macedonian-Yugoslav border, the question of whether
some issues have remained outside the focus of the
Security Council is not only a rhetorical one. However,
from our point of view, the Security Council must
continue to focus on the global aspects of security and
in particular on disarmament questions. This is in
answer to one of the questions raised in the note
distributed by your delegation, Mr. President, to this
meeting.

The commitment to achieve the elimination of the
threats created by weapons of mass destruction was
enshrined in the Millennium Declaration. Belarus, as is
well known, traditionally has put forward, at sessions
of the General Assembly, an initiative for the adoption
of a draft resolution prohibiting the creation of new
types of weapons of mass destruction and related
systems. During the last few years, Belarus has devoted
particular attention to practical measures for
strengthening regional and global security through
nuclear disarmament. From our point of view, such
activity reflects clearly the effective contribution of a
specific State to strengthening international peace and
security and must be duly taken into account by the
Council.

An important contribution to halting illicit flows
of small arms to regions of conflict will be made by the
upcoming international Conference on this problem.
This is a step towards improving the peacekeeping
activities of the United Nations and of the Security
Council. In past years, we participated in an
international experts' group on the preparation of the
report of the Secretary-General on this problem, an
opportunity we were grateful for.

From our point of view, the focus of attention of
the Security Council must be, to a greater degree, on
issues linked to the fundamental social and economic
reasons for conflicts: the prevention of outbreaks of
violence; the improvement of principles and
mechanisms for the establishment of enforcement
measures and in particular of economic sanctions; the
strengthening of the democratic basis for the Security
Council's decision-making process; and above all the
stepping up and strengthening of interaction with the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and other bodies. This was mentioned by previous
speakers, and we fully concur.

What are the basic changes that have taken place
recently that could help in overcoming, to use the
Secretary-General's expression, the crisis of faith in the
United Nations and in the Security Council? In our
view, we can include the following among the
important achievements: further United Nations reform
efforts; emphasizing regional forums, including
African forums, on the problems of maintenance of
peace and international security; extensive discussion
on new concepts for peacekeeping operations; and
intensive consideration of the mechanism for sanctions,
proposals and conclusions of the report of the United
Nations Panel on Peace Operations. Many important
changes have already been initiated on this basis. The
resolution has been adopted based on the Brahimi
report and a number of steps have been undertaken to
systematize peacekeeping operations sanctioned by the
Security Council.

There have been open meetings on issues such as
exit strategy, complex approach and others. There has
been an increase in the work on sanctions and
additional dynamic work on Afghanistan, Angola,
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Steps have been considered to halt international
terrorism. These are extremely important steps.

There is also a new scale of contributions and
assessments for peacekeeping operations and
cooperation by the membership of the various States
groups. In many States, inter alia, in Belarus,
additional work has been carried out to expand
participation in peacekeeping operations.

The list could go on if we looked at the period
beginning with the summit. This does not mean that
little or much has been done, but more still lies ahead.
Unfortunately, after September 2000 many
contradictions also remain unresolved, which, to a
significant extent, continue to hamper decisions in the
Council today. The main question remains: Does the
Council always truly have a decisive voice here? The
Charter and the role of the Security Council cannot be
ignored. In that regard, the events of the last few years,
inter alia in the Balkans, have taught us a serious
lesson. At the same time, today we are witnesses of
another serious escalation in that region.

The draft resolution on Palestine was not adopted
and the question on the no-flight zones also remains. A
number of very serious problems remain on the
Security Council agenda today.

How can we achieve effective implementation of
the Council's decisions so that they do not remain on
paper alone? Perhaps the decision is not to simply
continue discussions on Security Council membership,
but to have this discussion open to all Member States.
The President of Belarus has noted that one of the great
achievements of the United Nations is the fact that it
provides every State, regardless of its size and
resources, with an opportunity for equal participation
in producing a just and durable peace. We should not
look at the primacy of State interests; rather, we should
look at many situations in terms of collective interests.

Regarding Security Council reform, virtually all
the participants at the summit said there was a need for
reform. It was not coincidental that at the September
meeting many of the Council members themselves
rather bluntly raised the question of reform of this body
and of more effective response by the United Nations
to conflict situations at all stages, including their social
and economic aspects. This coincides with the spirit
and approach of the Non-Aligned Movement, which we
share, regarding further improvement of Security
Council activity and working methods and expansion
of its membership.

Undoubtedly, an important conclusion is that the
African continent will have to be given the highest
priority attention. There have been positive
achievements; the Congo and Ethiopia and Eritrea, for
example. But the most important thing is the
restoration of peace, which has not yet been achieved
in many regions. The voice of African States must be
taken more seriously into account. We are ready to
make our contribution to resolve the problems of
Africa, inter alia, through the comprehensive
development of our ties with the countries of that
continent, insofar as possible by making voluntary
contributions to international funds and programmes to
render assistance to countries that have experienced
natural disasters; the development of activities, to
which we will be paying great attention, not only
within the framework of our bilateral relations but also
within the framework of international organizations,
and, above all, those of which Belarus is a member.
Within the framework of our efforts to enhance the
effectiveness of the Security Council in the struggle
against the illegal trade of diamonds, our scientists are
working, inter alia, on a unique method for determining
the sources of their origin.

At the same time, with respect to cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations and mechanisms, the
potential of our region and that of its organizations,
including those of the Commonwealth of Independent
States, is far from having been exhausted. For its part,
Belarus is doing everything possible to strengthen that
potential.

Allow me once again to assure you, Sir, of the
readiness of the Republic of Belarus to fully cooperate
in enhancing the effectiveness of the work of the
Security Council.

