Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the manner with which you have
steered the work of the Security Council this month,
including your sincere efforts that led to the holding of
a ministerial-level meeting on the Arab initiative to
revive the peace process in the Middle East. There is a
need to revive the peace process in the Middle East
because of Israel's refusal to implement resolutions of
international legitimacy.

I would like to welcome among us Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Commissioner of the International
Independent Investigation Commission, who has just
presented his third periodic report. We have taken note
of the contents of Mr. Brammertz's procedural report,
as well as his working methods, professionalism and
expertise.

The report refers to the significant and positive
milestones represented by Syria's efforts to fulfil its
obligations and to continue to cooperate with the
Commission in an effective manner on all levels. Syria
continues to respond to every demand of the
Commission, providing all the information it needs in a
timely manner according to the deadlines agreed
between the two parties. That fact was emphasized in
the statement we have just heard from Mr. Brammertz.

I would once again like to reaffirm that the
cooperation of the Syrian Arab Republic with the
Investigation Commission is based on my country's
keen desire to help to find the truth in the crime of the
assassination of Rafik Hariri, former Prime Minister of
Lebanon, as well as to determine the parties
responsible.

The report before the Security Council includes a
periodic explanation and description of the technical
aspects on which the Commission is working within its
competence, whether in terms of the scene of the crime
or the alleged tools utilized in the crime. We hope that
the investigation, which is based on the two previous
periodic reports, will reveal the real perpetrators of this
crime.

In that context, we repeat what we have said on
previous occasions, that one of the most dangerous
things faced by the investigation is the ongoing
exploitation by some parties, within or outside our
06-54337

region, of what is in the investigation to jump to
premature conclusions not based on any evidence or
clear proof. The same is true with regard to the attempt
by some parties to provide uncorroborated information
to be used for purposes different from the real purpose
for which the Commission was established. For those
parties, one such purpose is to continue to pressure my
country. I wish to underscore that the report continues
to point out that, as regards uncovering the truth, the
Commission will still have to make great efforts before
it reaches a final conclusion.

Allow me to address briefly some of the points
contained in the report before the Security Council,
without going into the report's substantive details, in
order not to interfere with the investigation. We in
Syria believe that it is important that the investigation
be independent, impartial, objective and free from any
political influence or interference.

First, the report noted that Syria's cooperation
with the Commission was satisfactory and effective.
Mr. Brammertz has just reaffirmed that once again
before the Security Council. In that connection, we
would like to state that Syria continues to cooperate
fully with the International Independent Investigation
Commission, and has done so since the Commission
began its work. Syria had hoped that the report would
have pointed to the extent of other States' cooperation
with the Commission.

We would like to emphasize that the ad hoc
judicial commission established in Syria oversees
coordination and cooperation with the International
Independent Investigation Commission and responds to
all the Commission's requests for assistance. The
accuracy and clarity of the requests made to Syria's ad
hoc commission has enabled it to continue to provide
the International Independent Investigation
Commission with information in record time.

Secondly, in the context of cooperation between
Syria and the International Independent Investigation
Commission, the report refers to Syria's response to the
Commission's requests for information and documents.
The report also points out that Syria has provided
timely assistance to the Commission, and refers to the
satisfactory timeliness in which Syria has responded to
the Commission's requests for setting up interviews
with witnesses and for putting in place security and
administrative measures needed to conduct those
interviews.
5
Thirdly, Syria has taken note of the importance
that the Commission attaches to exploring new
hypotheses as to the way the assassination of the late
Mr. Hariri was committed. Syria would like to
underscore the importance of scrutinizing all evidence
accurately and carefully and in a way that adheres to
international criminal investigative procedures and
criteria. That is especially so with regard to evaluating
false testimonies previously presented by witnesses
before the International Independent Investigation
Commission for well-known political purposes. Those
who are providing such testimonies should come
before legal authorities for misleading the legal process
and be ordered to reveal the political groups or persons
who forced them to give false testimony.

Fourthly, Syria has noted that the Commission
has made great efforts, as part of its expanded mandate,
to investigate terrorist crimes committed in Lebanon
since 1 October 2004. In that regard, we wish to point
out that many people, in Lebanon in particular and in
the region in general, would have expected the Security
Council to attach similar importance to the war crimes
and crimes against humanity perpetrated recently,
namely Israel's bombardment of Lebanon, given that
the evidence is clear and the persons responsible are
well known to all.

We believe that it is important that the
Investigation Commission also focus on the crime of
the assassination of the two Majzoub brothers, so as to
clarify the relationship between that and other crimes.
We would point to the statement distributed by the
Permanent Mission of Lebanon to the United Nations
on 21 June 2006, which stated that the terrorist group
that carried out the assassination of the two Majzoub
6

brothers on 26 May 2006, as well as other terrorist
groups, were working for the Israeli Mossad. That
statement also said that the group had carried out
exercises in and outside of Israel. We hope that the
Commission's mandate will include that and similar
terrorist crimes.

Fifthly, we note with satisfaction that the
principle of secrecy in the investigation continues to be
upheld in a professional manner. We welcome that
professionalism and hope that it will continue.

In conclusion, Syria believes that we should give
the investigation the time and resources necessary to
allow it to pursue its work and to uncover genuine
evidence quite independently from politicization, false
hypotheses and all interpretations irrelevant to the true
investigation. We stress yet again that Syria will
continue to cooperate actively, through its ad hoc
judicial committee, with the International Independent
Investigation Commission and to provide it with all the
information at its disposal and the results of its own
investigations concerning the assassination of the late
Rafik Hariri.

We reaffirm once again that Syria - eager in its
own core interests to continue uncovering the truth -
is fully committed to cooperating so long as the
international investigation is pursued professionally
and expertly.

