Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Let me join others in congratulating you,
Mr. President, on the assumption of the presidency
of the Council by the People's Republic of China.
We wish you every success and pledge you our full
support. My delegation would like to once again thank
and commend Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her courageous
work and for her sixteenth report, which she has just
done an excellent job of presenting to us today.

Focusing on the issue before us, we must recognize
that it is not easy to tackle issues as complex as those
we are dealing with today, especially given the current
situation in Libya, a country that is going through
terrible times on the political, economic and social
fronts and where, as everyone knows, the security
situation continues to be highly volatile, owing to the
prominence and influence of the dozens of militias and
armed groups that in practice are in control of much
of the country. We consider that to be one of the main
obstacles to carrying out an investigation aimed at
clarifying specific facts in any field, as is currently
the case with the Office of the Prosecutor. That
demonstrates the gravity of the current situation and the
existing limitations, both those that I have mentioned
and for the Libyan Government, which we encourage
to continue collaborating to the extent possible with the
Office of the Prosecutor, despite those limitations.

While taking all of this into consideration,
we believe that the problem is bigger than that.
The prevailing impunity and the large number of
grave violations of international law and of serious
multidimensional crimes, as Prosecutor Bensouda
just informed us - such as murder, sexual violence,
human trafficking, torture of immigrants and extortion
of every kind - continue to be a source of concern.
That is why it may be necessary to try a new strategy
and focus efforts on determining how to reduce the
presence and influence of armed groups and militias
in this process within an appropriate legal framework,
including measures to support and cooperate with the
Libyan Government in the prosecution of the most
serious crimes and to ensure the most effective and
robust accountability possible, without forgetting that
those measures must be impartial and applied equally,
regardless of who commits the crime.

To that end, it is essential to maintain strict,
objective and transparent cooperation between States
and international organizations, the International
Criminal Court and the Council, with a view to seeking
real solutions that will help put an end to this type of
situation, while putting aside any unilateral interests or
actions. All of that must be done within a framework
of respect for Libya's sovereignty and integrity, as
well as for its laws, internal rules and customs, which
in turn must ensure justice within a framework of
respect for human rights and international law. In
that context, based on our assessment and Prosecutor
Bensouda's report, it is clear that the country's judicial
institutions feel unable to detain and prosecute Mr. Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi and
Mr. Mahmoud Mustafa Busayf Al-Werfalli, among
others. The International Criminal Court must
therefore work closely with the Libyan Government in
order to facilitate the Prosecutor's work. It must also
continue to make efforts to establish mechanisms that
will restore peace and stability in Libya. In that regard,
we welcome the recent extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya.

In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea believes that in
the light of the difficulties the Prosecutor's Office faces
in carrying out its investigations, all that we can do is
fully support its efforts, its wide range of activities
and its requests for effective cooperation. That is why
we ask the Council to take its recommendations into
account and to take action accordingly.

Once again, I wish Prosecutor Bensouda every
success in the mission entrusted to her and courage in
her complex and dedicated work in the context of the
tangled conflict in which Libya is mired.

