President Al Sisi (spoke in Arabic): It is my great
pleasure to participate in this Security Council meeting
organized by Ethiopia on the issue of peacekeeping
operations. At the outset, I would like to welcome
the adoption of resolution 2378 (2017), on the issue of
peacekeeping reform, as a step towards enhancing the
United Nations peace and security architecture.

Egypt was among the very first countries to
contribute to peacekeeping operations, having
participated in the first-ever mission, deployed to the
Congo in 1960. Today Egypt ranks seventh in the top
10 troop-contributing countries. We have participated
in 37 missions, with a total contribution of 30,000
uniformed personnel, since we began participating in
peacekeeping operations across Asia, Africa, Latin
America and Europe.

Over the past decades, Egypt has responded to
peacekeeping needs and has never refrained from
participating - even in the most complex security
situations - while maintaining the training, readiness
and capability of its troops as a top priority. Furthermore,
our compliance with the highest standards of conduct
and discipline and zero tolerance for any form of
misconduct is considered exemplary. Egypt has also
contributed significantly to building regional capacity,
in particular in the African and Arab regions.

As we welcome today's resolution on peacekeeping
reform, we hope that it will be the first of many steps
to ensure effective United Nations peacekeeping, while
focusing on addressing technical and operational gaps,
in order to include a comprehensive approach that aims
to prevent conflict and sustain peace. In that regard, the
role of peacekeeping and decision-making needs to be
further articulated. In that connection, I would like to
highlight the following points.

First, without prejudice to the significance of
peacekeeping as the most important tool for maintaining
international peace and security, it should not be the
only tool to be deployed. Peacekeeping should not be
an alternative to preventive diplomacy, mediation,
peacebuilding efforts or any other political, economic
or social tool for addressing the root causes of conflict
and ensuring social cohesion. Peacekeeping should not
be the initial reaction to every conflict.
Especially over the past three years, Egypt has
repeatedly called for a new strategic approach that
includes comprehensive, pragmatic political and
programmatic plans, as well as adjusting mandates
according to political and operational developments
throughout the lifecycle of conflict. Such an approach
is in line notjust with the vision ofa number of Member
States, but also with the Secretary General's vision.
I take this opportunity to commend the Secretary-
General on his efforts to revitalize the tools at the
disposal of the Secretariat, including its political tools.
Those efforts must be commended and supported.

Egypt believes that such a strategic approach
is crucial in addressing the complex challenges and
consequences of armed conflicts. Most notably, that
includes the weakening of State institutions, the ability
to provide basic services, the breakdown of the social
fabric and other challanges. In addition, that approach
is also crucial given the direct relationship between
conflicts and the threat of terrorism and organized
crime, as well as other threats and challenges to peace
and security.

Secondly, Egypt has always called upon the
international community to prioritize its efforts to
resolve conflicts rather than simply manage them,
which has been the status quo for decades with no
potential for a political solution. Unfortunately, this is
very much evident in conflicts in the Arab region and
the African continent, where we witness relapses due
to unresolved political, social and economic causes. In
that context, I would like to echo the conclusions of the
2015 reviews of the United Nations peace and security
architecture, which emphasized the primacy of political
solutions as the basic task for both peacekeeping and
special political missions.

Thirdly, peacekeeping operations must not substitute
the role of Governments and host State institutions.
Peacekeeping operations must not become trusteeship
mechanisms, rather, they must provide an enabling
security and political environment for nationally
owned reconciliation and peacebuilding efforts in line
with the priorities of those States and communities.
In that regard, I would like to emphasize that any
attempts to impose templates of political systems that
have proven successful in countries thousands of miles
away have repeatedly failed. Instead, we must take into
account the political, cultural and social specificities
of every country in order to ensure the success of our
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.

Along the same lines, I would like to highlight the
important and central role of peacekeeping operations
in the protection of civilians. However, that role must
not override the responsibility of the host country to
protect its nationals. Peacekeeping operations should
instead focus on building host State capacities. In
that regard, Egypt believes that it is imperative that
the mandates of United Nations missions mirror the
priorities and specific needs of those countries.

Fourthly, allow me to be frank. Attempts to
monopolize mandate-formulation by some Member
States without taking into account the concerns of
troop-contributing countries does not aid the success of
peacekeepingmissions.Infact,theabsenceofmeaningful
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries is detrimental to the implementation of their
tasks, in view of the lack of a common understanding
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and the
troop-contributing countries. Therefore, I call upon
the Security Council to support the establishment of an
effective and institutionalized triangular consultative
mechanism among the three stakeholder - the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the troop-contributing
countries - which would reinforce agreement on
common objectives when drafting or renewing the
mandates of peacekeeping operations.

Lastly, it should be undoubtedly clear that the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security falls upon the Security Council.
However, we must also recognize the vital role of
regional organizations in conflict zones, as stipulated
in Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. More
specifically, I would like to highlight the role of the
African Union, which represents a successful model
for partnership with the United Nations. The rehatting
of African Union operations into United Nations
operations and the success of hybrid operations
conducted by both organizations underscore the central
role of the African Peace and Security Architecture in
conflict resolution, not just conflict management, on
the African continent.

That partnership and cooperation could be further
developed and utilized based on the comparative
advantages of the United Nations and the African
Union. That is particularly relevant at a time when the
United Nations is attempting to optimize the use of its
resources. To that end, I would like to emphasize the
importance of implementing the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, which was signed in April.

Moreover, the United Nations must also develop
its partnership with other regional organizations
and contribute to enhancing their effectiveness in
responding to regional conflicts by developing their
mediation and early-warning tools and cooperating with
them to deploy observers and peacekeeping missions,
if required. In that regard, I would like to highlight
the potential role that the League of Arab States could
play in support of promoting peace and stability in the
Arab region.

In conclusion, as one of the top troop- and
police-contributing countries, Egypt is committed to
continuing to play its regional and international role in
addressing challenges to peace, security and stability
through its active participation in international and
regional organizations and its robust contributions to
peacekeeping operations.

