Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan): First, I would like to
express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council to consider
the situation in Afghanistan.

Kazakhstan expresses its grave concern over the
continued armed conflict in Afghanistan, which has recently
escalated sharply as a result of the large-scale military
offensive launched by the Taliban movement despite the
repeated pleas by the Security Council to cease the fighting
and resume negotiations under the auspices of the United
Nations.

It is particularly disturbing that the military activities
have resulted in suffering on the part of the civilian
population and an increase in the number of refugees. We
cannot but condemn the instances of gross violations of
human rights, forced deportation, ethnic and religious-based
persecutions and violations of the norms of international
law, as well as the actions that prevent the unimpeded and
safe delivery of humanitarian aid and the normal conduct
of the work of the United Nations in Afghanistan.

A year ago, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan, strongly condemned in a statement the
capture by the Taliban movement of the Consulate
General of the Islamic Republic of Iran in Mazar-e-Sharif
and the murder of Iranian diplomats and a journalist. We
firmly support the call on the Taliban movement to
cooperate with the United Nations in investigating these
crimes with a view to prosecuting those responsible.

The civil war in Afghanistan continues to pose a
threat to the security and stability of the other States in
the region. We fully share the concern expressed by the
Secretary-General in his recent statement that, should the
transnational aspect be allowed to take root, the potential
danger will increase greatly, and it will be much more
difficult to prevent the conflict from spreading beyond
Afghan borders. In this connection, Kazakhstan reaffirms
its strong commitment to the agreements reached at the
Almaty summit of 4 October 1996 and the meeting of the
Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Defence of Kazakhstan,
Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, held in Tashkent
on 22 August 1998. We believe that efforts must continue
to be made to convince the parties to the conflict that no
military solution exists and that reliance on force has no
future.

We again express the firm conviction that any
international efforts to resolve the situation in Afghanistan
must take place under the auspices of the United Nations,
as an impartial mediator in the attainment of peace and
national harmony in Afghanistan, and on the basis of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly. In this connection, we fully support
the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Mr. Brahimi, and the work of the United
Nations Special Mission in Afghanistan (UNSMA), and
express our readiness to continue to extend the necessary
assistance to them.

Kazakhstan attaches great importance to the
collective efforts by Afghanistan's neighbours and other
interested States aimed at establishing peace in that
country. In the search for a political solution to the
Afghan problem, we took a positive view of the holding
of direct talks between the United Front and the Taliban
movement in Ashkabad in January and March 1999 and
in Tashkent in July 1999. An important step towards
attainment of a just and lasting peace in Afghanistan was
the convening of the Tashkent meeting of the "six plus

 

two group and the adoption of the Declaration on
Fundamental Principles for a Peaceful Settlement of the
Conflict in Afghanistan. We are prepared to make a
concrete contribution to this process.

Kazakhstan strongly condemns any external
interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and
supports the appeal of the Security Council for the
immediate cessation of the delivery of military supplies
from outside and the halting of active support to the
factions in Afghanistan. In our view, the fulfilment by the
States of the region of their obligations to refrain from
providing military support to the parties to the conflict and
to prevent the use of their territory for these purposes
would greatly facilitate the speedy, peaceful resolution of
the conflict.

The continuing armed conflict in Afghanistan creates
conditions conducive to the illegal production and
trafficking of narcotics, and also to the proliferation of
terrorism. There is a need to strengthen effective and
coordinated measures to combat illicit drug trafficking. We
are convinced that the many calls on the Taliban movement
by the international community to stop giving refuge to
international terrorists and their organizations and to
cooperate with efforts to bring indicted terrorists to justice
must be strictly complied with.

Kazakhstan fully supports the efforts of the United
Nations to provide humanitarian assistance to the civilian
population of Afghanistan suffering as a result of the
military activities, as well as to the many refugees who
have been compelled to leave the places where they were
born or to emigrate to neighbouring countries. It remains
committed to promoting Afghanistan's future rehabilitation
and recovery.
