Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are pleased to see
you, Mr. President, presiding over this meeting of
the Council in a demonstration of the importance
you attach to the situation in Libya. Let me take this
opportunity to thank you for the very humane way
your country has been handling the migrant issue,
for which we are very appreciative. We also welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Libya with us this morning. We appreciate Mr. Salme,
Special Representative ofthe Secretary General, for his
briefing and diplomatic efforts in the ongoing search
for peace and stability in Libya. The analysis and the
updates we received from the Special Representative
was truly of high quality. We have drawn confidence
from his comprehensive and objective analysis.

As the representative of France said, the time has
come for this Council to speak with one voice on Libya.
As we know, that applies to other situations as well. We
also thank Ambassador Skoog for his briefing and his
efforts as the Chair of the Libya Sanctions Committee.
We know that whatever tasks Ambassador Skoog is
entrusted with, he discharges them with a great sense of
responsibility. Given the many human rights violations,
much is expected from the Committee he chairs, and
we are confident that he will make the Committee as
effective as possible.

The deteriorating political, security and
humanitarian situation in Libya, including the recent
attacks targeting civilians and civilian institutions,
continues to be of serious concern. We take this
opportunity to express our solidarity and sympathy
with the people and Government of Libya. We reiterate
our conviction that the multifaceted crisis in Libya,
including illegal migration and refugees, as well as
illegal armed groups, can be addressed sustainably only
through a comprehensive political solution facilitated
by the United Nations.

In that regard, the United Nations action plan,
with its sequential components, provides another
opportunity to end the current political impasse and to
meet the legitimate demands ofall Libyans. We welcome
the continued efforts of the Special Representative to
engage all Libyans on the basis of the United Nations
action plan, including by bringing together the main
political actors, so as to amend the Libyan Political
Agreement, which remains the only viable framework
to resolve the Libyan crisis.

We particularly welcome the progress made in
Tunis at the meeting of the Libyan stakeholders under
the auspices of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya. We believe that that process is absolutely critical
to helping to overcome the current political impasse
and to pave the way for durable peace, stabililty
and reconciliation in Libya through an all-inclusive
dialogue. However, we understand the challenge in
addressing the points of divergence and, hence, the need
for the meaningful and constructive engagement of all
Libyans with the greatest sense ofurgency and national
vision in order to reach a common understanding and
to move the process forward.

Clearly, two issues, among others, would continue
to be critical. As Special Representative Salame has
stressed, there should be no vacuum; hence, the need
to uphold the Libyan Political Agreement. The other
issue relates to the need to make the process genuinely
Libyan-owned. Of course, there is no military solution
to the Libyan problem.

The international community, particularly the
Council, should send a strong and united message to
pressure all parties to stop the violence and to engage in
an inclusive and sustained political dialogue. The role
of the neighbouring countries of Libya in the pursuit
ofpeace, security and reconciliation is, indeed, critical
within the framework of a Libyan-owned process. The
African Union also has an important role to play in the
process. Ultimately, however, the solution to the crisis
in Libya lies primarily in the hands of the Libyans
themselves and the role of the international community
is to provide effective support to the Libyan efforts.
We therefore hope that all Libyans will constructively
engage in the inclusive political process, as set out in
the action plan, and demonstrate a spirit of compromise
in order to achieve concrete results that could facilitate
the full implementation of the plan.

