Mr. Mehlis: The terrorist attack of 14 February
2005 that claimed the lives of Mr. Rafik Hariri and 22
others was a landmark event in the history of Lebanon.
It was a tragedy that came as the country was
beginning to heal the wounds of a long civil war. Allow
me first to pay tribute to the memory of all the victims
and acknowledge the suffering of the bereaved
families.

On 7 April 2005, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1595 (2005), whereby the United Nations
International Independent Investigation Commission
(UNIIIC) was set up. The Commission was designed to
be a supportive mechanism for the Lebanese judicial
and security authorities to carry forward the
investigation into the assassination.

Before going into the details of this unique and
unprecedented experience - by United Nations
standards - I would like to express my sincere thanks
to the Secretary-General and to the Security Council
members, who, by appointing me, have shown me and
my team trust and confidence, upon which I have
drawn throughout the five months I have spent in
Lebanon and which has been a great source of comfort
and encouragement. My heartfelt thanks also go to the
Lebanese people and Government for their unwavering
support and full confidence.

The Commission, which was established in full
agreement with the Government of Lebanon, became
fully operational on 16 June 2005. In keeping with the
letter and the spirit of resolution 1595 (2005), the
Commission and the Government of Lebanon signed a
memorandum of understanding outlining the modalities
of cooperation between the two parties.

Having set the framework of work and
cooperation early on, the Commission has been able to
05-56783
move ahead with its investigation. The earlier Fact-
finding Mission led by Mr. Peter FitZGerald and the
accompanying files were a valuable source of
information during the early phase of our work. In
addition, we relied to a large extent on the 8,000-page
Lebanese case docket handed over to the Commission
in order to understand the dimensions of the case, to
draw up a preliminary list of potential witnesses and
suspects and to focus on possible leads to pursue.

To the credit of the Lebanese judicial and security
authorities, they have come a long way in terms of
their ability to pursue the investigations. Some
problems of public trust remain. More recently, they
have shown growing levels of professionalism and
competence. They have been helped in this by the
presence and active support of the United Nations.
Undoubtedly, one of the main reasons for this positive
change is the setting aside of past constraints and the
stepping down of the old guard. On the other hand, the
close interest and valuable support shown by the
international community in Lebanese affairs has been
encouraging.

The Commission established close working links
with the Lebanese authorities, and channels of
communication were kept open with all sides. With the
political authorities, arrangements were made to
facilitate our work and to give the Commission the
moral and physical backing it most needed. With the
judicial authorities, regular meetings were held to
exchange updated information, files, statements and
new evidence. Plans were agreed for the upcoming
phases of the investigation, and lists of witnesses were
submitted to the Lebanese authorities for summoning
for questioning. With the security authorities, raid and
search operations were conducted in tandem. A striking
example was the joint UNIIIC-Internal Security Forces
(ISF) operation carried out on 30 August 2005 for the
house raid and search of former senior security
officials, who were later arrested by the Lebanese
authorities.

Thanks to the backing and active engagement of
the Lebanese authorities, we have been able to
integrate our work together, as envisaged by the
Security Council in April. Of utmost importance has
been the valuable assistance extended by other
organizations of the United Nations family, as well as
by other international organizations, such as Interpol.
Several United Nations Member States provided
expertise that contributed in no small measure to
05-56783

shedding light on major areas of the investigation. On
behalf of all the members of the Commission, I wish to
convey to all of them my sincere thanks and profound
gratitude.

On 19 October 2005, I submitted the
Commission's report to the Secretary-General. Our
modus operandi, our findings and conclusions are set
out in that document, which is before you today at this
important session of the Council. I do not wish to
burden you by repeating the content of that report or
with further details. However, there are certain
elements and facts that I wish to stress at this time.

Over 130 days, 30 investigators from 17
countries interviewed more than 400 witnesses and
suspects, reviewed approximately 60,000 documents
and produced more than 16,500 pages of documents.
More than 450 pieces of evidence have been collected.
Some main lines of investigation have been identified
and leads established.

However, for such a multidimensional and
complex case as the one under review, the investigation
cannot be considered complete as of now. More time
should be allotted to further investigate our findings
and look into emerging leads. I would note that it is
entirely normal that a case of this type takes many
months, if not years, to cover all aspects of
investigation with certitude and to prepare a case for
prosecution.

The Lebanese Government recently asked for an
extension of the Commission's mandate until
15 December. As the extension has been granted, the
Commission's modus operandi will remain unchanged -
that is, the Commission will maintain the same level of
cooperation with the Lebanese authorities and, wherever
possible, will help to enhance it. The Commission will re-
interview a number of witnesses and interview new ones
as the investigation unfolds. It will complete its
examination of material evidence obtained recently. And
it will endeavour to provide the Lebanese authorities with
any technical assistance they might require.

Moreover, the Commission is of the view that this
would provide yet another opportunity for the Syrian
authorities to show greater and meaningful cooperation
and to provide any relevant substantial evidence on the
assassination. For this reason, the Syrian authorities
may wish to carry out, on their part, their own
investigation into the assassination of Mr. Hariri in an
open and transparent manner. That would enable the
3
Commission to fill in the gaps and to have a clearer
picture about the organizers and perpetrators of the
14 February terrorist act.

As the Commissioner of UNIIIC, I am also
responsible for the safety and security of my staff.
Therefore, since the Commission will continue its work
until 15 December, the safety and security of its
members must be a priority. Ever since the
Commission started its work in Lebanon, in addition to
its own security team, the Lebanese security forces -
namely, the army and the police - have played a
major role in ensuring the protection of its members
and headquarters. They took exceptional security
measures, for which I wish to thank them on behalf of
all the Commission's members.

However, it should be noted that despite all the
precautionary measures, the level of risk, which was
already high, will further increase, particularly after
the issuance of the report. I would also add that the
Commission has received a number of threats that were
deemed, in the assessment of our security personnel, to
be credible.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that the total
number of investigators who have served in the
Commission was 30, coming from 17 different United
Nations Member States. The drafting team was
composed of members representing eight different
nationalities. It has been of particular importance to me
to maintain a geographical balance in the teams in
order to enhance the Commission's credibility.

Finally, if and when the overall investigation is
completed, it will be up to the Lebanese authorities to
seek the way ahead and determine the nature and
location of any judicial mechanism to be set up. In the
meantime, the Lebanese judicial and security
authorities, who have shown good will and
demonstrated a growing ability to handle the case,
would benefit from all the legal and technical support
the international community could provide, either
bilaterally or through the United Nations system.

