Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I would like to begin my statement by
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Modibo Toure, for his insightful briefing
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau.

I will focus my statement on two main points:
the implementation of the Conakry Agreement by the
Guinea-Bissau signatories and the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau.

Guinea-Bissau is going through a new phase in the
serious and deep political and institutional crisis of
recent years. My country and West Africa are concerned
about this situation, which is characterized by a
political impasse and requires the Council to act with
greater firmness alongside the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African
Union to bring the political actors of Guinea-Bissau to
honour their commitments. Indeed, despite the signing
on 14 October 2016 of the Conakry Agreement, which
was supposed to favour the appointment of a consensus
Prime Minister and the establishment of an inclusive
Government, the country is again without a Government
and confronted by a blockage of Parliament and a deep
lack of trust between the President of the Republic and
his party, the African Party for the Independence of
Guinea and Cape Verde.

The stalemate heightens raises concerns not only
of a detrimental delay in the electoral calendar, which
calls for the holding of legislative elections in May
2018 and presidential elections in 2019, but also of the
exacerbation of political tensions and the growth of
the criminal economy linked to drug trafficking. My
country welcomes the ongoing efforts of ECOWAS
to definitively resolve the crisis in Guinea-Bissau, in
strict compliance with the communal arrangements and
constitutional framework of the country. The current
deadlock in Guinea-Bissau is the culmination of a
prolonged deterioration of the political situation and the
manifest lack of will on the part of the political actors
to commit themselves to a consensual settlement of the
crisis, despite the appeals and efforts of ECOWAS.

Cote d'Ivoire calls on the parties to implement the
Conakry Agreement in good faith and without delay.
My delegation once again commends ECOWAS for its
leadership and the ongoing commitment of its leaders,
the Chairperson of the ECOWAS Authority, President
Faure Gnassingbe of Togo, and the ECOWAS Mediator
for Guinea-Bissau, President Alpha Conde of Guinea,
in the quest for a solution to the political impasse in
Guinea-Bissau. Cote d'Ivoire also commends the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau for its invaluable
contribution to stability in the country.

ECOWAS, after a lengthy process of futile
warnings, decided to adopt individual sanctions against
19 persons considered to be hostile to the process of
ending the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. The sanctions are
a strong signal of the resolve of ECOWAS to bring the
country out ofa crisis that has persisted too long. Those

measures - which specifically involve the suspension
of the participation in the activities of ECOWAS of all
persons concerned, a travel ban on travel, the denial of
visas to them and their families, and the freezing oftheir
financial assets - must be applied with utmost rigour.
The sanctions, I recall, are based on the Supplementary
Act of 17 February 2012, which imposes sanctions on
Member States that fail to honour their obligations
vis-a-vis ECOWAS, and article 45 of the Protocol
on Democracy and Good Governance. My country
congratulates ECOWAS on taking those courageous
measures, which will serve as a wake-up call to the
Guinea-Bissau political class, and looks forward to
their effective endorsement by the African Union.
Cote d'Ivoire invites the Council to fully support
ECOWAS in the interests of peace and national
cohesion in Guinea-Bissau. To that end, my country
calls on the Security Council to adopt by consensus
the draft resolution on the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, which also requires the endorsement of
those sanctions.

Furthermore, my delegation urges the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), the European
Union and the United Nations to also support the
efforts of ECOWAS to effectively implement measures
that seek to ensure that the Conakry Agreement be
upheld. Institutional and political stability, peace and
security in Guinea-Bissau depend primarily on the
people of Guinea-Bissau themselves. To achieve that,
we call on them to take ownership of the Conakry
Agreement. Without the involvement of the parties
themselves, the prospects for finding a solution to the
crisis and for restoring lasting peace to Guinea-Bissau
will remain illusory.

With regard to the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, my
delegation welcomes the various initiatives to support
the political dialogue and the national reconciliation
process. Furthermore, we encourage ongoing
consultations in order to make progress on security
sector reform and to meet the needs of the peacebuilding
mechanism under way in Guinea-Bissau.

My delegation thanks the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau for his
efforts in mediation, promoting the rule of law and
building the capacity of the Guinea-Bissau institutions.
Cote d'Ivoire encourages its international partners, in
particular the United Nations, the African Union, the
European Union, the CPLP and ECOWAS, to cooperate
more closely with regard to their work on the ground
to ensure greater effectiveness. My country also
welcomes the strong involvement of Guinea-Bissau
women in the political process, and in particular their
role in facilitating dialogue between the parties.

With regard to the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, I would like to inform the members of
the Council that Cote d'Ivoire will soon submit a draft
resolution for adoption on that issue. At the same time,
ifit is acceptable to all members of the Council, a draft
press statement will also be submitted for adoption.

My country reiterates its appeal to all stakeholders
in the crisis in Guinea-Bissau to participate fully
in the efforts of the international community, in
particular of ECOWAS, to promote the comprehensive
implementation of the Conakry Agreement, which
guarantees a way out of the political impasse that the
country has long suffered.

I would like to finish by thanking Ambassador
Mauro Vieira of Brazil, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
all the information that he has kindly provided to
the Council.

