I wish to thank Director-General Arias and High Representative Nakamitsu for their briefings. I would like to begin by commending the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for having successfully hosted the first part of the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention despite the impediments created by the coronavirus disease pandemic. We look forward to the second part of the Conference taking place in April 2021 or as soon as the situation allows. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates its support for the mandate of the OPCW. Our commitment to ensuring that applied science is used only for peace, progress and the prosperity of all humankind never wavers. As the implementing body of the Chemical Weapons Convention, the OPCW plays a tremendous role in realizing our shared goal of a world free of chemical weapons. We therefore continue to underscore that it is fundamentally important that its work and that of its various facets and subsidiary bodies be impartial, independent and free from politicization. Anything less contributes to the erosion of the multilateral system. Although the current pandemic has further delayed progress on this dossier, we recognize the efforts made by both the OPCW and the Syrian Arab Republic to continue to undertake the critical work in as far as it is possible to do so. We take note of the seventh round of inspections conducted between 8 and 13 November, and we look forward to receiving the corresponding report. We also take note of the reports on the work of the Declaration Assessment Team. It remains imperative that all gaps and inconsistencies be clarified, and it is our hope that the continued constructive and inclusive dialogue between the parties will help to make meaningful progress in that regard. That is the only path to building trust, fostering cooperation and ensuring the full implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). The Security Council should not overlook the notifications issued by the Syrian Government warning that various armed groups operating in Syria may be preparing to use chemical weapons. We have an obligation to give that matter due attention in order to make an assessment and safeguard civilians. In conclusion, we reiterate our well-known, long-standing and principled position that the use of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone and under any circumstances constitutes an abominable violation of international law. The development, stockpiling, transfer or use of chemical weapons must be prevented, and the norm against that reprehensible form of warfare must be preserved. Impunity for their use must not be encouraged through inaction, and the perpetrators of chemical weapons atrocities must be held accountable. Failure to do so will only embolden future actors.
