Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I would like to express our satisfaction at the
presence of the Secretary-General in the Chamber.
More specifically, we acknowledge the presence of the
president of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and the international president
of Medecins Sans Frontieres, Ms. Joanne Liu. In their
individual briefings, they not only provided useful
perspectives but also eloquent accounts that spoke
volumes about the situation that we hope resolution
2286 (2016) will bring some influence to bear on.

We must remember that the adoption of the
resolution by members of the Security Council and the
many delegations that co-sponsored it are also signs
of the commitment of States Members of the United
Nations to abide by their obligations and deliver on them.
However, we must also be mindful that many events, if
not the majority of them, that we are trying to address
through this resolution involve violations that have
been perpetrated by the armed forces of some Member
States of this Organization. We hope, therefore, that
this will not be just another empty exercise where we
make commitments that will then fall by the wayside.

We are very concerned that both human rights and
international humanitarian law are being continuously
violated and ignored with total impunity in many
regions of the world. The current asymmetric conflicts,
involving many opposing parties, including non-State
actors, make it all the more necessary today for
humanitarian personnel, who carry out medical tasks
in war zones, to be protected. However, the deliberate
targeting of such personnel and their health facilities
has become a distinctive tragic aspect of the current
conflicts, as those personnel and facilities find
themselves becoming increasingly vulnerable.

As previous speakers have said, in the recent past
we have observed with alarm and concern the sinister
and growing trend of attacks against hospitals and
medical personnel, which is a scourge in those areas
ravaged by violence. Such attacks very often occur
within a framework of growing impunity for violations
of international humanitarian law. Thousands of
people are left defenceless, threatening the lives of
humanitarian personnel, who are performing medical
tasks with dedication and selflessness by providing
health services to populations trapped in conflict
areas and providing a glimpse of humanity amidst the
cruelties of war. The attacks and bombings against
medical facilities in South Sudan, Iraq, Afghanistan,
Yemen, Syria and other places, which have been
reported in the international news, demonstrate that
those attacks can occur in any part in the world that is
beset by war.

Respect for international law, which frames
international humanitarian law, is a guiding principle
for my country's foreign policy. For Uruguay, attacks
and violence against medical facilities and medical
personnel in the context of conflict, in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law, are
totally reprehensible and unacceptable. Those who are
responsible must be held accountable, sooner or later.
We believe that the Security Council and its members
have an important role to play and a moral and legal
responsibility to do everything in their power to ensure
that situations involving the violations of the most basic
human rights and international humanitarian law are
not repeated.

In that regard, and together with Egypt, Spain,
Japan and New Zealand, we engaged in an intense round
of consultations that culminated in the introduction of
this resolution, based on the conviction that the current
situation facing the international community requires
effective measures to prevent such unacceptable acts.
Many of us welcome the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), and we can only hope that it will be useful for
the protection and security of the organizations that
are providing medical and humanitarian assistance on
the ground.

I must, in conclusion, render homage to the
humanitarian personnel who are carrying out medical
tasks with great courage and total dedication. Many of
them have sacrificed their own lives to carry out their
work and to save the lives of many other human beings
trapped in those armed conflicts.

