Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): Allow me to begin, Sir, by
congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of March. We are confident that
with your widely known diplomatic skills, your knowledge
and a great deal of optimism, you will successfully conduct
the work of this body. Let me also assure you of the full
cooperation and support of the delegation of Poland.

I should like also to pay a special tribute to Her
Excellency Ambassador Madeleine Albright for the
outstanding manner in which she presided over the Council
in the month of February.

Only a month ago the Security Council discussed the
developments in Burundi. The Polish delegation joined
others in expressing its concern about the direction in which
the events in the county were evolving. As then, today also
we associate ourselves with the statement on Burundi
delivered by the Italian delegation on behalf of the
European Union.

The situation in Burundi remains a matter of grave
concern to the international community. Although the last
Secretary-General's report notes certain signs of
consolidation of the uneasy peace in the country, the
political and security environment in Burundi continues to
be tense and volatile. Hence, an intensification of
international efforts to avert a further worsening of the
situation seems to be imperative.

The draft resolution under consideration reflects the
conviction that combined political endeavours on the part
of the international community can still be effective and
that the possibilities of exerting diplomatic and political
influence on the parties concerned have not yet been
exhausted and should be adequately enhanced.

At the same time, the draft resolution recognizes that
without the firm commitment of the people of Burundi to
achieve a lasting political resolution of the conflict, the
international community might not be in a position to
solve the problems that the Burundian State is faced with.
The underlying assumption of the draft resolution before
us is that the situation in Burundi has not yet reached a
stage at which preventive diplomacy must be replaced
with preventive action. Nevertheless, we agree that the
Secretary-General should continue his considerations of
steps for a rapid humanitarian response in the event of
widespread violence or a serious deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Burundi.

The principal message conveyed in the draft
resolution is that further evolution of the situation in
Burundi will depend both on the parties to the dispute -
especially the more radical factions among them - and
on the assistance of the international community. It is
precisely for this reason that in the draft resolution under
debate the Security Council expresses its strong support
for the diplomatic efforts of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative, the Organization of African Unity,
the European Union, former Presidents Nyerere and
Carter and other facilitators appointed by the Cairo
Conference. Similarly, the Council extends its support to
those forces in Burundi that are ready to pursue political
options to defuse the present crisis and to engage in
serious negotiations within the framework of the National
Debate established in accordance with the Convention on
Governance.

Supporting the efforts from within the Country to
contain violence and resist factional friction, the Council
expresses deep concern at the assistance provided to
certain groups operating in Burundi by some of the
perpetrators of the genocide in Rwanda, as well as at the
activities of radio stations aimed at inflaming ethnic
hatred.

Bearing in mind the potential threat that such forces
pose, inter alia, to the stability of the region, a political
action by all the parties involved in Burundi to reach a
durable stabilization which would lead to genuine national
reconciliation is urgently needed.

 

Since reconciliation cannot be attained without an
environment of personal security among the faction-ridden
people of Burundi, the draft resolution pertinently draws the
attention of both the international community and the
Government of Burundi to the importance of building a
reliable local police force which would not arouse fear
among the Burundian population.

The draft resolution also refers to cooperation in the
domain of military reform. The professionalization of the
Burundian army and its restructuring on a wider base of
recruitment, comprising all the ethnic groups, seems to be
essential for the stability of the country.

It is important to note that the draft resolution
addresses the issue of security of aid personnel who seek to
ensure the continued delivery of humanitarian relief to the
Burundian population. This is a matter of fundamental
importance for the survival of the Burundian State, because
humanitarian assistance has become a major factor within
the overall Burundian economy, stricken by years of violent
political and social upheaval.

Taking into account all the aforementioned reasons,
the Polish delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution under consideration.

