Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to begin by
warmly congratulating His Excellency Mr. Paulo
Portas, Minister of State and Foreign Affairs of
Portugal, on presiding over the Security Council today.
I would also like to extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, and to
thank him for his statement. I am grateful to
Ms. Ameerah Haq for her briefing to the Council in her
capacity as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and for the presence here of Her Excellency
Mrs. Vera Crivano Machado, Vice-Minister for
Political Affairs of the Ministry of External Relations
of Brazil.

Japan shares the expectation of the international
community that the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) will complete its work by the
end of 2012, marking a significant historical milestone
after a decade of assistance from the United Nations.
As all parties concerned will agree, the highest
measure of success in this undertaking will be the self-
sustainability of Timor-Leste and - with due
consideration given to the elements of
peacebuilding - the peaceful completion of United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Timor-Leste.

To achieve that end, it is essential that the two
elections planned for next year be conducted smoothly
and peacefully. Japan has already launched its
assistance for the elections by providing a grant of
approximately $1.66 million through the United
Nations Development Programme, possibly to be
followed by the dispatch of election observers to the
country. Japan appeals to the international community
to accelerate its support for a promising young country
at a historic juncture.

Japan highly commends Timor-Leste's successful
assumption of all responsibility for policing, and
appreciates that a stable, calm situation has been
maintained ever since. The outstanding efforts being
made by the Timorese national police in this regard are
indispensable. At the same time, I would like to
highlight the supreme importance of security during
the elections. Japan calls for further improvement of
the capabilities of Timor-Leste's police and armed
forces, as well as for enhanced efforts by the
Government and continued support from UNMIT in
this area.

Democratic elections are not simply a matter of
maintaining security and conducting votes. They are a
process by which a people entrusts its sovereignty to
its representatives. From that point of view, the
fundamental role played by trust among members of
society cannot be overemphasized. In order to foster a
sense of trust within a society, Japan believes that its
elections must be perceived as fair and transparent, that
all representatives selected in those elections must be
considered trustworthy, and that they are understood to
be respecting the results of a democratic process. In
that regard, while commending the efforts of the
Government and UNMIT to ensure the technical and
procedural credibility of the elections, Japan calls for
the political leaders of Timor-Leste to hold democratic
dialogue and to banish corruption from every sector of
the country. Japan encourages the expediting of this
process so that Timor-Leste can continue to develop
with the precious asset of mutual trust among the
members of its society.

As for the post-UNMIT discussion, Japan
welcomes the joint transition plan agreed between the
Government and UNMIT following extensive efforts
on the part of both parties. At the same time, we are
pleased to note that the plan provides for a certain
degree of flexibility, allowing for modification of its
details to reflect the situation on the ground. As the
Secretary-General wisely points out in his report
(S/2011/641), we will have to wait to see how the
post-election situation on the ground develops,
particularly in terms of security, before finally settling
the plan.

We hope that the best decisions for the country
will be arrived at through dialogue between the
Government and the United Nations. While the
transition process is owned by the people of Timor-
Leste, Japan stands ready to deliver any form of
support that the country may decide to seek from the
international community. I would like to conclude by
reiterating Japan's continuing commitment to
consolidating the friendship between our countries and
cooperating with the Timorese people in support of
their nation-building efforts.

