Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): Since this is the first
time that my delegation takes the floor this month, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
At the same time, I would like to thank Ambassador
Hardeep Singh Puri and the Indian delegation for their
excellent work last month.

Allow me to begin by welcoming Presidents Meron
and Joensen, as well as Prosecutors Brammertz and
J allow, and by thanking them for the reports on the work
of the Tribunals and on the progress and challenges in
the implementation of the completion strategy.

The Republic of Croatia advocated the
establishment of the Tribunal and its operation from
the outset. Its establishment was a welcome and much-
needed development that signaled the international
community's opposition and response to the culture
of impunity that had for centuries prevailed in matters
concerning responsibility for crimes committed during
war and armed conflict.

The main purpose of the Tribunal has been to
prosecute persons responsible for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and to contribute
thereby to the restoration and maintenance of peace, as
well as to the promotion of justice and reconciliation in
the region.

Despite certain shortcomings, the Court has played
an important role in enhancing the universality of
justice. We sincerely hope that judicial proceedings
against indicted individuals will be concluded in a
short period of time, taking into account the deadlines
for completion of the work of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).

Prosecuting war crimes is a process that must
continue. An important element of that process is
confronting the past, however difficult it may be. The
acceptance of the substantiated truth is a prerequisite
to the process leading to reconciliation. We understand
the possible frustration of those who developed their
positions based on attempts to create a false sense of
parity by equating criminal policy in se with individual
crimes committed on the other side that did not have
support in Government policy. However, we cannot
accept reactions that are tantamount to questioning or
even rejecting the decisions of the Tribunal and that
contribute to creating an atmosphere that makes it
difficult to continue the positive processes under way
in the region. We are of the View that every responsible
member of the international community should respect
legal order and the commitments undertaken, whether
they agree with them or not.

The initial purpose of the Tribunal can be achieved
only by determining the truth. Part of the truth that
the Tribunal confirmed in the recent judgements
concerning retired Croatian generals is that Croatia
was not involved in and did not conduct any joint
criminal enterprise, and that it was not Government
policy to plan or commit war crimes. On the other
hand, the judgement did not state that there were no
individual crimes, including war crimes, committed by
the Croatian side. We are aware that on an individual
level such crimes did occur, and this judgement does
not by any means trivialize those crimes or negate the
fact that they are unacceptable. The Republic of Croatia
has prosecuted many individuals for such crimes, and
I particularly stress that it will continue to do so. In
doing this, we count on the cooperation of all interested
States and organizations. Furthermore, we call upon
other successor States of the former Yugoslavia to
process war crimes committed by their own citizens.

An additional reason why Croatia supported the
work of the Tribunal was its contribution to building
sound foundations for post-war and future cooperation
in the region. An independent outside judicial body
that recognizes and sanctions individual responsibility
for specific war crimes reduces the danger of mutual
arbitrary accusations and retribution against whole
nations and peoples in the region. The recent verdict
in the case of the retired Croatian generals was met
with criticism by Croatia's neighbour, Serbia. While
we fully cooperated with the Tribunal, the final verdict
was reached by the Tribunal alone. Since the Tribunal
was established by the Security Council, we feel that
any grievance regarding the decisions of the Tribunal
should be addressed by the founding body rather than
by Croatia.

Croatia is deeply committed to the continuation
of the process of reconciliation between the successor
States to the former Yugoslavia, and fully supports
regional cooperation in the area of war crimes. We are
confident that such cooperation should be conducted
pursuant to well-established principles of international
criminal law, one of which is the principle of double
jeopardy, and in full observance of respective national
jurisdictions and competencies. In this context, we
would like to recall that, in March 2012, Croatia
presented Serbia with a draft bilateral agreement on
the prosecution and punishment of war crimes. Croatia
firmly believes that this type of proposed cooperation
presents the best approach to solving war-crime issues,
as opposed to the practice of one country claiming
jurisdiction for war crimes that were not committed
in its territory or by its citizens. However, we regret
to inform the Council that we have not received any
response from the Serbian side to date.

To conclude, in all the years that the Tribunal
has operated, there have been instances in which the
Republic of Croatia was unsatisfied, but it has always
cooperated with the Prosecutor and the Tribunal.
Regardless of the public perception of the Tribunal's
decisions, we have always fully respected them. Finally,
although the ICTY office is set to be closed, my country
is determined to continue to cooperate until the final
completion of the Tribunal's mandate. Croatia would
also like to reiterate its commitment to the prosecution
of war crimes.

