Mr. De Mistura: I want, as is my custom, to
make only three points and one conclusion. The first
point is a warm thanks to the Council for allowing me
not to miss this meeting of the Security Council. I
would have loved to be there today in order to present
my last report to the Council in my capacity as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and, frankly,
to thank all the members of the Council warmly and
shake their hands, one by one, in gratitude for what
they have done in supporting the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and me
during the past two years. My colleagues and I never
felt for a single moment during that time that we were
not supported and guided by the Council.

I leave UNAMA in excellent hands, as the
Council will see. Mr. Jan Kubis is perfectly suited for
doing even better than has been done so far. He comes
with the right spirit, enthusiasm and background. I feel
that, with the Council's help and the Secretary-
General's guidance, we will be able to continue doing
what UNAMA has been trying to do for the past two
years and to respond to Afghans' needs. We heard it
from Deputy Foreign Minister Ludin: the most
important thing for Afghans is respect for their dignity
and sovereignty while at the same time understanding
their need for a partnership, and a long-lasting one.

What has been done so far, I think, with the
Council's guidance and support, is to help the

democratic process. There is now a parliament; there
are 69 women in parliament; the parliament is working;
and preparations are being made for future elections
when the time comes for them. There is support for
Afghan institutions, such as the Independent Electoral
Commission. A regional process that has started
through the Istanbul Process, and we will see those
new meetings taking place next year. We have constant
reminders from the human rights side of the United
Nations concerning human rights for women, for
civilian casualties, for those in detention, and for
children. And there is a process, albeit nascent and still
insufficient, for political reconciliation. But we do
have the Salaam Support Group from UNAMA that
will be with Mr. Kubis, supporting any process that
Afghans want to lead. And we have been supporting
the transition, which is moving forward in the right
direction.

I also take this opportunity to thank the NATO
International Security Assistance Force, European
Union representatives and representatives of the
regional bodies for the excellent cooperation we have
had during the past two years. We have different
agendas and sometimes a different focus, but we have
all worked in the same direction and towards the same
goals. I welcome the review. Every opportunity for
revisiting what we are trying to do and should be doing
in the future - as can be seen from the Mission
outlined in the coming report - becomes an
opportunity for us to better serve Afghans and be more
effective vis-a-vis the Security Council.

Last but not least is the aspect of aid coherence,
which, with the establishment of the Joint Coordination
Board, has enabled UNAMA, in partnership with
Afghan authorities, to have a body that can move
forward on what we call the Kabul process. The
Conferences in London, Kabul, Lisbon, Istanbul and,
most recently, in Bonn have all been opportunities
where, in serving the United Nations, I have had the
privilege of seeing the process and progress moving in
a good direction for Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I have had moments of great
satisfaction at seeing Afghan achievements moving in
the right direction. We have had setbacks and terribly
sad moments, especially, as can be imagined, when my
colleagues and friends died in Mazar-e-Sharif. But
never have we felt alone, because the Afghans were
with us, showing us the way through their own
determination and resilience, and because the Council

11-6435!)
and the Secretary-General were always there
supporting us. That is why I want to thank the Council
warmly and Why I am so happy I could be with
everyone, even from a long distance, on this occasion.

