Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing
and for his leadership of the important Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) on Iran.

For the past decade, the international community
has had grave concerns about the nature of Iran's
nuclear programme. Since 2006, the Council has
committed to resolve those concerns through a mix
of principled diplomacy and steadily increasing
pressure. The Council's four major resolutions on the
issue - resolutions 1696 (2006), 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007) and 1803 (2008) - and the tough sanctions that
they imposed embody that approach.

In recent weeks, the P5+1 have taken important
steps on the Iran issue. The joint plan of action adopted
in Geneva last month is a milestone. For the first time
in nearly a decade, key parts of the Iranian nuclear
programme will be halted or rolled back. The joint plan
of action begins to address the issues of the greatest
concern, such as the enrichment of uranium up to
20 per cent, the development of advanced centrifuges
and the work at the Arak reactor. The arrangement also
provides for a six-month window for us to test whether
a long-term comprehensive solution can be reached.
In exchange, the United Nations would provide
limited sanctions relief that is temporary, targeted
and reversible. In the coming weeks and months, our
diplomats and experts expect to meet with Iran to see
if a comprehensive deal is possible. Any such deal
must address squarely the Security Council's multiple
resolutions on the matter, a principle that the joint plan
of action specifically states.

In the meantime, however, the relevant Security
Council resolutions remain in force, and all United
Nations sanctions remain in force. For now, as in the past,
all States must carry out their obligations to implement
those sanctions fully and effectively. In a similar vein,
the Council's Iran Sanctions Committee and its Panel
of Experts must continue their Vital work. In the weeks
and months ahead, we look to the Committee to step up
efforts to help States understand and implement those
sanctions. For example, we call on the Committee to
issue more implementation assistance notes and provide
other useful guidance. We note that the Committee has
not implemented all of the recommendations from the
Panel of Experts' report. We hope that that work can be
finished soon.

Sanctions Violations remain a matter of serious
concern. We therefore call on the Committee to improve
its ability to investigate and respond to such incidents.
Over the past year we have been disappointed that the
Committee has not taken decisive action on reported
violations. In particular, the Committee should be
doing more to tackle Iran's illicit arms shipments to
Syria, Yemen, Lebanon, Gaza and elsewhere. Iran's
gun-running threatens to destabilize already fragile
regions and fuel long-smouldering conflicts.

The Panel of Experts also has a key role to play in
supporting States' efforts to implement sanctions. Over
the past year, the Panel has sustained an impressive
level of activity. That should continue. We particularly
welcome the Panel's work in investigating Iran's
attempts to circumvent sanctions. The Committee
should do more to share that information publicly,
including best practices for detecting and stopping
violations in progress.

The United States looks forward to a day when Iran
establishes full confidence in the peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. But that day is not today. As our
negotiators seek a comprehensive deal, we wish them
the best. Yet, until there is a deal, the Council must
maintain pressure on Iran.

