Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me thank the
Director and Deputy to the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs for her briefing. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report on small
arms. This report provides a clear picture of the
multidimensional and multilevel nature of the
challenge of small arms today. It clearly underlines the
responsibilities accruing to various organs of the
United Nations, including this Council, in addressing
these challenges.

The International Committee of the Red Cross
estimates that some 90 per cent of recent war casualties
have been brought about by small arms. The threat
posed by these weapons arises from the widely known
fact that they tend to be relatively cheap, portable and
easy to conceal. These weapons, therefore, are
unfortunately in high demand and are easily accessible
in civil wars, terrorism, organized crime and gang
warfare. Much monumental human misery may be
traced to them.

In a wider context, small arms are not only a
security issue, they are also a development issue.
Developing countries continue to be threatened by the
destruction caused by these weapons and the hindrance
such destruction has been to productive economic
activities.

In our view, our strategies for dealing with small
arms should include not only curbing illicit trade and
brokering, but also dealing with existing stockpiles and
surpluses of arms and controlling their spread. Such
efforts have begun in some places, such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and have met with
considerable success. Greater effort is needed, with
cooperation among Governments and regional actors,
to ensure that surplus or excessive small arms are
destroyed. Furthermore, global advocacy can
contribute in raising public awareness of the
importance of addressing those issues and in
galvanizing support within countries and regions.

As a subscriber to the Geneva Declaration on
Armed Violence and Development, Indonesia finds it
both necessary and beneficial to start to develop
innovative and robust methods for systematically
measuring the scope, scale and distribution of armed
violence, as well as its impact, and to develop
measurable reductions in armed violence. Indeed,
concerted efforts should be pursued to develop
economies, eliminate poverty and create sustainable
development, particularly in the poor countries that are
still fragile and susceptible to the emergence of or
relapse into internal conflict.

My delegation is pleased to note the Council's
renewed focus on the issue of small arms. The
consideration of this issue in the Council, while
extremely important on its own, should always be in
synergy with that in the General Assembly, which has
been seized of this issue. We believe that the Assembly
has provided important norm-setting initiatives,
including the 2001 United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its
Aspects, as well as the development of instruments on
international tracing and illicit brokering.

Pursuant to the Security Council request
contained in its presidential statement of 29 June 2007
(S/PRST/2007/24), the Secretary-General has submitted
some far-reaching recommendations, particularly with
regard to data collection and development issues, that
could be of benefit to this process. In this regard, the
Security Council could, for its part, contribute in the
ongoing international effort by closely considering
those recommendations.
Indonesia believes that one of the most important
elements in achieving success in our effort to address
this highly complex problem is coherence and
cooperation among all relevant bodies, such as
Governments, international organizations, the World
Bank, the donor community, United Nations agencies,
non-governmental organizations and civil society. Such
a comprehensive approach will strengthen the full
implementation of the Programme of Action.

With regard to the Programme of Action, we
support the creation of a common framework for
connecting needs with resources in order to enhance
the capacity of States to implement the Programme. We
find particularly useful the electronic database that the
Secretariat is working on for coordinating small arms
programming.

With a View to better addressing the challenges
brought by small arms, Indonesia is in favour of an
early multilateral negotiation to establish a legally
binding instrument to curb the illicit transfer of small
arms, including ammunition.

While supporting those practical measures, my
delegation is also of the view that the legitimate
defence and security needs of States should always be
taken into account. The inherent right of individual or
collective self-defence in accordance with Article 51 of
the Charter, including the right of States to maintain
their territorial integrity, should not fall victim to our
effort to prevent small arms from falling into the wrong
hands. The legitimate rights of sovereign States in
acquiring and possessing small arms and Government-
to-Government trade relations regarding these weapons
should also be guaranteed.

Finally, Indonesia emphasizes that only by
concerted action can we reach the goal of reducing the
flow of these weapons for use by non-State actors in
war, crime and violence throughout the world. Only by
persistence, as well as through the visibility that this
Council has, can we ensure a brighter future for
societies on which small arms have inflicted
destruction, or might yet invite damage.

