Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to join other members who
spoke before me in expressing our gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Seren J essen-Petersen, for the comprehensive report he
has given us on the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
as well as on the developments that have taken place in
the province. As Mr. Jessen-Petersen has recently
announced that he will soon be leaving his post, we
would like to commend him for his commitment to
Kosovo and for the professionalism he has
demonstrated in fulfilling his mandate.

We would also like to thank the President of the
Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, Ms. Sanda Raskovie-Ivie, for
her statement. We note also the presence of the Prime
Minister of Kosovo in the Special Representative's
delegation.

We understand that currently there are two
processes in Kosovo which are running in parallel. On
the one hand, the process to determine the future status
of Kosovo has moved forward. Despite the violence
that has taken place, it is encouraging to note that
direct talks between the parties have shown that there
is a certain level of convergence on some concrete
issues, though substantial differences still persist. It
should also be pointed out that it is the parties
themselves that are responsible for ensuring progress in
those talks, of which the outcome should be a mutually
beneficial agreement. For the process to succeed, it is
vital that the outcome - whatever it might be -
should be the outcome of negotiations between the
parties and not an international imposition.

We are pleased also to note the progress detailed
in Mr. Jessen-Petersen's report with regard to the
implementation of standards, which is evidence of the
commitment of the political leaders and of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo
to realizing the objectives set by the international
community. We agree with the Special Representative
that real progress regarding standards is a key factor in
setting the pace of the political process aimed at
determining the future status of Kosovo. We would
also underline the actions taken that have allowed for
the revitalization of the implementation process, and
we urge the Government of Kosovo to deploy vigorous
efforts in the key areas identified in the report,
including the incorporation of Kosovo Serbs in the
Provisional Institutions; the promotion of confidence
and reconciliation between both communities; and
ensuring that due attention is given to the security
situation and the rule of law, bringing to justice those
who are responsible for acts of violence.

Argentina believes that there can be no
prosperous or peaceful future for Kosovo without full
respect for the diversity of its people. We think that it
is necessary, and possible, to reach a sustainable
solution for Kosovo with full implementation of the
principle of territorial integrity. This political process
must be fostered by real progress in the
implementation of the eight standards. Standards
implementation is also a requirement for realizing
Kosovo's European perspective, and it must continue
to be the core of the efforts during the process of status
determination, and even after that process has been
completed. We urge the Provisional Institutions to
continue the vigorous implementation of the standards
in order to fulfil the aim of laying the foundations of a
multi-ethnic and democratic society in Kosovo, where
all communities can live in dignity, security and
democracy.

