Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on a
very important topic. As this is my first statement at
the Security Council this year, I would like to offer
congratulations to the newly elected members of the
Security Council - Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Spain and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

My country expresses its serious concern about
the ongoing violations in the Palestinian occupied
territories and in the whole region of the Middle East.
Developments there, such as continuing settlement and
construction processes in the occupied territories, do
not make it possible to speak about any improvement
in the situation of regional and international peace and
security.

My country reiterates its recognition of the
legitimate right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination, the creation of an independent State of
Palestine within the 1967 borders, peacefully coexisting
with Israel, and obtaining full-fledged membership in
the United Nations. The two-State solution is the only
viable option for a durable peace reached through direct
and meaningful negotiations.

We therefore call on Israeli and Palestinian leaders
to show wisdom, responsibility and political will
to reach a historic peace agreement that meets the
legitimate aspirations oftheir peoples. The ultimate goal
of all efforts should be the restoration and promotion of
peace processes in accordance with Security Council
resolutions and other relevant mechanisms. All parties
must fulfil their commitments responsibly as stipulated
by the road map. We commend the internal Palestinian
reconciliation process and the consolidation of the
efforts of the Government of Palestine to alleviate
the situation. Kazakhstan expresses its hope that
international actions led by the United Nations will
contribute to the resumption of further peace talks.

Kazakhstan is very alarmed about the overall
situation in the Middle East. Well-coordinated
international efforts need to be brought to bear to stop
the senseless bloodshed and find an inclusive political
solution. My country strongly condemns atrocities
against civilian populations and foreign citizens and
attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), which pose a major threat to the region and its
population, including children from our part of the
world. We stress that terrorism can be defeated only
by a sustained and comprehensive approach, with the
active cooperation of all States and international and
regional organizations.

We strongly believe that all peaceful means are
appropriate for preventing tension and resolving
conflict. In addition to politicians and diplomats,
religious and spiritual leaders should be involved in
such processes to soften the hearts of enemies.

Kazakhstan has worked hard to build a culture of
tolerance and respect through, inter alia, the regular
convening of the Congress of Leaders of World and
Traditional Religions, where leaders of various beliefs
together seek ways to promote peace based on spiritual
values. As an example, the participants in the fourth
Congress in 2012, in Astana, included the two Chief
Rabbis of Israel - Sephardic and Ashkenazi - the
Secretary General ofthe Muslim World League, Islamic
leaders from the Middle East States, prominent
theologians including from Al-Azhar University,
in Egypt, Orthodox Christian Patriarchs, Holy See
Cardinals and Buddhist, Hindu and Taoist leaders from
different parts of the world.

The fifth Congress will take place in Astana in June.
Its theme will be dialogue among religious leaders and
politicians in the name of peace and development. We
believe that the Congress could serve as a showcase of
ways to contribute to dispute resolution efforts through
mutual respect and understanding.

In conclusion we again urgently call on all parties,
especially those with real political power and influence,
to commit their political will to ensuring lasting peace
and security in the Middle East and freedom andjustice
for all people through a genuine multilateral approach.

