Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for having convened
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and
mediation efforts. I also thank the representatives of
Palestine and Israel for their statements.

Today's debate comes at a particularly sensitive
time for the consideration of the situation in the
Middle East, in particular in Gaza, where violence
has reached an unacceptable level. Chad follows with
great concern and consternation the spike of violence
hitherto unseen in Gaza, which since 8 July has been
subjected to a full-scale Israeli assault, leading to more
than 600 deaths; more than 350 wounded, the majority
of whom are civilians, including women, children and
the elderly; and more than 100,000 displaced persons,
all of which has been compounded by the destruction
of civilian infrastructure - housing, hospitals, clinics
and schools.

Chad vociferously condemns the massacre of

Shujaiya, a city where many civilian lives were
lost on the Palestinian side as a result of the Israeli
bombardment. We also condemn any attacks targeting
innocent civilians or civilian infrastructure. We are all
aware that such acts of violence against civilians are
serious violations of the most fundamental principles of
international humanitarian law and could constitute war
crimes. The perpetrators of such crimes and atrocities
should be held to account. The principle ofpayback and
justice cannot be used as a pretext.

Chad deplores the growing number of civilian
casualties and regrets the approving silence or impotence
of the international community and the resulting failure
to put an end to the escalation of violence in Gaza.
Israel's legitimate right to self-defence cannot justify
such a high number of civilian casualties. The right to
self-defence is defined with respect to the threat and to
the right to life and security of innocent civilians. In
that regard, Israel has the obligation to act in line with
international humanitarian law and to protect the lives
of the civilian population.

We call upon Israel to immediately halt its air raids
and ground offensive, which have already claimed far
too many lives and caused destruction and material
damage. Along the same lines, we call upon the
Palestinians to halt attacks on Israel from the Gaza
Strip, particularly through rocket fire. We call upon
the international community to act with solidarity to
provide emergency humanitarian aid to the people in
Gaza and to support the efforts of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East.

The 2 million people in the Gaza Strip, under a
blockade since 2007, are cut off from the rest of the
world, stripped of the minimum of necessities and
subjected to periodic collective punishment. They
are experiencing a tragedy that is an affront to the
human conscience. The Security Council, as the
body exclusively responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, has an obligation
to persuade Israel to put an end to its attacks against
civilians and to its disproportionate offensive.

Chad supports all the good offices of the international
community, including those of the Secretary-General
and the Egyptian initiative, supported by the League
of Arab States, to bring about a cessation of hostilities
and a resumption of peace talks. In that regard, it is of
utmost importance to take on board the concerns of all
parties so as to find a fair, comprehensive and definitive
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis
of the well-known parameters, chiefly, the two-State
solution, living side by side in peace and security with
the pre-l967 borders.

The Middle East region is increasingly fragile.
The wars in Iraq and Syria, the collapse of security
in Yemen and the ongoing fragility of Lebanon are
all worrisome signs that call attention to genuine and
imminent threats looming over the Middle East and
undermining peace and security, which are increasingly
called into question. The international community
should make tireless efforts and be firm in its policy
so as to extinguish the fires in the various areas of
the region and thereby ensure that they do not spread
further to threaten international peace and security on
a yet broader scale.

