Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Like my
dear colleague, the Ambassador of Pakistan, I will try
to be brief.

Allow me to start by expressing our gratitude to
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
our good and dear friend Mr. de Mistura, head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, for
their efforts and dedication to strengthening peace and
stability in Afghanistan. We attach great importance to
the role of the United Nations in coordinating
international efforts in Afghanistan, and extend our full
support for the Mission's success.

Very briefly, I would like to touch upon a few
points regarding the prevailing situation in
Afghanistan.
First, the announcement of the drawdown of
United States military forces this year is a welcome
step, but this withdrawal should not be compensated
for by the establishment of permanent military bases in
Afghanistan. Obviously, the presence of foreign
military forces, in whatever form and under whatever
justification, would not help to ensure peace and
stability in Afghanistan; rather, it would provide
enough excuse for the extremist groups to prolong and
continue the armed conflict.

Secondly, we are very concerned about the
increase in the loss of lives and injuries inflicted upon
Afghan civilians. We are also worried about more
displacements of people. Putting the lives of innocent
people at the mercy of drone attacks must be halted.
There is no justification for putting the lives of
innocent civilians at risk in the name of countering
terrorism.

Thirdly, we welcome the initiative of the
Government of Afghanistan in setting up the High
Peace Council. Mr. Rabani, the head of the Council,
paid a visit to Iran and we expressed our readiness to
host one of the meetings of the Council in Iran, with
the participation of Afghan political groups and
factions. We hope that the High Peace Council will
expand its discussions on the reconciliation and
reintegration efforts within Afghanistan and with the
countries in the region.

Fourthly, in the area of regional cooperation, the
neighbouring countries of Afghanistan share critical
interests in Afghanistan's security and long-term
stability and play a role in promoting Afghanistan's
socio-economic development. Obviously, a stable and
flourishing Afghanistan would be the ideal situation for
its neighbours and the wider region. The continuing
engagement between Afghanistan and its neighbours
and regional partners in the areas of trade and
economic and infrastructure development must be
supported.

Fifthly, the narcotic drugs problem is still one of
the most serious challenges that Afghanistan and the
transit countries are facing. We should all take
seriously the warning issued in January by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime that rising opium
prices may encourage farmers to plant more opium
poppies. The traffic in narcotics has also served as a
breeding ground for terrorists, extremists and illegal
groups attempting to destabilize the Afghan

1 1-26621
Government. We call again on those who bear the
responsibility for combating narcotic drugs on behalf
of the international community to take more concrete
steps to curb this threat as soon as possible.

Sixthly, we have continued our dialogue with the
Afghan authorities on bilateral cooperation,
particularly in relation to increasing cooperation on
security matters, counter-narcotics efforts, illegal
immigrants, migrant workers and the completion of
development projects, including road and railway
building. A number of agreements were reached at last
week's visit by Iran's Minister of the Interior to
Afghanistan, and we look forward to more agreements
at the bilateral and trilateral summits of the Presidents
of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, and the trilateral
meeting with Tajikistan during next week's visit to Iran
for the celebration of Nowruz.

We are confident that the people and Government
of Afghanistan, who have undergone so many
hardships and much suffering in past decades, will
soon surmount the challenges and difficulties and move
ahead towards a prosperous, peaceful and stable
Afghanistan. We wish them the best, especially at the
beginning of Nowruz, the historical New Year
celebration, in the coming days.

