Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to begin by paying tribute to the men and
women police officers and commanders working today
in United Nations peacekeeping missions in what are
sometimes very difficult security situations. Listening
to Mr. Lacroix and the testimonies of our briefers
today, we see clearly that it is particularly important to
ensure that populations really feel the benefits of our
peacekeeping operations, especially when it comes to
improving their daily lives. We clearly see that police
forces have a key role to play in that regard. The account
provided by Ms. Marie-Joseph Fitah-Kona, Adviser
to the Mayor of the Third Arrondissement of Bangui,
whom I warmly thank for her participation today, is
illustrative of that.

France intends to be a willing and constructive
partner in that area, and that is why we fully support
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, including the
commitment, in that framework, to make the United
Nations police more efficient and effective and better
able to respond to the needs of the people. To that end,
it is necessary that the United Nations police dispose of
the appropriate capacities in terms of planning, force
generation, crisis management and guidance. In that
regard, I will focus on three priority issues for us.

First, the police and gendarmerie personnel
provided by contributing countries must offer genuine
added value in terms of technical competence
and operational capacity. The United Nations also
needs their expertise within command structures.
Accordingly, France is deploying a team of police
officers specialized in explosives and forensic science
to work within the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. We also
provide experts in the areas of formed police units and
planning within the Secretariat.

Secondly, we believe that the role of police units
must be reappraised. While the Blue Helmet military
contingents represent the bulk of uniformed personnel
in any peacekeeping operation, police officers have a
specific and indispensable role. Their presence sends a
different message, which is that of a gradual return to
normalcy linked to a reduced threat level and positive
developments in the security situation. In that regard,
local populations are generally well able to see that.

The extremely special role of police units takes on
special meaning during the transition phases. Indeed,
as the number of Blue Helmets gradually decreases, the
host State strengthens its sovereignty and the armed
forces gradually take over, United Nations police units
demonstrate that United Nations investment is not
limited to the deployment of units, but that concern for
local populations remains at the heart of the Security
Council's priorities. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo comes to mind. In some provinces, as the
Permanent Representative of Belgium underlined,
police units can take over from peacekeeping units.

The last point that I want to emphasize is that
increasing the female presence among contingents
and police personnel is essential. We must continue
to make progress in that area in accordance with the
ambitious but obtainable, goals set by the Secretary-
General. As several United Nations police missions
have pointed out, there is a positive correlation between
the participation of women in police forces and the
stability and sustainability ofpeace processes. We have
seen that in Liberia, where the inclusion of women
in police forces helped to reduce sexual and gender-
based violence during the day and especially at night.
We regret that, despite those positive statistics, the
inclusion of women in police forces remains glaringly
insufficient, while we nevertheless welcome the efforts
of the Department of Peace Operations to increase the
number of women deployed.

I should like to conclude by asking several questions.
My first question is general and addressed to each one of
the briefers. What, broadly speaking, are the principle
difficulties in carrying out their missions? My second
question is addressed to all briefers and concerns the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in
particular. How do they assess the capacities available
to respond to the needs of victims of sexual and gender-
based violence?

Lastly, I have a question for Mr. Abdounasir,
Police Commissioner of MONUSCO. His reference to
MONUSCO's efforts to counter organized crime by
prioritizing the strengthening of the penal system was
very useful. I would be equally interested to know what
other information he might be able to share with us
with regard to the activities that the police component
of MONUSCO is carrying out in helping deal with the
Ebola crisis.

