Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I would like to thank Mr.
Annabi for his briefing and his introduction of the
Secretary-General's report. Like Ambassadors Greenstock
and Hasmy before me, let me say that my delegation would
be happy to comply with Mr. Annabi's plea for an
extension of the reporting period.

The report before us points to some positive
developments, but essentially the news is bad. As the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) is in
the process of deploying - very courageously, I might add
- its units have been the targets of rebel attacks and
intimidation. There are widespread, major human rights
violations, and they are so bad that these violations
prompted a strongly worded statement to the press by the
Council's President only last week.

This situation is unacceptable, and the main
responsibility for it lies quite clearly with Mr. Sankoh and
the lack of commitment on the part of Mr. Sankoh and
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). This is the theme,
the red line running throughout the Secretary-General's
report. The process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration is proceeding slowly, and while any progress
in this area is of course good news, here again the
programme is in trouble because of a lack of commitment
on the part of the RUF.

While the international community is devising new
ways of addressing the needs of a country emerging from
conflict, Mr. Sankoh pockets what is offered him under
the terms of the peace accord. He sits in the Government
and has himself appointed head of the Commission that
is supposed to curb the sale of illegally mined diamonds
from Sierra Leone, all the while himself dragging his feet
when it comes to fulfilling his part of the deal. And
worse, Mr. Sankoh is not just trying to obstruct the Peace
Agreement, he is in fact trying to intimidate the
international community.

While there is much that could and should be said
regarding the steps ahead outlined by the Secretary-
General at the end of his report, their success is
predicated on the international community's success in
forcing Mr. Sankoh and his supporters to abide by the
Peace Agreement. Without the RUF's cooperation, there
just will not be the measure of security and stability
needed for faster and further progress.
The Security Council has been unequivocal that it
will not put up with Mr. Savimbi any longer. The time
has come now to show that the Security Council's
patience with Mr. Sankoh is running out.

As part of our effort to ensure a strong and credible
UNAMSIL presence, we should spare no effort to ensure
the full deployment of UNAMSIL, with access to all parts
of Sierra Leone, and firm UNAMSIL action in
accordance with its robust rules of engagement.

While UNAMSIL is not fully deployed, the
continued presence of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) is needed to maintain the fragile stability and
prevent a security vacuum. We applaud the Nigerian offer
to suspend the withdrawal of Nigerian ECOMOG troops
remaining in Sierra Leone.

A warm tribute is due also to President Konare,
whose commitment to regional stability is well known
from his leadership in fostering the ECOWAS small arms
moratorium and whose energetic current leadership of

 

ECOWAS is contributing greatly to the international
community's peace efforts in Sierra Leone.

Finally, I should like to ask two questions of Mr.
Annabi. Paragraph 48 of the report states that viable
mechanisms should be created to allow the Government and
the people of Sierra Leone to reap the benefits of the
exploitation of the country's strategic resources. Does this
not imply that the Commission for the Management of
Strategic Resources, National Reconstruction and
Development, which is chaired by Mr. Sankoh, is not in
itself such a viable mechanism as intended in paragraph 48?

Finally, I would be grateful if Mr. Annabi could shed
some light on the projects that will be developed as part of
the community rehabilitation and reintegration programme
referred to in paragraph 26 of the Secretary-General's
report.

