Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): We thank
the Secretary-General for his report and Mr. Klein, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his statement. We are grateful to the diplomats and to
the General for having reminded us of the essential
elements of a peacekeeping operation - a clear
mandate, consent of the parties and, above and beyond
that consent, their full support for the efforts of the
Mission, appropriate resources and, lastly, persistence
in implementing the mandate with the difficult
arbitration that this requires

In this spirit, the combined efforts of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) and the Office of the High Representative
contribute greatly to stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and will remain a critical component in
international efforts to guarantee a viable and durable
peace in the region.

Canada commends the recent inauguration of the
State Border Service at the Sarajevo airport and the
support that was provided in this regard by UNMIBH
and by the Special Representative from the outset. As
Mr. Klein underscored, it constitutes an important step
towards building the State identity and strengthening
common institutions. This service will also provide
more effective means to fight smuggling and
corruption and will, therefore, bring Bosnia closer to
Euro-Atlantic institutions.

We believe that a coherent and integrated strategy
is essential to any lasting establishment of the rule of
law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this regard, Canada
wishes to underscore the work and the achievements of
the judicial system assessment programme under the
auspices of UNMIBH. We believe it will be important
to ensure that appropriate follow-up arrangements are
made with competent bodies to ensure successful
implementation of the recommendations of the judicial
system assessment programme.

It is encouraging that progress is being made in
changing the composition of police forces, which
absolutely must reflect the multi-ethnic character of the
communities which they serve. We encourage Bosnian
authorities to cooperate fully with UNMIBH in
establishing professional, accountable multi-ethnic
police forces.

Lastly, the return of refugees and displaced
persons to their homes is a top priority. The Bosnian
authorities must fully implement measures likely to
foster returns, such as the property law, and cease
obstructing legal evictions. Progress on this front will
be critical in measuring the real commitment of
Bosnia's authorities to a lasting peace within the
Framework ofthe Dayton Accords.

The role of the International Police Task Force in
this regard is key, and we welcome their success in
creating security in some parts ofthe country.

