Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his insightful
briefing on developments concerning the tunnels along
the Blue Line. The tunnels identified are a clear violation

ofresolution 1701 (2006), and we are glad to hear today
they are being disabled. We are convinced that United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) technical
teams should carry out thorough inspections south of
the Blue Line in order to prevent any similar activity in
that area in future.

We appreciate the efforts of UNIFIL Force
Commander Del Col to de-escalate the situation on the
border between Lebanon and Israel. We appreciate also
the meetings held with Lebanese President Michel Aoun
and Speaker Nabih Berri in Beirut. We are pleased to
hear that the overall situation in UNIFIL's area of
operation remains calm and that the mission is working
with all interlocutors to maintain overall stability. We
must therefore further support the efforts of United
Nations peacekeeping forces to monitor the situation
along the Blue Line. They must have full access to all
locations along that Line. We also appeal to all parties
to tone down the rhetoric.
UNIFIL peacekeepers should further increase
their patrolling along the Blue Line, together with
the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF), so as to maintain
overall stability and avoid any misunderstandings that
could lead to escalation. We request that the Force
Commander be in close liaison with both the LAF and
the Israeli Defense Forces. All parties should therefore
make use of UNIFIL's dialogue, coordination and
tripartite mechanisms in de-escalating tensions.

We join others in urging all the parties to prevent
violations of the Blue Line under any circumstances.
The Lebanese army should continue to expand the
State's sovereignty and control throughout the country
and try to maintain a permanent ceasefire. Both Tel
Aviv and Beirut should strictly comply with all the
relevant Security Council resolutions and assist the
United Nations peacekeeping forces with their mandate.
Kazakhstan supports Lebanon's territorial integrity,
sovereignty and political independence, provided for in
the General Armistice Agreement between Israel and
Lebanon of 23 March 1949, and based on paragraph
5 of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). We
condemn Israel's numerous and continuing violations
of Lebanon's territorial integrity, which must cease
immediately. We reaffirm Israel's right to protection,
but at the same time Israel must observe the established
borders and other demarcation lines.

We were pleased to learn that UNIFIL and the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
Lebanon are continuing to engage with the Lebanese
authorities in order to ensure the appropriate follow-up
to the Rome II conference, held in March, which in turn
will ensure Lebanon's commitment to increasing the
strength and presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces in
the UNIFIL area of operations by deploying its model
regiment and building the Lebanese navy's capacity.

Lastly, these noteworthy measures must continue
and be supported by the Council and the wider
international community. Kazakhstan is keen to make
a real contribution, so two months ago we deployed a
peacekeeping contingent to UNIFIL. As our term is
coming to an end, this is the last time that Kazakhstan
will address this issue as a Council member. Let me
assure the Council that our commitment to this agenda
item will be steadfast as we continue to support the
Force Commander and the mission in the future.

