Mr. Kubis: It gives me great pleasure to be here
before the Security Council after my previous
appearances as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan, and now in my capacity as
Secretary General of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). On behalf of OSCE
and its Chairman-in-Office, Foreign Minister Jaap de
Hoop Scheffer of the Netherlands, I thank you, Sir, for
the invitation to participate in this timely meeting.

During the Istanbul OSCE Summit of 1999, the
heads of State and Government of the OSCE
participating States reiterated

"the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security and its crucial role in
contributing to security and stability in our
region".
They also reaffirmed OSCE as a regional arrangement
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, as a primary organization for the peaceful
settlement of disputes within its region and as a key
instrument for early warning, conflict prevention, crisis
management and post-conflict rehabilitation, as well as
the inclusive and comprehensive organization for
consultation, decision-making and cooperation in its
region.

From its inception in 1975, OSCE's work has
been based on the concept of comprehensive, common
and indivisible security. From that perspective, OSCE
promotes equally human rights, the rule of law,
democratic institutions, free media, free and fair
elections - including election supervision and
monitoring - economic reforms, good governance and
the fight against corruption, and ecological security,
alongside more traditional political and politico-
military aspects of security, including confidence- and
security-building measures and small arms and light
weapons-related activities, to mention but a few areas.
The multifaceted, cross-border nature of security
challenges in the modern world, such as terrorism,
trafficking, transnational organized crime or ethnic and
religious discrimination and intolerance, requires both
a multidimensional approach and a common response.

OSCE has always constituted a unique forum for
inclusive political and security dialogue and
cooperation among its participating States and for
developing principles and standards in different areas
of security, but it is also an action-oriented and highly
operational organization. Practical instruments at our
disposal include our institutions: the High
Commissioner on National Minorities, the Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, the
Representative on Freedom of the Media, the
Secretariat, as well as the Parliamentary Assembly.

Approximately a decade ago, OSCE deployed its
first mission. Currently, OSCE missions and field
operations are a hallmark of the organization. Nearly
4,000 of our international and local staff work in 19
civilian field operations and some 80 per cent of the
OSCE budget is devoted to their work.

To deploy our missions rapidly requires, among
other things, simple, operational and efficient resource-
management solutions supported by robust and reliable
information technology. At their core are clearly
defined responsibility and accountability, roles and
processes built around OSCE programmes managers,
heads of institutions and heads of missions.
To increase the Organization's responsiveness to
modern security challenges, the recent OSCE
Ministerial Council in Porto last December took a
number of important decisions. OSCE has decided to
develop in the course of this year an OSCE strategy to
address threats to security and stability in the twenty-
first century. The strategy will make an inventory of
threats to security and stability in the OSCE area and
analyse their changing nature and main causes, setting
out how OSCE can prevent or counter threats to
security and stability and contribute to relevant
international efforts. The ministers have also decided to
conduct a review of peacekeeping with a view towards
assessing OSCE capacity to conduct peacekeeping
operations and identifying options for potential OSCE
involvement in peacekeeping in the OSCE region.
Further, the first Annual Security Review Conference,
to be convened this June, will provide a framework for
an enhanced security dialogue in the OSCE area.

As has been the case with many other
international and regional organizations since 11
September 2001, issues related to preventing and
combating terrorism have risen to the top of the
OSCE's agenda. The Plan of Action for Combating
Terrorism, which was adopted by the OSCE's
Ministerial Council at Bucharest in 2001, and the
OSCE Charter on Preventing and Combating
Terrorism, which was adopted at the Porto Ministerial
Council in 2002, reiterated the core principles and
approaches that guide OSCE actions in the fight
against terrorism in support of the United Nations-led
effort. Just a month ago, the OSCE reported to the
Security Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee's
special meeting with regional organizations about the
OSCE's activities and experiences in the area of
counter-terrorism.

Other capabilities and capacities critical to
preventing and combating both traditional and new
security challenges which have been built up by the
OSCE in recent years include policing, border
monitoring and security, and combating trafficking in
all its forms. Further strengthening the OSCE's work in
those areas is an important priority for the Dutch
chairmanship-in-office of the OSCE in 2003. For
example, the forthcoming 2003 OSCE economic
forum, which is to be held in Prague, will be fully
dedicated to the issue of combating trafficking in
human beings, drugs and arms.

The lessons learned from the four OSCE missions
that currently possess a police-related element and
from the expertise established in the Strategic Police
Matters Unit, which was formed last year in the
secretariat, are now enabling the OSCE to
comprehensively implement police-related assistance
in the areas of reform, training and capacity- and
institution-building.

Because of its broad and supportive membership,
its comprehensive approach to security and its proven
operational flexibility, the OSCE has demonstrated a
high degree of effectiveness in developing and rapidly
deploying multidimensional activities. It has also
proved to be a good partner for other organizations
involved in complex peace operations. The OSCE pays
special attention to the complementarity of its efforts
with those of the United Nations, which is indeed the
vital cornerstone of multilateral responsibility and
action. The aim is to introduce a concerted operational
mechanism to strengthen the common response to new
threats to international and regional stability and
security. Regular meetings between the Secretary-
General and regional organizations assist us in that
endeavour.

There are a number of examples of how we work
side by side with our international partners - with the
United Nations in Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro,
where the OSCE Mission in Kosovo constitutes the
democratization and institution-building pillar of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK); as well as in Georgia and, in the
past, in Tajikistan and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Among
our other key international partners are the European
Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), the Council of Europe and, increasingly,
organizations within the region of the Commonwealth
of Independent States. The OSCE's guiding principles
and commitment to such cooperation are defined in its
Platform for Cooperative Security, which is the
operational document of the 1999 OSCE Charter for
European Security.

At the same time, as a regional organization, the
OSCE also sees its role as being a general framework
and forum for interaction and cooperation among
subregional organizations and initiatives working in the
OSCE area. Furthermore, the OSCE has maintained or
intensified its contacts with other regional
organizations outside the OSCE area, including with
the Organization of American States, the Association
of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), the ASEAN
Regional Forum, the African Union, the League of
Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. In that endeavour the aim has been to
share our experiences in various areas. A good point of
departure for such cooperation is our joint work with
six OSCE Mediterranean Partners for Cooperation and
four Asian Partners for Cooperation. The fourth Asian
partner is Afghanistan, which was admitted as OSCE
Partner for Cooperation two weeks ago.

In conclusion, I would once again like to express
the OSCE's appreciation for this initiative by the
Mexican presidency of the Security Council. I would
also like to emphasize the fact that the OSCE is open to
cooperation, ready to share its knowledge and
experience and willing to learn from the United
Nations and other international partners.

