Mr. Maurer: I am grateful for the opportunity to
address the Security Council today.

The shape of conflict has undergone rapid
transformation in recent years and the result is a heavy
price being paid by tens of millions of women, men and
children around the world. They suffer the immediate
impact, namely, death, injury and displacement,
and often the invisible harms, such as psychological
trauma, sexual violence and the loss of missing family
members. In today's wars, a vast array of armed
forces, special forces, armed groups, terrorist groups
and criminal gangs now fight directly or by proxy and
openly or secretly. Conflicts and protagonists cross
State borders. Battles are fought in populated areas,
risking thousands of civilian lives and destroying
critical infrastructure. Wars often involve partners
and allies, leading to a dilution of responsibility, the
fragmentation of command chains and an unchecked
flow of weapons. That only increases the climate of
impunity and, ultimately, causes yet more suffering.

With the absence of political solutions, wars are
increasingly protracted, with year after year of violence
and turmoil, embedding resentments and deepening
fragility. When I speak with families who are living
through the realities of war and violence today, they
often asked why this has happened and how this has
been allowed to happen. Humanitarian action is often
desperately needed in such miserable situations.

Throughout the operations of the International
Committee ofthe Red Cross (ICRC), we see that neutral,
independent and impartial humanitarian action has the
best chance of reaching those most in need. It is also a
tried and tested formula to prevent humanitarian action
being appropriated for larger and more controversial
political agendas.

Yet in many places across the world, the space for
impartial humanitarian action is under threat. Human
dignity is disregarded, the applicability of the law is
questioned, and humanitarian aid is politicized and
deliberately hijacked for political gain or the control of
populations. Terrorist attacks, indiscriminate by nature,
are destroying the very notion of proportionality,
precaution and distinction, which are at the core of
behaviour in combat.

Moreover, neutral and impartial humanitarian
action is hindered by complex sanctions regimes
and counter-terrorism measures. Humanitarian
organizations are increasingly placed under pressure as
both States and non-State armed groups hold civilian
populations and humanitarian actors to ransom in order
to achieve their goals.

But humanitarian organizations do not exist to
endorse, to legitimize or to help the authorities further
their political objectives. The ICRC works to help
States live up to the obligations to which they have
signed up, not to help them circumnavigate them.
When the principles of impartiality are breached and
humanitarian action is curtailed, families such as the
ones I meet go hungry, fall sick and are left vulnerable
to abuse. It is no wonder that they are asking why.

Today we are also witnessing a shift in the
perception of international humanitarian law and
protection work. International humanitarian law does
not rely on reciprocity. It applies even if an opponent
fails to comply. It relies on a consensual understanding
among belligerents that there are limits to war and that
there must be a neutral and impartial humanitarian
space in which those not participating in hostilities
are protected. Those who deny the space deny the very
essence of the law.

The Geneva Conventions are not up for negotiation.
They reflect, in normative language, the tested practice
of societies over time. They are customary law and
must guide practical action. They are a tool and a
reliable basis on which to facilitate trust and dialogue,
allowing for consensus-building among belligerents.
For example, agreements have been brokered with
regard to those who have gone missing during war,
bringing news to traumatized families on each side, or
exchanging the remains of the dead. Such agreements,
facilitated throughout a neutral and independent space,
can be the first steps in building trust and in forming
other arrangements to lessen people's suffering, such as
the exchange of detainees, family contacts across front
lines and others.

With political actors increasingly occupying the
humanitarian space, humanitarians must find practical
ways to fulfil our mission in today's more complex
environment. Front-line humanitarian negotiators are
rapidly becoming more critical in building support
for humanitarian action. Through the Centre of
Competence on Humanitarian Negotiation, the ICRC
has been building systematic knowledge and networks
of professional negotiators to develop more adaptive
strategies and practices in field operations today.

It is the task of the international community to
fiercely defend and protect principled humanitarian
action. We ask that States take the following very
practical steps, that is, that they fight any attempt to
instrumentalize, manipulate or politicize principled
humanitarian action. Humanitarian access must not
be unlawfully denied or withheld, especially when
people's basic needs are going unmet. While neutral
and impartial organizations, such as the ICRC, in
accordance with the Geneva Conventions, have the right
to propose humanitarian action to States, States have an
obligation to facilitate such action unless constrained
by valid security concerns.

We ask that States fight the double standards that
delegitimize law and weaken its protective force. Politics
is about the different priorities of States, and we well
understand how difficult it is in today's international
arena to harmonize their positions. The humanitarian
space is about respecting the law to which they have
already agreed consensually, not about abusing the
law to make a political point. We ask, therefore, that
States lead by example and steadfastly respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
Individually or in partnered military operations,
this means using their positive influence to ensure
the proper application of the rules on the conduct of
hostilities, the protection of civilians and medical
facilities, and the humane treatment of detainees. We
ask that States train and instruct their own troops and
the troops of their partners so that they know the law
and how to respect it, that they vet and oversee with
appropriate structures, processes and mechanisms the
combat operations in which they and their partners
are involved, and that they put in place accountability
mechanisms that ensure respect for the law.

With regard to the proliferation of arms, we urge
that States ensure that safeguards and precautions are
in place and that no weapon is transferred if there is a
clear risk that it would be used to violate international
humanitarian law. We ask that hostilities be conducted
in a manner that protects civilians and with respect
for the basic principles of distinction, precaution and
proportionality and that their operational guidance and
those of their partners concretize these principles for
combat operations. Of particular concern is the use
of explosive weapons. The ICRC sees the enormous
civilian cost of bombing and shelling, including death
and physical injury, but also long-term damage to
critical civilian infrastructure.

We ask all parties to an armed conflict to refrain
from using explosive weapons with wide-area effects
in populated areas owing to the significant likelihood
of indiscriminate effects. To support these efforts of
leadership on international humanitarian law, the ICRC
is preparing an international humanitarian law road
map, to be adopted at the International Conference of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent in November. We are
looking forward to working with States and national
societies on pledges for the respect and implementation
of international humanitarian law.

The noose is tightening on humanitarian action.
We have seen some positive steps, including consistent
increases in humanitarian funding levels and the
recognition that counter-terrorism measures must
be compliant with international humanitarian law
obligations. The recent resolution 2462 (2019) is a case
in point. Its implementation at the domestic level will
be a crucial step towards preserving a humanitarian
space in domestic counter-terrorism regulations.

But our license to operate should not be up for
debate. It has already been guaranteed. The mission to
protect and aid civilians during times of armed conflict
was universally agreed 70 years ago, in the Geneva
Conventions. We call on States to step forward and
reaffirm this mission, not only in words but through
urgent and concrete actions.

