Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Russia has always taken the position of resolutely
resisting international terrorism in all its manifestations. In
combating this extremely dangerous threat to world peace
and security, we cooperate with various States in a concrete
and constructive manner, as well as with international and
regional organizations. Russia's contribution in preparing
the anti-terrorist decisions of the Group of 8, adopted in
Lyons and Paris, is clear proof of our consistent policy in
this regard.

Russia decisively condemned the attempted
assassination of the President of Egypt in Addis Ababa. We
are making persistent efforts to see to it that an objective
investigation into this crime, on the basis of facts, is carried
out and that its perpetrators are brought to justice.
This job can be accomplished only through
constructive cooperation between all interested parties,
including within the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and other regional mechanisms, as well as at the bilateral
level, with the involvement, if necessary, of competent
international agencies. In particular, we are familiar with
the pertinent proposals made by Interpol, but unfortunately,
so far they have been left floating in the air. Important
additional information might come to light also during the
in camera trial going on in Addis Ababa, and we repeat our
request for members of the Security Council to be informed
about this trial.

We cannot fail to be concerned by the fact that when
resolutions 1044 (1996) and 1054 (1996) were adopted, the
prevailing approach in the Security Council was aimed not
so much at investigating those suspected of perpetrating a
terrorist act as at isolating Sudan. In order to satisfy
short-term interests, the voices were ignored of those -
including my delegation - who strongly objected to the
unsound practice of imposing sanctions on the basis of
vague, and therefore hard-to-meet demands, without
clearly formulated criteria and conditions for their
imposition and lifting.

Unfortunately, a repetition of this approach can be
seen in this draft resolution. It is true that this time the
sponsors sensibly gave up the idea of an automatic
imposition of a partial air embargo against Sudan; that
was a step in the right direction. However, the draft
resolution predetermines the inevitability of an air
embargo. We are surprised that this was decided without
an attempt being made to assess the negative
humanitarian consequences of this measure for the
population of Sudan, despite the fact that our delegation
suggested that such a prior evaluation be conducted.
Moreover, paragraph 3 of the draft resolution would
impose sanctions not only on Sudan Airways but on all
other Sudanese airlines, which have never been accused
of anything.

The question arises of how Sudan should comply
with the provisions of resolutions 1044 (1996) and 1054
(1996), as, in several aspects, these provisions go beyond
the limits of Sudan's national jurisdiction and real
capacity.

The rash use of the sanctions instrument is not only
destructive for the people of Sudan and the countries of
the region, but creates a precedent which could do real
damage to the Security Council's authority by giving the
impression that the Council is not able to draw
conclusions from past lessons. A paradoxical situation
arises: on the one hand, during various informal
consultations and in discussion in bodies of the General
Assembly, broad support is given to the need to take into
account and minimize the negative consequences of
sanctions, inter alia for third countries, and the need to
establish clear criteria and time- limits; on the other hand,
when it comes to taking specific decisions in concrete
situations, the old approaches are followed.

In this light, the Russian delegation cannot support
the draft resolution. However, we deem it possible not to
stand in the way of its adoption. We trust that if, after
three months, it falls to the Security Council to consider
again the question of Sudan, common sense will prevail,
and a commitment will be made to the goal of a realistic
campaign against terrorism, not an attempt to use this

 

slogan to punish regimes that some find unpalatable. We
believe that such a discussion, if it takes place in three
months' time, should be conducted only on the basis of an
appropriate report of the Secretary-General, which should
reflect both the possible humanitarian consequences of the
measures being considered by the Security Council and an
analysis of specific ways to resolve the issue, taking into
account the proposals of Interpol and the progress made in
Addis Ababa in the in camera trial.

We are convinced that the problem of bringing the
suspects to justice must and can be urgently resolved. We
hope that the Government of Sudan, in the spirit of its
well-known proposals and promises, will, in cooperation
with the authorities of Ethiopia, Egypt and other interested
States, take real steps to attain that goal.

