Mr. Lamamra (spoke in French): Allow me at
the outset to thank you, Sir, and the other members of
the Council for this opportunity to report on the
African Union Commission's assessment of the
situation in and prospects for Somalia. I particularly
appreciate the privilege of participating in the Security
Council's consideration of this item under your
presidency, Sir. Your personal commitment and
Uganda's invaluable contribution to peace and
reconciliation in Somalia are recognized and praised
here and everywhere.

The situation in Somalia is difficult and volatile,
but it is neither desperate nor insurmountable. In the
few months since the unity Government, headed by
President Sheikh Sharif Sheik Ahmed, has been in
existence and functioning, we have seen marked
improvements in the country's governance. These
improvements reflect a drive for transparency,
inclusiveness and responsiveness to the expectations of
a people who have been sorely tried by years without a
State and by fratricidal hostilities.

The Transitional Federal Institutions, representing
broad political movements, have undertaken to work in
Somalia to create positive momentum towards a
resolution of the crisis. But anti-peace forces inside
and outside Somalia have redoubled their violent
efforts to destroy the achievements of the peace and
national reconciliation processes, supported by Africa
and the entire international community as a precious
opportunity for Somalia. These forces are working
relentlessly to ensure that Somalia is inescapably
associated with terrorism, piracy, endemic instability
and threats to itself as well as to neighbours near and
far.

The African Union's governing bodies, the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government and the
Peace and Security Council, have assumed and
reaffirmed action-oriented positions in line with all the
recommendations put forward by the political leaders
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
These positions and recommendations are well known
to the Council and I will not repeat them here. I would,
however, like to articulate three key ideas that I feel
should be seen as essential by the international
community, assuming that failure in Somalia is not an
option and that now more than ever is the time for
boldness and increased commitment.

First, the strategic stakes of the situation, in their
direct impact on international peace and security,
ensure that the Somali conflict cannot be dismissed as
a simple civil war fed by general dissatisfaction with
the distribution of power and wealth in the country.
Somalia has become a source of insecurity at a regional
level and beyond.

Secondly, the increase, since 12 May 2009, in
acts of armed violence against the Transitional Federal
Institutions, the nascent National Security Force and
the Somali police in Mogadishu is aimed not only at
bringing about an unconstitutional change of
Government, but at making Somalia a lasting trouble
spot and a base of operations for extremist activities
that challenge the region and the world as a whole.

Thirdly, the fight waged in legitimate self-
defence by the Somali Government and the forces
supporting President Sheikh Sharif Sheik Ahmed, on
the one hand, and the stabilization work carried out by
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), on
the other, together form a coherent resistance to a
global threat and are helping to defeat it.

Taking these considerations into account, we feel
that it is in the natural order of things that the
international community, mobilized in solidarity and
faced with the challenges that the anti-peace forces in
Somalia pose to its core values, should decide on and
implement bold and innovative measures. Beyond the
ongoing strengthening of AMISOM. and the
expeditious build-up of the Somali National Security
Force, it is important that Somalia's air space and
territorial waters not be open to the free passage of
weapons, munitions and foreign combatants.

It is equally important that the struggle not be
waged only where the anti-peace forces take the
initiative, in this case the capital, Mogadishu, which is
being increasingly emptied of its civilian population.
The authority of the State and of the Government of
President Ahmed should be gradually extended to other
parts of the country, beginning with those presenting
distinctive characteristics in operational as well as
strategic terms, and indeed in spiritual and symbolic
terms, too.

The African Union and the United Nations are
developing a lasting partnership in Somalia that heralds
a qualitative step forward in the design of peacekeeping
operations whose objective aims determine their form
and composition. The deployment of a sixth battalion,
from Burundi, with Algerian air assets and the
establishment of a United Nations logistics support
module, are further encouraging developments.

The conditions are thus gradually being created to
enable the United Nations to assume directly the large
share of responsibilities that naturally fall to it in
asserting the presence of the international community
in Somalia, including taking over from a fully
operational AMISOM. From this standpoint, upgrading
the level and effectiveness of regional and international
institutions' representation in Somalia would be a
timely step in the right direction.

The African Union, which welcomes the promising
work it is doing in Somalia with the United Nations
and the team headed by Special Representative Ould
Abdallah, alongside the Department of Field Support,
as well as the valuable assistance of its international
partners, expresses the hope that this struggle for peace
will be crowned with the success it deserves.

