Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his statement this
morning. Equally, we wish to express our sincere
gratitude to Mr. Achim Steiner, Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme, for his
extensive briefing. We welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Marcus Stephen, President of the
Republic of Nauru, in this room. His presence here
today can only be a demonstration of the real challenge
that sea-level rise presents to his country and to other
low-lying areas.
At the outset I wish to associate my delegation
with the statements to be made by the representative of
Argentina on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and
by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

South Africa reaffirms General Assembly
resolution 63/281, which invites the relevant organs of
the United Nations, as appropriate and within their
respective mandates, to intensify their efforts in
considering and addressing climate change, including
its possible security implications. In that regard, the
convening of this debate is timely and opportune to
highlight the reality of climate change and the threat it
poses to African and developing countries in general
and to the small island developing States (SIDS) and
least developing countries (LDCs) in particular. It is
those countries who bear the disproportionate impact
of climate change.

We would like to reiterate the well-known
principled position of the Group of 77 and China that
climate change threatens not only development
prospects and the achievement of sustainable
development, but also the very existence and survival
of societies.

The Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change makes it
clear that if no action on climate change is taken in the
next few years, there will be dire consequences, in
particular for the small island developing States that
are already experiencing slow onset effects of this
phenomenon. This enjoins us to deal with this global
problem in an equitable manner. In that regard, we join
other delegations in calling for the full and effective
implementation of the commitments under the
Barbados Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States and
the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation
of the Programme.

Developing countries are working hard to
eradicate poverty and underdevelopment and to
improve quality of life for our people. However, we
continue to be confronted by a lack of resources and
are relatively less prepared to deal with the
consequences of climate change. Least developed
countries, especially in Africa and Asia, as well as
small island developing States, cannot shoulder those
costs. It is for that reason that we continue to call for,
first, the scaling up of resources; secondly, the transfer
of technology and, thirdly, capacity-building to help
developing countries to deal with the grave
consequences of climate change.

South Africa firmly believes that the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol remain the best
instruments to deal with the broader challenges of
climate change. It is important that we all continue
honour our obligations under the UNFCCC and the
Kyoto Protocol if we are to effectively deal with the
challenges precipitated by climate change. That has to
be in accordance with the fundamental principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities. The
UNFCCC affords all Member States, including small
island developing States and LDCs, an opportunity to
advance their cause while ensuring robust engagement
with the partners.

The contribution that the members of the Security
Council can make to these UNFCCC processes is to
ensure that the architecture of the climate change
regime is strengthened and not fragmented. Such a
global challenge can be effectively dealt with only
through a strong rules-based international system. The
UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol should be
strengthened, and a second commitment period should
be finalized as soon as possible.

Finally, for South Africa, as President of the
seventeenth Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC,
this debate provides an opportunity to raise awareness
and exchange views in order to intensify global efforts
to address climate change, first as a sustainable
development issue and, secondly, to re-emphasize the
need to retain the climate change debate within the
UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol.

For our part, we will spare no effort in ensuring
that the parties strive for a balanced and credible
outcome in Durban that is party-driven. In that regard,
we will rely on the bureau, work optimally with the
secretariat of the UNFCCC and consult with the parties
and their regional groups in an inclusive and
transparent manner.

