Mrs. Albright (United States of America): We meet
today to consider a matter of grave concern to my
country, to members of this Council and to all who care
about the safety of those engaged in civil aviation around
the world.

The issue before us is not the United States versus
Cuba. It does not require that Council members make a
judgement about the repressive nature of Cuba's
Government or about the rights and wrongs of the past 35
years of United States-Cuban relations. The draft
resolution deals, instead, with a fundamental question of
international law and with the observance or
non-observance of international standards.

It is for this reason that the draft resolution
condemns the cowardly and cold-blooded shootdown by
Cuba on 24 February of two unarmed civilian aircraft
operated by Brothers to the Rescue and declares that
shootdown to be a violation of international law. The
draft resolution also extends to the families of those who
were killed the Council's deepest sympathy and
condolences. I thank those of my colleagues who met
with the family members of those killed on 24 February
and who can better appreciate the human dimension of
this tragedy. The draft resolution also demands that all
nations, specifically including Cuba, abide in the future
by international legal standards governing civil aviation.

Months ago, in the aftermath of the shootdowns,
representatives of the United States and Cuba each set out
a version of the events that took place on 24 February. In
key respects, those accounts differed. To resolve the
differences, each Government pledged to cooperate fully
with an investigation to be conducted by the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). Inherent in the
pledge of each was an obligation to accept the outcome
of that investigation. The United States does accept the
outcome of that investigation. Indeed, we believe that it
provides an accurate account of the facts.

Those facts are clear. The Cuban military first
identified these two unarmed Cessna planes as civil
aircraft and then knowingly and intentionally destroyed
them with air-to-air missiles. The Cubans did not follow
ICAO standards or their own published procedures for

 

intercepting aircraft. The Cubans did not attempt to make
radio contact with either plane, nor did they instruct the
planes to land at a designated location. Finally, according
to the most reliable position estimates, the aircraft were
destroyed approximately 9 to 10 miles outside Cuban
airspace.

By its actions, Cuba violated the principle of
customary international law that States must refrain from
resorting to the use of weapons against civil aircraft in
flight - a principle that applies whether the aircraft are in
national or international airspace. Cuba violated the ICAO
principle that interception of civil aircraft should be
undertaken only as a last resort. Cuba failed to follow
proper warning procedures. And, as the ICAO noted in its
own resolution on 27 June, by taking the lives of four of
my countrymen - Pablo Morales, Carlos Costa, Mario de
la Pefia and Armando Alejandre - Cuba violated
elementary considerations of humanity.

Although the draft resolution before us today is
prompted by a tragedy that occurred five months ago, its
greatest value relates to the future. This Council's primary
mission is to maintain international peace and security. The
draft resolution serves that goal by calling upon all nations
to refrain from shooting down civil aircraft in violation of
international legal standards.

But the Government of Cuba still refuses to
acknowledge the unlawful nature of its actions on 24
February. It has not expressed regret at the death of the
four men who were killed, or evidenced sympathy for the
irreplaceable loss felt by their families. And it continues to
threaten that it may shoot down civil aircraft again.

Quite frankly, Cuba's position has been callous and
contemptible. They shoot down civil aircraft and then
blame the victims. They call for an investigation and then
blame the investigators. They are the aggressors in this case
and yet claim they are being persecuted. They are
consistent only in their refusal to admit the truth and their
determination to lie to the world over and over again.

Clearly, the Government of Cuba has not met or
accepted its responsibility to comply with the Chicago
Convention and customary international law, which set out
the standards of international behaviour with respect to civil
aviation. In contrast, my Government does accept its
responsibilities, both generally and with respect to the
control of United States aircraft.

Well prior to 24 February, we issued warnings and
notices urging United States airmen not to enter Cuban
airspace without authorization. When the pilot of a United
States-registered civil aircraft overflew Havana last July,
we moved to suspend his license to fly.

All along, we have asked the Cuban Government for
information concerning alleged intrusions into its airspace,
and we have kept Cuba apprised of our actions. And
Cuba has previously acknowledged our efforts and
cooperation in this regard.

As I said at the beginning of my remarks, this is not
an issue of the United States versus Cuba. The people of
every nation are vulnerable to lawless acts, be they acts
of terrorism or acts committed intentionally by
Governments in violation of international law. The very
purpose of the Security Council is to help protect the
people of all nations against such acts. We are here to
protect international security and peace.

As far as I am concerned, what the Cuban military
did on 24 February was a crime and no excuse, no
rationalization and no finger-pointing by the Cuban
Government can change that judgement. If we were to
allow such acts to occur without expressing our
condemnation, we would not be meeting our
responsibility to the international community. If we were
to remain silent in the face of Cuba's continued threat to
shoot down civil aircraft in flight, we would invite a
repetition of this tragedy. If we were not to insist that all
countries meet their obligations concerning civil aviation,
we would put at risk the lives of all people who travel by
air.

In recent weeks, we have seen and heard a great
deal about the anguish that the loss of a loved one in an
aeroplane crash can cause. In some cases, we know that
the tragedy is caused by mechanical shortcomings which
we can address. In other cases, we do not know the cause
and there is little we can do. In this case, we know the
cause and we know that the remedy is to accept and
adhere to the rule of law.

That is all that we demand of Cuba. And that is the
standard we must always demand of each other and of
ourselves.

