Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. I also would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco for his insightful
and comprehensive briefing. Our thanks go to the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their very useful statements.

It is a matter of great concern that despite years
of engagement and efforts by the international
community to find a lasting and comprehensive
solution to the Middle East crisis, including the
Palestine question, the problem remains intractable.
Today, not only is the peace process deadlocked;
tensions are rising in East Jerusalem and violence is
reported in Gaza. The prospects for the resumption of
peace talks are further hindered by the political
uncertainty in Palestine, the humanitarian crisis in
Gaza, arms smuggling into Jerusalem and, more
importantly, by settlement activities.

It is within this framework of daunting challenges
that we welcome the positive developments
enumerated by the Assistant Secretary-General in his
statement. In particular we note the payment of
$10.5 million by the Israeli Government to the United
Nations in respect of losses sustained by the United
Nations last year during Operation Cast Lead.

We also welcome the efforts of the United States
through its Special Envoy, Senator George Mitchell, to
restart substantial peace talks in the region. In the same
vein, we appreciate other initiatives, including the
Middle East Quartet, the intra-Palestinian talks
brokered by President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and the
Arab Peace Initiative. Indeed, the decision by Prime
Minister Netanyahu to suspend settlement activities for
10 months provides a window of opportunity that we
must seize.

Nigeria remains firmly committed to the Middle
East peace process, particularly the aspiration to a just,
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the conflict
between Israel and Palestine. We reaffirm our support
for a two-State solution with both Israel and Palestine
living side by side within secure and recognized
borders and respect for the agreed borders of 1967. We
know that progress requires achievement of core
benchmarks encompassing peace talks, settlements, the
humanitarian situation in the occupied territory and the
issue of access to and movement in Gaza.

It is evident that following Operation Cast Lead,
the political will of both parties to come together for
negotiations is visibly lacking. Despair must now give
way to optimism and concrete, credible engagement.
We therefore join other delegations in calling for the
urgent resumption of the peace talks as a means of
building confidence between the parties. The need to
move forward with the political process in order to
consolidate the gains of past efforts has never been so
critical.

As speakers before me have stressed this
morning, freezing settlement activity in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem is critical to the resumption of
dialogue and to the entire peace process. We therefore
reiterate our call on Israel to adopt all possible
measures to stop settlement expansion in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, including natural growth.

On the abject humanitarian situation in the
occupied territories, we encourage Israel to remove the
obstacles to access and to facilitate the movement of
people and goods into the Gaza Strip, consistent with
the Agreement on Movement and Access. The
inhabitants of the territory, especially women and
children, are dependent on aid as their means of
livelihood, whereas they should be engaged in gainful
economic activities. Immediate steps must be taken to
alleviate suffering. We encourage Israel to allow the
recommencement of the stalled United Nations projects
and other donor projects in the area.

The human rights violations committed by both
sides during Operation Cast Lead have also not been
adequately addressed. We therefore call on both sides
to conduct credible domestic investigations into the
many reported allegations.

We also call on Palestine to continue its
unrelenting efforts to set up a functioning State
structure and to strengthen its security capacity in
order to address the incessant arms smuggling and
other threats to Israel. We believe that an intensified
intra-Palestinian dialogue will lead to domestic peace
and security.

As the world commemorates International Day of
Commemoration in Memory of the Victims of the
Holocaust, we wish to echo the ideals for which the
United Nations stands and to call for a concerted effort
to rekindle the spirit of collective existence, as
enshrined in the Charter, in order to save the people of
the Middle East - and indeed the whole world -
from the scourge of war.

