Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join my colleagues in thanking Ambassador Nestor
Osorio for presenting the 90-day report of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We commend his stewardship of the Committee
and the professionalism with which the Committee has
been implementing its mandate.

The Panel of Experts is mandated to assist the
Committee in the implementation of the relevant
resolutions, and has to work under the direction of the
Committee. We appreciate the work, including
outreach activities, that the Panel has been doing, and
we encourage it to continue its work in strict
compliance with the relevant resolutions in an
independent, objective, transparent and impartial
manner. The Panel should also brief the Committee
regularly on all its activities.

During the reporting period, the Panel submitted
several reports, including a quarterly update on the
implementation reports of the Member States
submitted during the period from 1 November 2011 to
31 January 2012. We thank the Panel for those reports,
which we are carefully studying. In January this year,
three members of the Panel visited India. They had a
useful exchange of Views with the authorities
concerned in New Delhi.

India has consistently supported the right of all
nations to peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in
accordance with relevant international treaties to which
they are parties. Iran should fully cooperate with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to restore
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. In that connection, we welcome
the recent exchanges between Iran and the IAEA. We
hope that the outstanding technical issues concerning
the Iranian nuclear programme will be resolved
peacefully through Iran's cooperation with the IAEA.
We also welcome the decision to resume talks between
the P5+1 group and Iran. Those talks should serve as
an important confidence-building measure and help
avoid an escalation of the situation.

India supports the full implementation of relevant
resolutions of the Security Council concerning the
Iranian nuclear issue. While implementing those
resolutions, it is necessary that all efforts be made to
ensure that legitimate trade and economic activities do
not suffer.

In conclusion, we support the Chair's intention to
hold an open briefing, along with the Coordinator of
the Panel of Experts, in April 2012 for interested
Member States on implementation procedures. That
briefing will also serve as a useful opportunity for the
members of the Committee and the Panel to get the
Views of the wider United Nations membership.

