Mr. McLay (New Zealand): We thank you, Sir, and
your country, Germany, which holds the presidency
of the Council this month, for ensuring consideration
of this issue, and indeed for the excellent work you
have done as Chair of the Working Group on children
and armed conflict. It is the second year in a row that
you, Sir, have demonstrated leadership on this very
important topic.

New Zealand was very pleased to be a sponsor
of resolution 2068 (2012), adopted today, which
strengthens the Council's children and armed conflict
agenda, and we applaud its passage, although we do
regret the lack of unanimity.

We welcome the appointment of Ms. Leila
Zerrougui as the new Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict. She brings outstanding
credentials to her critically important task. We join
Belgium, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and many others in urging all States
to support all aspects of her mandate without let or
hindrance, without qualification. We join Kenya and
others in paying tribute to the courage, professionalism,
and, in the light of some recent comments, I
underline the word professionalism, leadership and
Vision of the former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflicts,
Radhika Coomaraswamy, whose unwavering efforts
demonstrated the importance of a continuing mandate
for addressing abuses of children in armed conflict.

A very clear majority of United Nations Member
States abhor the use and abuse of children in armed
conflict, so we see today's debate as a very important
opportunity for those countries to demonstrate their
political will that the matter be aggressively addressed
by the Council as part of its role in maintaining peace
and security.

Children - innocent children - must be protected
and must receive particular attention from the Council.
Likewise, we welcome thematic resolutions on children
and armed conflict as an important signal that the
Council will tackle the issue.

New Zealand is a member of the Group of Friends
on Children and Armed Conflict and endorses all the
comments made by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group. I will not repeat what was said, but
I will make a comment on just four matters very briefly.

First, it is clear that, over the past year, specialized
offices and reporting mechanisms continued to perform
essential functions. Through that reporting, the
Secretary-General has recounted appalling situations
requiring the urgent attention of the United Nations and
its Member States. His report also identifies some of
the successes in protecting children, and we commend
those achievements. So, we say quite unequivocally
that specialized reporting with all its disclosures must
continue.

Secondly, we wish to see greater mainstreaming of
the children and armed conflict agenda, with its issues
being considered across all areas of the Council's work,
including all relevant mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping, political and peacebuilding missions,
and also by deploying child protection advisers in
accordance with the child protection policy of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. New Zealand
regards the protection of children as fundamental to the
maintenance of peace and security, which means that it
must be factored into all relevant decisions across the
Council's agenda.

Thirdly, greater use of sanctions, or just the
threat thereof, should be a useful tool in meaningfully
addressing the most serious abuses of children,
particularly those committed by persistent perpetrators.
In situations that are already subject to sanctions,
political will is required to address the specific issue
of child protection. Situations that are not currently
subject to sanctions require a degree of innovation in
the Council's working methods. We urge that political
will and that innovation.

We also call for greater use of child protection
experts in sanctions committees' groups of experts. We
commend the sanctions committees on Cote d'Ivoire,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and
the Sudan for including designation criteria on grave
Violations against children.

Finally, accountability is essential, particularly
in respect of breaches that constitute war crimes and
crimes against humanity. We encourage greater support
and assistance to national judicial mechanisms to
prevent impunity for perpetrators of those grave crimes.
We particularly urge that priority be given to providing
international assistance for capacity-building in national
judicial systems. Moreover, where national judicial
mechanisms are unwilling or unable to investigate or
prosecute, we see a clear role for international criminal
tribunals and for the International Criminal Court.

In that regard, we welcome the recent outcomes
of the Taylor and Lubanga proceedings, both of which
made significant advances in the fight against impunity
for war crimes committed against children. They are,
as Belgium described them, landmark decisions.

Above all, we recognize and commend the gains
and successes made in the children and armed conflict
agenda. But, so long as thousands of children remain
subject to the horrors of armed conflict, we will not
rest, and we will do all we can to push forward this
agenda in all its aspects, and, hopefully, with even more
favourable outcomes. We cannot hear that particular
plea from the mouths of, to use the biblical phrase,
babes and sucklings. So we, the peoples of the United
Nations, must make that plea on their behalf.

