First, I would like to thank Acting Special Representative of the Secretary- General Stephanie Williams and Ambassador Schulz for their briefings. In the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we call on the Libyan parties to cease hostilities and to find a political solution to the conflict. Both parties should formally endorse the draft ceasefire agreement concluded on 23 February within the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. That draft ceasefire agreement is a Libyan-owned document and has been agreed upon by representatives of both camps. It is also important that another meeting of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission take place as soon as possible and without preconditions, with a view to finalizing that agreement and establishing subcommittees on structural issues such as the dismantling of militias. Those are the messages that the French Minister for Foreign affairs conveyed to the Libyan leaders from both camps. A durable ceasefire should be put in place and monitored by the United Nations, and we have taken positive note of the proposal made to agree on a truce during the holy month of Ramadan, which was approved by the Libyan National Army. There can be no military solution in Libya and, in that regard, we condemn the bombing of civilian areas in Tripoli. Both parties should refrain from fuelling tensions and avert any escalation, and military interference should cease. In that regard, we regret that no element on the monitoring of a possible ceasefire by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) has been included in the most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/360) in the absence of a specific report, which was requested by the Security Council in resolution 2510 (2020). We call on the parties to resume inclusive political talks as soon as possible under the auspices of the United Nations. Core issues such as elections, the type of constitution and civil-military coordination will have to be discussed as a matter of priority. This political dialogue should be relaunched with the active participation of Libya's neighbouring countries and of the African Union, the League of Arab States and the European Union. We should collectively support the implementation of reforms of economic and financial institutions, starting with an audit of the Central Bank of Libya, in order to restore its sound and transparent governance. The equitable allocation of oil resources and the lifting of the oil blockade are also matters of priority. The Security Council and, more broadly, the United Nations must remain fully mobilized to find a solution to the Libyan crisis. The French authorities have continued their dialogue with all Libyan parties in order to find such a solution, in support of the efforts led by the United Nations mediation. In that regard, we call on the Secretary-General to appoint a new Special Representative of the Secretary- General as soon as possible. It has been almost three months since the resignation of Mr. Ghassan Salame. We also welcome the deployment of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, which will implement the arms embargo, which is continuously being violated by both sides, and thus help to implement the outcome of the Berlin Conference and resolution 2510 (2020). IRINI will operate strictly within the framework of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. In that regard, the renewal by the Security Council of the mechanism created by resolution 2292 (2016) is absolutely essential. France will remain fully committed to and engaged in the process of finding a political solution in Libya.
