Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's open debate.
I am pleased to take the floor in my capacity as the
coordinator of ACT, which stands for Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency. Launched in 2013,
ACT is a cross-regional group of 25 countries aimed
at improving the working methods of the Security
Council. ACT's efforts focus on the Security Council in
its present composition and have remained independent
from the comprehensive Security Council reform
process.

How the Security Council can prevent or stop mass
atrocities has garnered considerable attention. There is
widespread and growing concern about the veto when
employed in such cases to block Council action. In
that context, ACT welcomes the political declaration
presented this morning by France, addressed to the five
permanent members, on the suspension of the veto in
cases of mass-atrocity crimes.

However, ACT believes that all Security Council
members, and indeed all States, have a role to play in
improving the Council's response to atrocity crimes.
Under the leadership of Liechtenstein, we have
therefore prepared a code of conduct, a voluntary
political commitment, which contains a pledge to
support timely and decisive Security Council action in
situations involving atrocity crimes, as well as a pledge
not to vote against credible draft Security Council
resolutions aimed at preventing or ending these crimes.
Since effective Council action to prevent and end
atrocity crimes is a matter for all Council members,
the code is open for support by any current or potential
future Security Council member - that is, all Member
States. As of today, a total of 82 States have committed
themselves to it. The code will be officially launched
on 23 October, on the occasion of the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations. We encourage all
Member States to commit themselves to the code before
then.

Under the stewardship of Estonia and Costa Rica,
ACT also played an active role in the negotiation of
GeneralAssemblyresolution69/321,ontherevitalization
of the work of the General Assembly, in particular
with regard to the appointment of the next Secretary-
General. The resolution was adopted by consensus,
and ACT looks forward to its full implementation. In
line with that resolution, and in order for the selection
process to be open and inclusive, our group encourages
the President of the General Assembly and the President
of the Security Council to write ajoint letter addressed
to all Member States calling for nominations. To be
completed on time, this process should start without
delay. Following this essential first step, our group
looks forward to the publication of a regularly updated
list of candidates, as well as the scheduling of meetings
and hearings with declared candidates.

Since the publication of presidential note
S/2010/507, the Council has agreed on 10 subsequent
notes, but their implementation has often proved to
be unsatisfactory or inconsistent. In order to facilitate
such follow-up, ACT suggests that the Council prepare
a note that would consolidate and streamline all
decisions taken regarding working methods.

Presidential note S/2013/515, issued in 2013,
touches upon many aspects related to interaction and
dialogue with non-Council members and bodies. Our
group has welcomed the commitment reiterated therein
to continue the practice of providing wrap-up meetings
and informal briefing sessions to non-members.
Seeking information and understanding regarding the
Council's activities remains a crucial and legitimate
request. We regret that so far this year only four wrap-
up sessions have taken place.

The format of Council meetings remains another
a key element of access and transparency. ACT
therefore welcomes the efforts of the Council to hold
open meetings. So far this year, just about half of the
meetings have been public, a figure similar to last year.

ACT welcomes the 12 Arria Formula meetings
organized during 2015. We want to underline that
that format permits interaction with non-traditional
briefers, including representatives from civil society,
thereby allowing the Council to be more thoroughly
informed about a given situation.

ACT notes that 19 open debates have taken place in
2015. Such debates are of crucial importance in order
to hear the views of the wider membership, including
troop- and police-contributing countries. However,
the response of the Council to open debates remains
in most cases rather limited. The outcome documents
are usually adopted before the views of the wider
membership are even heard. ACT therefore hopes that
today's open debate on working methods can contribute
to shifting this practice, and it welcomes the intention
of Spain to ensure follow-up. As it did last year, ACT
will produce a document that could serve as a guide
for follow-up work by the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Question.

Presidential note S/20l3/515 also recalls the
intention of the Council to remain committed
to maintaining regular communication with the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). That advisory body
to the Council has a strong role to play in preventing the
recurrence of conflicts. A coordinated and committed
approach to post-conflict peacebuilding is key to
preventing countries from falling back into conflict.
ACT is convinced that the PBC can assume the role of
a forum where critical situations are discussed early, in
an inclusive manner and with relevant stakeholders. We
also encourage the Council to invite the Chairs of the
various country-specific configurations to participate
regularly in Council meetings.

More generally, ACT welcomes the Council's
renewed focus on prevention. We regret that
horizon-scanning meetings have all but discontinued
since 2013, and we would welcome enhanced engagement
by the Secretary-General to inform the Council about
matters that, in his opinion, may threaten international
peace and security. The report of the Secretary-General
on conflict prevention (S/2015/730), as well as the 2015
reviews on peace operations, women and peace and
security, and the peacebuilding architecture all contain
useful ideas and proposals in that regard.

The Council acts on all our behalf, on behalf of
the full membership of the United Nations. This is
why accountability, coherence and transparency in its
work and in the implementation of its own decisions are
crucial. Last week, five new members of the Security
Council were elected. ACT encourages all elected
members to seize the opportunities that are presented to
them. Our group calls for the implementation without
delay of presidential note S/2014/268, on enhancing
wider participation by Council members in the work
of the Council, and presidential note S/2014/393,
on ensuring continuity in the work of the subsidiary
bodies.

ACT notes with satisfaction the way the Council
visiting missions have been recently arranged, with two
countries on the Council co-leading the mission. That
practice can serve as an example for the drafting of the
products of the Council. In that regard, ACT welcomes

the involvement of the United Kingdom and Spain in
the elaboration of resolution 2242 (2015), on women
and peace and security, adopted in the past week.

Today's debate is the sixth in what has become an
annual practice since 2010. Our discussion is about
much more than presidential note S/2010/507 or simply
working methods. It is about making the Council
more effective, accountable and inclusive. It is about
how to ensure that the Council carries out its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security in a more transparent and effective
way in order to contribute to positive developments on
the ground. To that end, ACT will remain committed to
working constructively with the Security Council and
the wider membership.

