Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): My delegation
wishes to pay special tribute to you, Madam President,
for organizing this open debate of the Security Council
to discuss the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I would also like to express our deep appreciation to
the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes and High Commissioner Pillay for their
perceptive remarks.

Sierra Leone welcomes this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which has
become one of the most valuable and indispensable
tools available to the Security Council in addressing
conflict challenges. The significance of this discussion
cannot be overemphasized, but it is particularly
important given that Africa is still home to a number of
conflicts, making the challenges so real.

I would like to explicitly stress the nexus between
the protection of civilians and transitional justice,
especially when occasioned by default in the context of
armed conflict, as the nature of war keeps changing,
with conflicts increasingly interrelated, involving
non-State actors and including the deliberate targeting
of civilians.

It is important from the outset to recognize the
significant strides made by the United Nations in
addressing the immense challenges confronting the
protection of civilians and the adoption of resolution
1894 (2009) of 11 November 2009 following a
comprehensive review. Broadly speaking, those
challenges include measures that can be taken to
protect the safety, dignity, integrity and sanctity of all
civilians in times of war, which are rooted in
obligations under international humanitarian, refugee
and human rights law. International humanitarian law
lays down the minimum protection and standards
applicable in a situation where people are most
vulnerable in armed conflict. It aims to prevent
situations that might exacerbate vulnerabilities, such as
displacement and the destruction of civilian property.

On the specific question of mandates, I would
like to preface our intervention by comprehensively
looking at the situation in my country immediately
following the United Nations troop hostage crisis in the
eastern part of Sierra Leone. The initial mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone was changed
in 2000 to include, among other functions, assisting in
monitoring respect for international humanitarian law,
including at disarmament and demobilization sites,
emergency relief and the repatriation of internally
displaced persons and refugees.

Security and geopolitical situation during that
period in Sierra Leone posed a very serious challenge
to the concept of the protection of civilians. The
atrocities committed by the warring factions
accelerated the deployment of one of the largest
peacekeeping forces in the history of the United
Nations. That was necessary to protect civilians, who
were left at the mercy of the rebels and their cohorts.

The new mandate also included the provision of
security in and around disarmament and demobilization
areas and facilitating the free flow of people, goods
and humanitarian assistance. Although the mandate
succinctly talked about the protection of civilians
under imminent threat of danger, it did not specify how
it should be done. Therefore, a mandate has to be very
clear so as to leave no ambiguity. Today, most
peacekeeping operations have the protection of
civilians entrenched in the mandates given by the
Security Council.

In his last report (S/2009/277), the Secretary-
General urged compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law, as well as
international and domestic criminal law, by States and
non-State actors alike. The provisions of international
human rights law also demand that all belligerent
groups respect the distinction between combatants and
non-combatants, attack only military targets and use
only the degree of violence proportionate to their
military requirement, while taking due care to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Regrettably, the
practices of warring factions lag well behind the legal
requirements and the global culture of the protection of
civilians.

The rational dimension of the protection of
civilians is critical to the attainment of lasting peace.
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission, the Special
Court for Sierra Leone and other tribunals were
established as instruments to combat impunity, thus
holding responsible parties and individuals to account
for serious violations, especially those considered to
bear the greatest responsibility for violations of
international humanitarian law.

Despite the systematic efforts made within the
United Nations system to find ways to streamline and
improve peacekeeping operations in tandem with the
protection of civilians, there are still inherent
challenges related to ambiguity over how the United
Nations should intervene when its Members lack either
the military force or, in some cases, the political will to
halt all forms of carnage. Ultimately, the end-state
objective of a peacekeeping operation should include
protection mandates to help create an enabling
environment for the host nation to exercise absolute
control in protecting its citizens.

Judging from my country's recent past, I would
like to conclude by reaffirming Sierra Leone's interest
in and commitment to addressing the challenges
affecting the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

