Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I would like to thank
High Representative Valentin Inzko for his briefing and
for his comprehensive reports to the Council, including
the special report of4 September. Listening to his latest
update on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
cannot help but feel that despite the voluminous work
and publications on the horrors of war, the lessons of
war and human tragedies appear to have been ignored.

Twenty years ago this month, the conflicting parties
in the Balkans war signed the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The agreement was brokered and guaranteed by key
members of the international community, endorsed
by the Council and subsequently upheld by various
Security Council resolutions. The Peace Agreement
ended a devastating war that saw a level of genocide
and ethnic cleansing in Europe unprecedented since the
Second World War. Since then, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has made considerable progress, reflecting the
achievements of peacebuilding by the United Nations,
in partnership with regional organizations. The
international community has invested a great deal in
rebuilding the country. Unfortunately, 20 years later,
the progress made by Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well
as the Balkans region, seems far from irreversible.

Malaysia is deeply concerned about the direct
challenges posed by the Republika Srpska to the
Dayton Peace Agreement, in clear violation of its
international commitments. Last April, the President of
the Republika Srpska declared that his political party
would call for a referendum to secede from Bosnia and
Herzegovina in 2018 if the party's demands, as they
relate to the redistributing ofcompetencies among levels
of Governments, were not met. In another alarming
development, last July the Republika Srpska National
Assembly decided to hold a referendum, scheduled for
this coming weekend, with the aim of challenging the
authority of the Office of the High Representative, the
rule oflaw and thejudiciary ofBosnia and Herzegovina.
Such a decision is contrary to the country's Constitution
and the Dayton Peace Agreement.

In addition, during the reporting period the
President of the Republika Srpska continued to make
irresponsible statements denying genocide in Srebrenica,
in spite of the decisions of the International Court of
Justice and the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. As we may recall from previous
reports of the High Representative, the secessionist and
nationalistic rhetoric of Republika Srpska politicians is
not new and has been on the rise over in the past few
years. However, the recent decisions adopted by the
Republika Srpska authorities have effectively taken the
matter to a disturbing new level, constitute the gravest
violations of the Dayton Peace Agreement to date, and
raise serious doubts about the future of the region. We
strongly urge Republika Srpska authorities to respect
the country's Constitution, various Security Council
resolutions and the Dayton Peace Agreement, cease in
proceeding with the referendum on 15 November, and
renounce their divisive politics and secessionist agenda
so as to avoid the further destabilization of the region.

Earlier today, the Council unanimously voted on
resolution 2247 (2015), renewing the mandate of the
European-led multinational stabilization force for
another year. Malaysia welcomes the renewal of the
authorization of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea operation and the unity shown
once again by the Council on the matter. However, we
regret the fact that several key elements of the previous
resolutions have been removed or watered down in
resolution 2247 (2015).

In particular, Malaysia views it more important now
than ever for the Council to reaffirm its commitment
to the Dayton Peace Agreement and its support for
the Office of the High Representative, in View of the
worrying developments on the ground. We reiterate the
need to fully implement the "5+2" agenda as a condition
for the closure ofthe Office ofthe High Representative.
Until then, Malaysia reaffirms its strong support for the
Office of the High Representative, as laid down in the
Dayton Peace Agreement and upheld in various Council
resolutions. Verbal attacks and personal insults against
the High Representative and the staff of his Office are
unacceptable and must immediately cease.

Malaysia takes note of the positive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period.
We welcome the increase in exports, foreign trade and
growth projections for 2015, as well as the country's
improvement in credit and business ratings. We also
look forward to the country's upcoming membership in
the World Trade Organization, which will further boost
foreign trade and investment.

Malaysia underlines the need for the Government
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to remain steadfast in its
reform agenda, particularly with regard to addressing
unemployment, fighting corruption and strengthening
the rule of law. After the collapse of the governing
coalition in May, we hope to see political stability return
to the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Despite
the political uncertainties in the entity, we commend
the Federation authority for adopting the new labour
law under its reform agenda.
Malaysia also takes note of the priority accorded
by the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
European integration as a cornerstone of its foreign
policy with a view to achieving peace, stability and
progress. In that regard, we welcome the country's
movement towards that aim, especially the entry into
force of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union in June.

In conclusion, Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to the independence, sovereignty, national unity
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in line with the Dayton Peace Agreement and
previous Security Council resolutions. We reiterate
our unwavering commitment to contributing to the
country's nation-building, reconciliation and economic
progress. Malaysia has long supported Bosnia and
Herzegovina in its reconstruction efforts and will
continue to do so, especially in the areas of trade,
investment and education, as well as through technical
and defence cooperation programmes.

We urge all peoples to create a common space to
continue building Bosnia and Herzegovina for a better
future. That should be achieved by exercising collective
responsibility and intensifying efforts towards national
reconciliation and socioeconomic reforms to ensure
peace and stability in the long-term interests of the
country and the region.

