Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): While of course thanking
our briefers, here we are again in the Chamber listening
to yet more grim and alarming briefings by Under-
Secretaries-General Lowcock and DiCarlo on the
situation in north-west Syria. It is heartbreaking to
learn that hundreds of innocent civilians have been
the victims of the escalation, with more than 300,000
people displaced recently. Three million people in
Idlib, including 1 million children, are trapped in the
crossfire. And if the violence keeps escalating, what
will happen to those people? Would the Council agree
with me if I said that it would trigger additional waves
of displacement? Would it agree with me ifI said it
would further complicate humanitarian operations?
And would Council members also agree with me that
a further escalation of violence would cause more
casualties? I am very sure that no one would disagree
with me, because I genuinely believe that we all want
to avoid those worrisome scenarios. This is really the
time for us to turn to each other, not on each other. The
people in north-west Syria need us more than ever. In
that context, my delegation wishes to highlight three
pertinent points.

First, we appeal to all the relevant parties to end
the violence and exercise maximum restraint. We
appreciate Russia and Turkey's efforts to broker the
ceasefire agreements. All parties need to respect those
agreements, as well as uphold and fully implement
the 2018 Russian and Turkish ceasefire agreements. A
lasting ceasefire is of great importance.

Secondly, we must address urgently the immediate
life-saving needs of affected people in Idlib and the
surrounding areas, particularly internally displaced
persons. There are more than 300,000 newly displaced
individuals, and we need to ensure that their immediate
needs for food and water are being addressed. That also
applies to the health sector. With the services of many
health facilities suspended, it is crucial to provide basic
health support, especially for displaced people who are
living under trees and are prone to infectious illnesses.
In that context, Indonesia calls on all parties to ensure
safe, unhindered and unimpeded humanitarian access
and assistance to the people in need across north-west
Syria. We commend all humanitarian actors on the
ground who are working tirelessly to respond to the
growing needs of the population in the area.

Thirdly, my delegation wishes to once again urge
all parties to redouble their efforts and focus more
on dialogue in order to find a peaceful solution to
the Syrian conflict. Everybody seems to agree that a
comprehensive political solution in Syria is key, based
on the Geneva process and resolution 2254 (2015).
However, we must not forget that continued engagement
and negotiation to enhance trust and confidence are
also crucial to advance the Syrian political process.
Many Council members have mentioned that this
humanitarian emergency cannot be resolved if there is
no political solution to the conflict, and we agree with
that position entirely. As the escalation of violence
continues in north-west Syria, the Council's action is
increasingly needed. Now is the time for the Council to
give the right answer when asked: if the violence keeps
escalating, what will happen to the people in north-
west Syria?

