Mr. Hassan (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to convey the greetings of His Excellency
President Mohamed Hosni Mubarak and his wishes for
the full success of this summit. We would also like to
extend our thanks and appreciation to His Excellency
President Thabo Mbeki, President of the Republic of
South Africa, for his constructive initiative in calling
for this important meeting at this high level to discuss
one of the most important issues of concern for Africa
and the world.

I am confident we all agree on the high priority
that the issue of peace and security represents on the
international list of concerns and on the agenda for
African collective action. This matter was clearly
reflected in devising the Constitutive Act of the African
Union (AU) in 2001 and earlier in the Charter of the
Organization of African Unity, in 1963. The issue of
peace and security in the African continent also comes
at the forefront in the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) document, which considered it
a necessary precondition for achieving comprehensive
development in the continent, hence emphasizing the
firm correlation between the promotion of peace and
security on the one side and the efforts to eradicate
poverty and achieve the Millennium Development
Goals on the other.

In this context, the African Union has been keen
on establishing institutions and mechanisms that are
capable of dealing, both seriously and effectively, with
conflict situations in Africa. Efforts have not been
confined only to the establishment of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, which plays a
crucial role in promoting security, stability and in
dispute settlement in the continent; they also extend to
the establishment of the African Standby Force, the
Panel of the Wise, a Peace Fund and a continental early
warning system, along with a comprehensive political
framework for reconstruction and rehabilitation in
countries emerging from conflict. That rendered the
AU highly capable of taking rapid and effective actions
to contain existing conflicts and avert the emergence of
new ones. As a result, many conflicts were resolved
within the past few years, bringing the number down
from 12 at the beginning of this century to a limited
number, for which efforts are under way to find
peaceful settlements.
The NEPAD initiative was launched in tandem
with the establishment of the African Peer Review
Mechanism in order to consolidate the pillars of good
economic and political governance, in fulfilment of the
aspirations of the peoples of the continent for a
promising future based on solidarity and integration
and arising from the principle of African national
ownership, stressing that the future of Africa will be
built by the Africans themselves.

Despite the numerous developments and the
continuing changes on the regional and international
scenes - which all reaffirm the need for further
cooperation and consultation between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council - we still lack the institutional
mechanism needed to consolidate such cooperation in a
specific framework that commits to the historical,
cultural and developmental particularities of the
African States. Such a framework must take into
consideration the delicate balance agreed upon in the
2005 United Nations Summit between the issues of
peace and security, economic and social development
and respect for the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of the African citizen.

At an early stage Egypt discerned the dire need to
bolster the cooperation between the United Nations and
the AU. To that end, Egypt proposed, during its
presidency of the African Union Peace and Security
Council in December 2006, its well-known initiative to
establish a Coordination and Consultation Mechanism
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the United Nations Security Council. We would
like to place on record our appreciation for the warm
welcome and interest with which the Egyptian
initiative was received and for the progress achieved in
its invigoration through joint sessions of the two
organs.

Furthermore, Egypt emphasizes the need to
promote cooperation and consultation between the
peace and security structures on both sides through
exchanging information and reports between the two
Councils, dispatching fact-finding missions or
conducting joint missions. In addition, there is a need
to speedily adopt the appropriate norms and to agree on
the necessary conditions by which to consider African
peacekeeping missions as United Nations missions and
to provide the necessary funding. Such coordination
should also expand to include the various African
subregional arrangements, as they play a vital role in

dispute settlement and maintaining peace and security
in the continent through their active regional
mechanisms.

Moreover, there is a much-needed constructive
cooperation between the United Nations, the League of
Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Conference in maintaining international peace and
security. We wish to highlight in this respect the
ongoing cooperation between the AU and the
subregional economic groups and the increasing
coordination between the AU and the League of Arab
States to achieve security and stability in Africa and to
contribute jointly to the settlement of existing conflicts
in a number of African States, such as the Sudan,
Somalia and the Comoros, etc. We salute the summit
decisions on both sides, as they reveal how highly they
value the cooperation between them, and underscore
the need to carry on their efforts to reinforce peace and
security in Africa.

In the light of its responsibilities towards the AU
and the United Nations, Egypt has steadily been keen
on actively participating in peacekeeping operations,
most recently through its broad participation in the
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Within the framework of
capacity-building in preventive diplomacy, it has
established the regional Cairo Center for Training on
Conflict Resolution and Peacekeeping in Africa, which
since 1995 has been organizing regular training courses
for African diplomatic and military cadres to enable
them to gain the necessary capabilities in the field.

Furthermore, Egypt attaches great importance to
the issue of peacebuilding and reconstruction in the
area, especially in countries emerging from conflict. In
the context of its membership in the Peacebuilding
Commission, Egypt is eager to elevate the standards of
those efforts so as to reach a situation that would
magnify the benefits derived from the international and
regional financial institutions and to serve the process
of rehabilitation and reconstruction in those States.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming that
Egypt is keen to continue to advance its role in the
African continent. It is committed to continue and
reinforce its contributions in peacekeeping operations,
settling disputes and achieving security and stability in
the continent. I reaffirm our confidence that the
resolution to be adopted by this summit will positively
contribute to consolidating the pillars of cooperation,
coordination and complementarity between the efforts
of the United Nations on one hand and the pivotal role
undertaken by the AU and other regional organizations
on the other, towards fulfilling the aspirations and
ambitions of our peoples in a safe world where we all
live in peace, freedom and prosperity.

