Mr. Jingree (Mauritius): I would like to thank
Ms. Bertini for her very useful and informative briefing
this morning. Indeed, the information which she shared
with us about the positive role that food aid plays in
alleviating international crises and in the recovery and
stability of affected countries was a real eye-opener.
We commend the exemplary role of the World Food
Programme (WFP) and other agencies, non-
governmental organizations and bilateral donors in
extending food aid to the needy, sometimes in very
difficult and dangerous situations, as mentioned by
Ms. Bertini herself.

Empirical evidence convincingly proves that the
lack of a food aid programme in a disaster area in the
right place and at the right moment can aggravate the
humanitarian crisis and impede the recovery of the
State, thereby threatening its political and social
stability.

My delegation wishes to place on record its
appreciation for the outstanding contribution of
Ms. Catherine Bertini, the outgoing Executive Director
of the WFP, and for the formidable job that she has
done during her mandate over the past 10 years. Her
vision of a world in which all have access at all times
to the nourishment they need has paid fruitful
dividends. Indeed, her contribution to the advancement
of women and children, particularly in the Horn of
Africa, as well as in other parts of the world, will
always be remembered. We wish her every success in
her future career and professional life. We also
congratulate Mr. James Morris on his appointment as
the new Executive Director, and we pledge our
unqualified support to him and his staff.

We would like to make a few comments. First,
access to food is one of the basic needs of a human
being. A situation in which food is absent or denied
can quickly lead to social instability, conflict and,
eventually, crisis. The shortage of food should not be
allowed to be a factor in further aggravating existing
conflict. We therefore need to ensure access to food,
particularly in remote areas, so as to avoid the
intensification of conflict. In this regard, we encourage
the WFP to continue to work towards this end.

Secondly, at a time of conflict, warlords may
create artificial shortages of food so as to cause people
to rebel against the central authority. We would like to
ask Ms. Bertini what the WFP does to deal with such
cases of artificial shortages of food.

Thirdly, in Afghanistan the WFP has been
extremely positive in contributing to the alleviation of
the plight of the needy, not only in situations of
conflict, but also during natural disasters. My
delegation commends the prompt response of the WFP
in delivering some 552 tonnes of food aid to northern
Afghanistan after the recent devastating earthquakes.

This morning, the delegation of Mexico
emphasized the need for coordination in the activities
of the humanitarian agencies. Perhaps Ms. Bertini
could enlighten us as to whether any coordinating
mechanism is in place with other agencies regarding
the distribution of food in or outside Kabul.

Fourthly, we are aware of the problems arising
from the lack of security in conflict situations where
WFP and other agencies work. The Council is not
insensitive to those problems. Mauritius, as a Council
member, will continue to appeal for improved security
and access for the personnel of WFP and other
agencies concerned with humanitarian activities.

Finally, we would like to express our full support
for the important work being carried out by WFP.

