Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (Spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Special Adviser Karim Khan
and the representative of civil society, Mr. Kachi, for
their briefings.

Iraq is currently actively committed to economic
recovery, peace and stability and national reconstruction
and reconciliation, all of which are at a critical stage.
China hopes that the Iraqi Government will continue to
pursue an inclusive political solution, further promote
economic development, improve its people's livelihoods
and speed up the reconstruction process, thereby
achieving further progress in its efforts to bring lasting
peace and security to Iraq.

The activities of terrorists in Iraq have caused
large numbers of civilian casualties and seriously
threatened national, regional and international peace
and security. The problem of the large numbers of
foreign terrorist fighters in Iraq, along with their
families, and especially their resettlement, deserves
the international community's urgent attention. China
commends the tireless efforts of the Government and
the people of Iraq to combat terrorism, and we support
their efforts to bring terrorists to justice in accordance
with the relevant domestic law. We take note of the
third report of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
(S/2019/878) and appreciate the Investigative Team's
efforts in spite of all the difficulties it has encountered.

China supports close cooperation between
UNITAD and the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq in order to provide support to the survivors
and victims of terrorist acts. We hope that the
Investigative Team will engage in close consultations
with the Iraqi Government and the parties concerned,
in strict compliance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and its mandate
and terms of reference, as set out in the relevant
Security Council resolutions. UNITAD should take
comprehensive measures to strengthen its capacity
for collecting evidence and conducting effective field
investigations, and play an active role in the process of
holding terrorists accountable and curbing the return
and spread of terrorist forces and activities.

As the Secretary-General's report points out,
UNITAD's capacity for tackling new challenges will
depend on its unique position as an impartial and
independent entity, as well as on the continued the
support of the Iraqi people. UNITAD should fully
respect Iraq's national sovereignty and its jurisdiction
over crimes committed on Iraqi territory and should
play an active role in strengthening the capacity-
building of the Iraqi Government so that it can hold
terrorist organizations accountable.

Terrorism remains a grave threat to international
peace and security, and combating international
terrorism is still an arduous task. The activities of
terrorist forces, including their attempts to spread
extremist ideology, pose major challenges to the
social stability and development of Member States.
The international community should continue to
strengthen cooperation, adopt unified standards and
take effective measures to resolutely crack down on all
terrorist organizations listed by the Security Council.
All parties, as well as the United Nations, should pay
close attention to the issue of foreign terrorist fighters
in Iraq and elsewhere. The Secretariat should follow
the situation closely and collect information effectively.
China stands ready to work with the international
community to achieve further progress in international
cooperation to combat terrorism.

