Mr. Abdallah Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would, from the outset, like to tell you
how gratified I am to see a diplomat with your
experience and talent leading the work of the Council
during this month of September of living dangerously. I
therefore wish you every success in carrying out the
task before you. I would also like to say how grateful
my delegation is to Ambassador Negroponte for having
presided over the Council in a very effective and a
distinguished manner.

Just when the United Nations, during the General
Debate held at the beginning of every session of the
General Assembly, brings together Member States,
large and small, to strongly reassert their attachment to
the principles and objectives of the United Nations
Charter, their commitment to the rules and standards of
international law, and their determination to respect
and ensure respect for all resolutions of the Security
Council at all times and in all places, Israel has once
again, with its habitual arrogance fed by the strange
complacency demonstrated by our Organization with
regard to its activities, chosen this moment to attack
what little was left standing after its destructive rage of
a few months ago. Israel has now annihilated the last
buildings where the Palestinian Authority was doing its
best to maintain some sort of appearance of life, while
striving to reform the Palestinian institutions, as had
been demanded of it.

This obsessive frenzy of Israel and its recourse to
disproportionate military means against helpless
civilian targets, revealed the nature of the Zionist
regime, intoxicated with its military power, and drunk
day after day with its inglorious military feats, sure of
its impunity.

This shows the stubborn resolve of the Israeli
leadership to annihilate every hope of ever re-
launching the peace process that Mr. Sharon himself
has said has breathed its last. Indeed, there is no doubt
this systematic policy of destruction of the buildings
and infrastructure of the Palestinian Authority, and the
policy of isolating President Arafat is part of a
deliberate strategy to completely destroy the
momentum of the peace process begun at Madrid.

There also is no doubt that the purpose is to
undermine the credibility of the Palestinian Authority,
to crush its motivating forces and make it impossible
for it to carry out its own commitment to law and order.
Then it is blamed for not containing the legitimate
resistance of a people that is subjugated, repressed and
humiliated on a daily basis by an occupying Power that
uses the most sophisticated and devastating weapons
against young people who have no shield but their
bodies, such as the thirteen-year-old child who was
deliberately shot in Nablus, in front of a British
volunteer, by an Israeli soldier who had not even been
provoked.

In other words, this clearly deliberate Israeli
policy attempts to discredit and disqualify the very
concept of a viable and responsible Palestinian State, a
concept that has been accepted and is demanded today
by the international community as a whole, and has
also been unanimously endorsed by the Security
Council.

What we see today in occupied Palestine is truly
a situation of war, rife with danger for the Palestinian
people, but also for all other people of the area, where
a war machine endowed with fearful means assails a
victimized people and its symbols with unheard of
ferocity.

It is incumbent upon the Security Council to put
an end to this immediately. Just when the Council is
very concerned with having its resolutions respected
when they apply to other conflicts, it must act with the
same resolve and rigour against a State which is
illegally occupying the territory of other States, a
country that resorts without restraint to force and
threatens its neighbours every day, which shamelessly
ignores resolutions of the Security Council, flouts
every standard of international law and tramples
underfoot the rules of international humanitarian law.

Any reluctance or hesitation on the part of the
Council would be a serious failure in terms of its
responsibilities and would certainly seriously damage
the credibility of the Council, which we want today,
more than ever, to see recognized by all and to have its
role as guarantor of international peace and security
recognized by all.

If we look at the responsibilities incumbent upon
the Council in terms of maintaining international peace
and security, and the part it must play as the pillar of
our collective security, we feel with increasing urgency
that the Council must act directly and energetically by
immediately condemning these outrageous policies of
the Israeli Government, by calling for an immediate
stop to the terror campaign and destruction it is
carrying out, to require that it withdraw from the
Palestinian towns and locations it has been occupying
since September 2000, by demanding it respect the
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, and
by making sure, by whatever means are adequate,
perhaps by sending international observers, that it see
to the protection of the Palestinian population and
launch the peace process once again.

Algeria holds this point of view and firmly
believes, more than ever, that peace is a strategic
choice and there is no alternative to negotiation.
Algeria is firmly attached to a peaceful, fair,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Middle East
conflict as proposed by the Arab Summit in Beirut
based on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) and resolution 338 (1978), and
on the principle of land for peace.

Such a settlement should obviously enable Israel
to withdraw from all of the occupied Arab territories,
thus opening the way to the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State with Al-Quds as its
capital.

