The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of South Africa.
We too would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2008/258) and Ms. Hoppe, Deputy to
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
presenting the report.

The Secretary-General characterizes the issue of
small arms and light weapons as complex, because it
has a direct bearing on a number of other important
policy areas such as sustainable development, human
rights, poverty and underdevelopment. It is clear that
this scourge has an impact on mandates within the
United Nations system and requires attention at the
national, subregional, regional and international levels
ifit is to be effectively addressed.

In other words, small arms and light weapons
have become the weapons of choice for the warlords,
who have been able to recruit children as their
preferred soldiers in some intractable conflicts,
particularly in Africa. That is one of the fundamental
reasons that we asked the Security Council to hold this
debate. In Africa, our people die more from small arms
than from any other weapon.

United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted by the
General Assembly in 2001, remains the central global
instrument to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. The Programme
of Action represented a hard-won compromise among
some very divergent Views on the issue of the
undertakings to be included. A number of States,
including South Africa, would have preferred the
Programme of Action to be far more encompassing, but
other Member States accepted what was attainable
during the first universal consideration of this
important issue, in 2001. We hope we can attain more
concrete results in the upcoming Biennial Meeting to
be held in July.

The full implementation of the Programme of
Action in all its aspects should remain central to our
national, subregional, regional and international efforts
to address this scourge. The Programme of Action
provides for international assistance and cooperation,
as well as for the coordination of efforts which, along
with the issue of stockpile management, brokering and
the international tracing instrument, will be key focus
areas of the upcoming third Biennial Meeting of States
on the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action. We believe it is important for
the General Assembly, which holds the primary
responsibility to oversee and monitor the
implementation of the Programme of Action, to also
consider these recommendations.

Nonetheless, South Africa believes that the issue
of small arms and light weapons has a direct bearing
on two aspects of the Security Council's mandate: arms
embargoes and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) efforts. Guided by our
commitment to the peaceful resolution of conflicts, we
support arms embargoes that contribute to lasting
peace and stability. The mandates of peacekeeping
operations handed down through Security Council
resolutions, therefore, need to be backed up with the
system-wide resources of the United Nations to ensure
that the DDR components of these mandates are
sufficiently sustainable and are carried out effectively.

In this regard, we welcome the Secretary-
General's recommendations to the Security Council on
the need for increased practical cooperation between
all the relevant international and regional components
involved in peacekeeping missions. The Security
Council will need to consider ways to strengthen the
synergies between arms embargoes and DDR efforts, as
well as the creation of dedicated units within
peacekeeping missions, not only to monitor arms
embargoes, but also to address DDR issues.

While we are pleased that this debate has
provided an opportunity for members of the General
Assembly and the Security Council to debate and
refine our common understanding of these issues, we
still believe that the Security Council also has a
responsibility to review how small arms and light
weapons can contribute negatively to the maintenance
of international peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Before I give the floor to the next speaker, I
would kindly remind all speakers of the five-minute
rule, to which we have tried very hard to adhere.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Argentina.

