Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Sir, for organizing this meeting. I also thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Pedersen, for his input and his tireless efforts.

The agreement on the formation of the Constitutional
Committee is a positive step towards ending the Syrian
crisis through a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, United
Nations-facilitated political process to reach a political
solution that my Government has called and striven
for from the inception. We welcome the formation of
the Committee, which is the result of continued close
consultations of the guarantors of the Astana format
and a clear sign of its effectiveness.

Along with the other guarantors of the Astana
format 4 the Russian Federation and Turkey - we
are resolute in our determination to actively participate
in helping the Syrian Government to launch the
Committee and to support its work, as declared in the
ministerial meeting of the guarantors in New York on
24 September. In that context, we fully support the
principle stipulated in the Committee's Core Rules of
Procedure that the Constitutional Committee

"shall work expeditiously and continuously

without foreign interference, including externally

imposed timelines." (S/2019/775, annex, para. 21)

Therefore, while the Committee should be extended
every support to do its work, everyone must avoid any
and all forms of external pressure or setting of artificial
deadlines. That is what the Committee expects and what
must be observed by everyone. Any possible assistance
to the Committee, even by the United Nations, must be
extended only on the request of the Committee itself
in accordance with its Core Rules of Procedure and in
full respect for the sovereignty, political independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria.

The recent Astana format summit reaffirmed those
principles and rejected any and all attempts to create new
realities on the ground under the pretext of combating
terrorism, including illegitimate self-rule initiatives.
The guarantors of the Astana format also expressed
their determination to stand against separatist agendas.
Accordingly, all foreign forces whose presence is
not authorized by the Syrian Government must leave
the country. The living example in that regard is the
occupation of certain parts of Syria by forces of the
United States, which continue to support and shield
terrorist groups under the mask of combating terrorism.
Obviously, Israel's acts of aggression against Syria
are in gross violation of those principles and further
complicate the situation. The international community
must compel Israel to stop its aggression and violations.
In the face of those acts of aggression, the Syrian
Government has a sovereign right to decide how and
when to exercise its inherent right to individual or
collective self-defence. In that context, Iran also
stresses that the occupation of the occupied Syrian
Golan by Israel is illegal, and the recognition by the
United States of its annexation by Israel is null and
void. While condemning such unlawful, irresponsible
acts, we stress that the Golan is, and will remain, part
and parcel of the Syrian territory.

While the Constitutional Committee should fulfil
its mandate expeditiously, there should be no linkage
between its work and other such important measures
as fighting terrorism, the restoration of control of
the Syrian Government over its entire territory, the
return of all refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and the reconstruction of Syria. A large
number of Syrians are trapped in terrorist-held areas.
Ensuring their security against terrorists is the main
responsibility of the Syrian Government. At the same
time, while fighting terrorists must continue unabated,
every effort should also be made to protect the lives
of civilians. Likewise, the international community
should contribute to and facilitate the speedy, safe and
voluntary return of all refugees and IDPs. N0 refugee
or IDP should be forced either to return or not to return.
More important, all refugees and IDPs shall return to
their place of origin. Politicization or impeding the
return of refugees and IDPs is unacceptable. Moreover,
supporting the reconstruction of Syria is essential.
That should be neither politicized nor linked to any
other issue.

To end the Syrian crisis, we will continue our
cooperation with the Syrian Government. Through
hosting the next summit of the Astana Format, Iran will
endeavour to fulfil that aim.

