Ms. Rodriguez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
Mexican delegation is grateful to Viet Nam for
convening this public debate on an issue of great
topicality on the international agenda and of great
importance to the agenda of human rights and
international humanitarian law.

Mexico notes with concern that the great majority
of victims in armed conflict continue to be civilians,
and in particular children, who have suffered from
deliberate killings and maimings as well as the
indiscriminate use of force, in violation of applicable
international law.

My country's Government commends the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, the Working Group on
this topic and UNICEF in implementing resolution
1612 (2005). Nonetheless, and despite those efforts,
Mexico regrets the fact that the situation of children in
countries in armed conflict continues to be serious.
That is why the international community must continue
to take action to eradicate the problem.

Mexico endorses the Security Council's appeal,
reiterated in the presidential statement of 12 February,
for the adoption of a broad-ranging strategy of conflict
prevention that would address in a comprehensive
fashion the underlying causes of armed conflict in
order to guarantee better protection for children in the
long term.

At the same time, my country applauds the
resolve expressed by the Council that it will continue
to include or increase the numbers of child protection
advisers in the mandates of peacekeeping operations
and political missions, and reaffirms the importance of
their also being included in demobilization,
disarmament, reintegration and rehabilitation
programmes. In that regard, Mexico attaches great
importance to the inclusion of the issue of the
protection and rehabilitation of children in peace
negotiations, to the demobilization of child soldiers
throughout any conflict, and to the application of
preventive measures to ensure that they are not
recruited again or suffer reprisals.

Mexico wishes to underscore its concern that
children continue to be the main victims of the increase
in the indiscriminate use of landmines and cluster
munitions in countries in armed conflict and their
effects in post-conflict situations. We would therefore
encourage Member States to sign the Convention on
Cluster Munitions at the conference that will take place
in Oslo in December.

Mexico believes it essential to combat the
impunity of those who violate human rights and
international humanitarian law as they continue to
recruit and use children in armed conflict and commit
other serious offences, such as the killing and maiming
of children, sexual violations, abductions, attacks on
schools and hospitals, and the denial of humanitarian
assistance to children. In that respect, my country
underscores the importance that those responsible for
such crimes be brought to justice in national courts or
international tribunals or even referred to the
International Criminal Court for investigation and trial.
We also support the idea that the Council should
continue to adopt targeted sanctions against parties to
conflicts that commit grave offences against children,
in disregard of the recommendations of the Working
Group and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.

I note that Mexico condemns any act of sexual
exploitation or abuse committed by United Nations
personnel in which women and children are the main
victims. In that regard, my country urges Member
States to step up their efforts to implement the strategy
of assistance and support to victims of such acts so that
children can receive the understanding and support that
they need.

Lastly, we stress our hope that the Security
Council's call on the parties to conflict indicated in the
annexes to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/757) to formulate and implement tangible
plans of action to put an end to the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict will help to strengthen the
overall framework of the Organization's action to
protect children in armed conflict.

