Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing. Since the briefing
before the Council on the seventh report of the ICC
on 13 May (see S/PV.7173), the political and security
situation in Libya has undergone numerous changes.
We note that since then the militias have continued to
clash with increased violence, making the security and
political situation ever more confused and volatile.

On the human and humanitarian rights front,
civilians are living in totally precarious conditions.
They continue to be the targets of many attacks and
tribulations, both at the hands of the militias and the
State authorities, who engaged in torture, inhumane
treatment and discrimination despite the publication of
Law 10/2013. The eighth report of the Prosecutor refers
to the displacement of the Tawergha without hope for
an improvement in their situation.

On the judicial front, despite the decision of the
Pretrial Chamber of May 2013, confirmed a year later
by the Appeals Chamber, recognizing the admissibility
of the case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, no judgment
concerning him has been rendered up to now. That
absence of accountability continues to bolster the
impunity that reigns throughout the country. That
encourages the commission ofnumerous crimes against
civilians that neither the Libyan Government nor the
international community are able to end.

The Libyan Government has expressed its
willingness to cooperate with the ICC in the case of
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, but it continues to use
the prevailing insecurity as an excuse for why it has
not done so. Everyone recognizes the seriousness of
the security situation in Libya today and the limited
means of the Government to address it. We therefore
encourage the Libyan Government to persevere in its
desire to promote justice and to cooperate with the ICC.
We also encourage it to make the effort necessary to
organize the visit of the defence counsel of Abdallah
Al-Senussi, and to provide the information requested
by the ICC regarding the case's prosecution in Libya.

Moreover, it is regrettable that the budgetary
constraints are limiting the work of the ICC in opening
new prosecutions and in collecting evidence on other
suspects outside of Libya. We therefore reiterate our
call on the Security Council to seek a solution to the
problem of financing in the cases it refers to the Court.
The issue of detainees has not been addressed, and we
therefore urge the Government of Libya to do all it can
to either release them or to prosecute them.

We welcome the ongoing dialogue between
the Libyan Government, through the Office of the
Prosecutor, with the ICC, and urge them to strengthen
it. We also support the proposal of the ICC Prosecutor
regarding the creation of a contact group of key
countries in judicial matters in order to support the
efforts of the Libyan Government to bring justice to the
victims. That would surely help to strengthen justice in
that country, which needs it so very much.

