Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China thanks you, Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting. We also thank President Abbas and Secretary-General Aboul Gheit of the League of Arab States for their presence at today's public meeting. We further thank Secretary-General Guterres and Special Coordinator Mladenov for their briefings. The question of Palestine, an issue that has remained unresolved for over 70 years, is the root cause of the turbulence in the Middle East. That issue calls into question the human conscience and international justice. Independent statehood is an inalienable national right of the Palestinian people. It cannot be subject to trading in any way. The Palestinian people continue to endure terrible suffering. Clashes and confrontations between Palestine and Israel are incessant. Settlement activities and the demolition of Palestinian housing are continuing and expanding. The Middle East peace process has deviated from the right track. China is deeply worried. China has noted the United States announcement of a new Middle East peace plan and the reactions of Palestine, the Arab League, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Secretary-General and others. China has always believed that the relevant United Nations resolutions and international consensus on the two-State solution and the principle of land for peace constitute an important foundation for resolving the question of Palestine. As such, they must be effectively observed. The question of Palestine can be settled only through political means. Any proposed solution to this issue must be based on the views and opinions of the major parties, in particular those of Palestine, as well as on giving consideration to the voices of regional countries and organizations. Such a solution must be reached through dialogue and negotiations on an equal footing and contribute to a comprehensive, fair and lasting solution to the question of Palestine at an early date. Over recent days, Council members have held intensive consultations on the question of Palestine. China supports the efforts of Tunisia and Indonesia in that regard. We believe that the Council must base its work on the resolutions adopted in the past; heed the voices of the Palestinian people; reaffirm its support for the two-State solution, the importance of the relevant resolutions and existing international consensus; and call upon all parties to comply with international law in order to prevent the further complication and deterioration of the situation. China encourages all the parties to continue consultations in a responsible manner, while narrowing differences and widening consensus with a view to creating conditions conducive to resolving the issue. China is highly concerned about the economic and humanitarian situationin Palestine. Wecallonthe parties concerned to fulfil their international treaty obligations and the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations, comprehensively implement the relevant resolutions, fully lift the blockade against Gaza in a timely fashion, and improve the economic and humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) continues to face financial shortages this year. The international community must increase its political and financial support to UNRWA so as to effectively improve the humanitarian situation of the Palestinian refugees and their host countries. It must also bolster its input into economic reconstruction in Palestine. The Security Council bears the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security. In the current circumstances, the Council should work alongside the international community and play a constructive role in seeking a comprehensive, fair and lasting solution to the question of Palestine at an early date. China remains firmly committed to supporting the just cause of the Palestinian people to restore their legitimate national rights.
