Mr. Akbaruddin (India): We live in times
when the shadow of barbarism is never far from us.
That manifests itself sometimes in acts like the one
perpetrated today in the dastardly attack on the Russian
Federation's Ambassador to Turkey. It is much more
manifest at times in what activities are undertaken by
designated terrorist groups in Afghanistan.

Therefore, I thank you, Sir, for organizing today's
quarterly debate on the situation in Afghanistan. We also
thank the three briefers for outlining a diverse array of
issues. I take this opportunity to thank the Ambassador
of New Zealand, Mr. Gerard van Bohemen, for his
stewardship of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), and wish the Permanent
Representative of Japan, Ambassador Bessho, all the
best as he prepares to take on that chairmanship.

India welcomes the key message of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto,
highlighting the positive and supportive role that
regional countries and neighbours of Afghanistan need
to play. That was never as critical as it is today. Every
time we discuss the situation in Afghanistan, we face the
dilemma depicted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. While the international community

recommits to standing by the Afghan people, the number
of casualties among Afghan civilians and security forces
keeps rising. While the Taliban sanctions regime has
remained split for more than five years, the designated
terrorist group makes concerted efforts to capture and
hold territory. Therefore, for numerous Afghan women,
men and children there is no respite from the plague
of terrorism.

We need to ask ourselves whether what we are
working on in Afghanistan is the wrong thing to be
working on, or whether we are working on it in the
wrong way. Since we all agree that supporting the
people of Afghanistan is not the wrong thing, then the
questions we need to ask ourselves should be related
to our ways of going about it. What do we mean when
we say that we stand with the Afghan people? Are we
doing it in the right way? What is it that we are missing
out on?

It is apparent that our efforts at rebuilding
institutions, infrastructure and networks in Afghanistan
are being undermined, schools are being destroyed,
mosques bombarded and religious gatherings targeted.
It is also evident that those who perpetrate such heinous
crimes have survived and thrived only with support and
sanctuaries on the outside.

Experience and academic research provide ample
support for the assertion that conflicts in which foreign
assistance is available to shadowy entities that fight
legitimate State authorities tend to be more severe and
last longer than other types of conflict. Therefore, if we
are to bring sustainable peace to Afghanistan, groups
and individuals that perpetrate violence against the
people and the Government of Afghanistan must be
denied safe havens and sanctuaries in Afghanistan's
neighbourhood. We need to address, as an imperative,
the support that terrorist organizations like the Taliban,
the Haqqani network, Da'esh, Al-Qaida and its
designated affiliates, such as Lashkar-e-Toiba and the
Jaish-e-Mohammed - which operate entirely outside
the fabric of international law - draw from their
shadowy supporters outside Afghanistan.

The outcome of the Heart of Asia ministerial
meeting held earlier this month in the ancient city of
Amritsar was a showing of the commitment of India
and the international community to Afghanistan. A
key focus during India's co-chairmanship of the Heart
of Asia Process has been to bring to centre stage the
importance of connectivity for Afghanistan. A well-
connected Afghanistan will be economically vibrant,
prosperous and politically stable. A well-connected
Afghanistan will have great potential to engage the
energies of its youth and attract its talent back from
foreign lands. To deny such an opportunity and
connectivity to Afghanistan is to deny Afghanistan all
the opportunities for prosperity and peace that it entails.

The connectivity that terrorist networks have
established needs to be replaced by that of roads, trade
networks and ideas for peace and prosperity. We need
to remind ourselves of what the great son of Balkhi,
the poet Rumi, once said, to the effect that every leaf
that grows will reveal that what you sow will bear fruit.
Therefore, if you have any sense, he said, do not plant
anything but peace.

Afghanistan's National Unity Government has
India's full support in strengthening its defence
capabilities to fight the terrorism directed against it. We
believe that the path to reconciliation in Afghanistan
should be through an Afghan-led and an Afghan-owned
process in adherence to the internationally accepted
red lines, reflecting the aspirations of the people of
Afghanistan. The international community also needs
to send the right message, making it clear that we will
neither roll over in the face of terror nor allow the roll
back of the achievements of the resolute people and
Government of Afghanistan over the past decade and
ahflf

