Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
open debate on a subject that is of vital importance for
the work of the Security Council. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his statement and for
his report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/20l2/746). Our thanks are due in particular to
Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen of Bangladesh
for his statement today and for his able stewardship of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) this year. I would
also like to thank the Secretariat team so ably led by
Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins.

Once described as the missing middle between
peacekeeping and durable peace, the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission was in response to the
widely felt need of the international community to assist
post-conflict societies to attain sustainable peace. The
PBC, its Organizational Committee and its country-
specific configurations have done commendable work
in mainstreaming peacebuilding in post-conflict
countries.

The Council's continuous engagement on
peacebuilding in recent times has also helped to
emphasize the critical role of peacebuilding. In that
context, we welcome the progress made in implementing
the Secretary-General's Agenda for Action. Inclusivity,
institution-building and sustained and meaningful
international engagement, which are the priorities
identified by the Secretary-General, are useful guides
to peacebuilding ventures in the future.

Inclusive polity and governance, including the
provision of basic services and peace, security and a
stable social order, continue to be the key peacebuilding
tasks. Success in their implementation will impact upon
subsequent efforts at economic and social revitalization.
In turn, that success will depend upon the ability of
the international community to provide the resources
required and to generate greater coherence among
entities, programmes and field operatives, with a View
to promoting an integrated approach to sustainable
peacebuilding.

We believe that peacebuilding activities should
draw from achievements in the field: the PBC being
an advisory body, the expectations are that its country-
specific configurations will deliver core peacebuilding
tasks with agility and nimbleness. With much effort
invested in its mechanisms at Headquarters, the time
has now come to test our ability to make a difference
to the people and societies in post-conflict situations.

Inclusivity is a sign of healthy societies. Women
and youth should be fully included in peacebuilding
activities. However, efforts in that regard are
demanding and resource-intensive. Also, the widening
gap between our aspirations and field programmes
need to be narrowed by means of suitable programmes
and enhanced resource commitments. My delegation
encourages the PBC to work in that regard with
international and regional financial institutions, so
that tangible peace dividends are made available to the
population in post-conflict societies. It is also necessary
to avoid an over-reliance on the supply side of the
equation by relegating peacebuilding programmes to a
secondary place.

Conflicts today are vastly different that those of
the past. Their intra-State character, natural-resource
dimension, transnational crime aspect, illicit
trafficking in drugs and weapons component and
regional dimension demand an integrated approach.
Establishing institutions of governance, socioeconomic
development, youth employment, transitional
justice national reconciliation, electoral support and
constitution-building are tasks that require coherent and
sustained assistance from the international community.
That, in turn, requires political will, matching
resources and readiness for long-term engagement,
while taking into consideration local conditions. It is
therefore important for the PBC to align its objectives
with national priorities and to ensure that all plans and
programmes are implemented under national leadership
and ownership and through national institutions, so that
the gains are sustainable even is slow.

It is also important that peacebuilding start from
a firm foundation of successful peacekeeping. As a
responsible global citizen with broad experience with
nation-building, which is most relevant for countries
on the PBC's agenda, India has been a regular
contributor to the Peacebuilding Fund. Apart from
our participation in peacekeeping missions, we have
also partnered extensively with national authorities
in post-conflict countries, in particular in Africa,
with a view to supporting their national efforts at
peacebuilding, including in sectors such as human-
resource development, institutional capacity-building,
information technology and so forth. We will continue
to partner with post-conflict countries bilaterally and
through the United Nations in meeting the challenges
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

As this is the last public meeting ofthe Council this
year, let me avail myself of this opportunity to thank all
the members of the Council, the wider United Nations
membership and the Secretariat for their cooperation
during the past two years as we have made our modest
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security. I would also like to extend a very warm
welcome the five newly elected members, namely,
Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic of
Korea and Rwanda. I wish them great success during
the next two years.

