Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): Like others, we
are grateful to Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing
to the Security Council this morning. Indeed, we
welcome him to the Council for the first time.

In the Council's regular meetings on this issue in
recent months, there has been broad agreement on what
needs to be done to achieve the ultimate goal of a two-
State solution with an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State, based on 1967
borders, living side by side in peace and security with
Israel. However, the peace negotiations essential to
achieving that aim still elude us. The parties must take
bold action to create an atmosphere conducive to
peace.
We fully support last week's statement by the
Secretary-General calling for a freeze on Israeli
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories. Such settlements are illegal under
international law. Their continued expansion, including
so-called natural growth, goes against the overwhelming
international consensus and, indeed, the decisions of the
Security Council. It creates a further obstacle to the
two-State solution, which is the only sustainable
response to the national aspirations of both parties.

We are especially concerned by Prime Minister
Netanyahu's recent comments, rejecting calls to halt
work on the Shepherd's Hotel settlement project in
East Jerusalem. Developments such as that, in what is
by any measure an Arab neighbourhood, would
seriously undermine the prospects for a successful two-
State solution, with Jerusalem as the capital of both
Israel and Palestine. We urge the Israeli Government to
bring an immediate halt to that construction and to
cease activities such as the house demolitions and
evictions that continue to cause such deep resentment.

We also encourage Arab partners to demonstrate
their readiness to move towards a normalization of
relations with Israel, as envisaged in the Arab Peace
Initiative. Prime Minister Netanyahu's remarks on
23 July indicated Israeli's interest in expanding peace
with the Palestinians into a broader regional peace. We
welcome the views expressed recently by His Highness
the Crown Prince of Bahrain on taking forward the
Arab Peace Initiative. It is vital that all Arab States
demonstrate both their commitment to dialogue and
peaceful relations and their willingness to respond
positively to any significant Israeli action to freeze
settlement activity.

Firm commitments are also needed from the
Palestinians. Rocket and mortar attacks by Palestinian
militants continue. The people of southern Israel have
the right to live free from terror. We call for those
attacks to stop, for the immediate release of Gilad
Shalit, for access by the International Committee of the
Red Cross to Corporal Shalit and for an end to all acts
of violence. Palestinian factions should unite behind
President Abbas, and we support the efforts of Egypt in
that regard. Palestinian reconciliation is essential to
prevent further political separation of the West Bank
and Gaza.

We are encouraged by the recent increase in
economic activity in the West Bank. We support the
work of Quartet Representative Tony Blair and his
team in helping to create the conditions for such
activity. In particular, there have been positive
developments in the city of Nablus, where the removal
ofjust six Israeli roadblocks and checkpoints has led to
a marked improvement to local economic activity. We
welcome recent Israeli action to reduce movement and
access restrictions and encourage further such steps.
The benefits are plain to see.

That is all in sharp contrast to the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. We are still a long way from the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009). Continued
Israeli restrictions imposed on the Gaza crossings have
allowed for little improvement in the plight of ordinary
Gazans. Restrictions on certain foodstuffs and
reconstruction materials have a serious and detrimental
impact, forcing goods to be smuggled in through
tunnels. As those tunnels are under Hamas control, the
restrictions serve only to strengthen their position. It is
in the interest of all that those restrictions be eased,
particularly as winter approaches.

We remain deeply concerned by allegations that
breaches of international humanitarian law were
committed by both sides during the Gaza conflict
earlier this year. We encourage all parties involved to
cooperate fully with the Human Rights Council fact-
finding mission, headed by Justice Goldstone.

As I said at the start, much-needed peace talks
still elude us. With regard to Syria, Lebanon and Israel,
negotiations are the only way to resolve the issues that
divide them. Now is the time to take that forward. We
urge Syria and Israel to restart indirect peace talks and
to consider moving to direct talks.

The positive manner in which the Lebanese
elections took place provides a good basis on which to
make real progress towards creating a durable peace.
Recent events in south Lebanon, particularly the
explosion of an arms cache on 14 July, underline,
however, the urgency of moving towards a
comprehensive agreement. We are deeply concerned
that Hizbullah continues to maintain a substantial
military capacity, which is a destabilizing factor for the
whole region. We condemn the recent attacks on
peacekeepers of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon in the strongest possible terms. We urge all
parties to step up their commitment to full and
unconditional implementation of resolution 1701
(2006). Movement on Ghajar would be an important
confidence-building measure.

