Mr. Kittikhoun (Lao People's Democratic Republic) (spoke in French): I would like, first of all,
to thank you, Mr. President, for acceding to the request
made by the League of Arab States and the Non-
Aligned Movement to convene this urgent meeting of
the Security Council in order to consider an extremely
urgent matter, namely, the war in Iraq. I would also like
to thank you and all the members of the Council for
honouring my request to participate in this crucial
debate. During these difficult and painful times, I
would like to wish you every success in guiding the
work of the Council during this tumultuous month.

My country, the Lao People's Democratic
Republic, is closely following the question of Iraq.
Like the overwhelming majority of peoples throughout
the world, we have always advocated a peaceful
solution to this sensitive and complex issue. Indeed, we
share the deep conviction of all those who have
cautioned against the unpredictable and devastating
consequences of the use of force to settle this conflict:
enormous material damage, extensive loss of human
life and a negative impact on peace and stability in the
Middle East and throughout the world.

In spite of the opposition of the vast majority of
the world community, on 20 March 2003 a large-scale
military attack was launched against the Republic of
Iraq, an independent and sovereign country, member of
the Non-Aligned Movement and of the United Nations.
We deeply regret that the peaceful path that was still
open was abandoned and that, unfortunately, the
military option was chosen. This unjustified act of
aggression, not mandated by the United Nations, is a
serious violation of the Charter and of international
law.

In its statement issued on 20 March 2003, the
Government of the Lao People's Democratic Republic
appealed for an immediate end to this armed attack in
order to spare the lives of innocent Iraqi civilians. We
continue firmly to believe that a peaceful solution to
this conflict, however complex, can still be attained
within the framework of the United Nations. Let us
give diplomacy a chance, rather than continue to let the
weapons roar. According to the latest information from
the mass media, the number of innocent civilian
victims continues to grow. No less seriously, if the war
persists, we should expect a major humanitarian crisis,
the consequences of which will be catastrophic.

Before the outbreak of the military conflict, some
spoke of a quick war. Many are now talking about the
possibility of a lengthy war, no doubt fraught with
consequences. In this situation, we can only feel the
greatest concern and even anxiety. The international
community is therefore called upon to take urgent
action to put an immediate end to this war, which has
already claimed close to 1,000 victims. If the world
should succeed in this noble endeavour, we will have
rendered a great service to the Iraqi people, whose
unbearable sufferings should be ignored by no one.

Following the end of the bipolar era, many people
expressed the hope that it would be possible to build a
better world. Since then, Governments and peoples
throughout the world have given their all and spared no
effort to promote cooperation among States in all
possible areas. In a word, this multifarious cooperation
has already registered important achievements in many
spheres. Is this not a trend in our modern history that
should be strongly supported? Cooperation yields
benefits. All countries and peoples the world over can
only welcome it. On the other hand, war or the use
force to settle conflicts brings only destruction, misery,
death, resentment, anger and hatred. Together, we
should do our utmost and persevere in our efforts to
ensure that dialogue and cooperation among States
prevail in international relations, thereby helping to
preserve world peace and security.

These are the thoughts which my delegation
wished to share with this Council.

