Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia is
grateful for the opportunity to participate in this
debate. In the interests of time, I will skip some parts
of my distributed statement. We agree with the
Secretary-General's report (S/2009/135), and with
other speakers that have referenced it, that 2009 will be
a critical year in Afghanistan. Ensuring the credible
conduct of elections will be important for
demonstrating that Afghanistan's emerging democracy
will not be disrupted by the Taliban insurgency.

Australia welcomes the August date for elections
announced by the Afghan Independent Electoral
Commission. That timing provides an opportunity for
the necessary logistical preparations to be carried out
to allow the people of Afghanistan to exercise their
democratic right. We also support efforts to find a
solution to constitutional issues in a manner that would
ensure the legitimacy and stability of government until
the inauguration. Moreover, we are committed to
supporting the conduct of the elections. We recently
announced $3 million for the United Nations
Development Programme to establish an independent
electoral complaints commission, and we had
previously supported the electoral registration.

Afghanistan and its international partners face
enormous challenges, as outlined eloquently by the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan. Improving
security is critical to reconstruction and development.
That will require the Afghan Government forces to take
the lead. To assist that, Australia has provided an
operational mentoring and liaison team to Afghanistan.

Political reconciliation and, ultimately, a political
settlement will also be critical elements of a lasting and
durable solution for Afghanistan. Constructive
engagement by regional countries will be very
important.

But Australia also recognizes the magnitude of
the humanitarian challenges in Afghanistan, and we are
doing our bit - some 600 million dollars' worth since
2001. I would particularly highlight the work that is
being done by my compatriots in the areas of mine
action and also through the food assistance being
delivered by the World Food Programme.

We welcome the importance attached in the
Secretary-General's report to ensuring that
development assistance is applied intelligently
according to coordinated and comprehensive plans
with clear goals. In that context, Australia very much
values the efforts of Special Representative Kai Eide
and his team in the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to achieve better unity of
effort in international donor activity. Australia stands
ready to be coordinated.

We also support the expansion of UNAMA's
reach through new provincial offices. That sends a
clear signal of the United Nations commitment to
provide more direct assistance through programmes
and outreach at the community level, where help is
most needed. We particularly welcome the opening of
an UNAMA provincial office in Oruzgan, where our
military and civilian personnel are deployed. We look
forward to working with the new office to improve
conditions in that part of southern Afghanistan.

Australia will, of course, participate in the
Afghan conference to be held in The Hague. That
meeting will be a key opportunity to look critically at
what is working and what is not in Afghanistan and
how we can make our collective efforts more effective.
We welcome the United Nations role in co-chairing the
meeting, and, of course, we thank the Netherlands, our
valued partners in Oruzgan, for hosting it.

Australia strongly supports UNAMA and the
extension of its mandate. We will need to continue to
ensure that this operation is properly resourced. We
also wish to record our deep appreciation for the
invaluable efforts of Mr. Kai Eide and for his
leadership of his courageous team at UNAMA.
Continued progress in Afghanistan depends on
strengthened and expanded engagement by the United
Nations and the international community, in concert
with the Government and the people of Afghanistan.

