The President: On behalf of the Security Council, I
should like to express deep sympathy to the Government
and people of China for the great loss of life and property
suffered as a result of the recent earthquake.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of February, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Sir John Weston, KCMG,
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the month
of January 1996. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Weston for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Angola

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) (S/1996/75)


The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Angola, Brazil, Lesotho, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal,
South Africa, Tunisia, Zambia and Zimbabwe in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Van Dunem
"Mbinda" (Angola) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Amorim (Brazil), Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho), Mr.
Keating (New Zealand), Mr. Andreassen (Norway),
Mr. Catarino (Portugal), Mr. Jele (South Africa),
Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), Mr. Kasanda (Zambia) and
Mr. Sengwe (Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), document
S/ 1996/75.

The first speaker is the representative of Angola, on
whom I now call.


