Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to thank this month's French presidency for
having agreed, at the initiative of the United Kingdom
delegation, to hold this briefing on the important issue
of strategic force generation. My thanks also go to my
colleagues from Bangladesh and Canada, and of course
to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix. Their briefings
confirm that all peacekeeping operations continue
to face a shortfall related to a lack of capacities
and equipment.

The United Nations Standby Arrangements System
for peacekeeping, which in all its iterations, has been
used by the Secretary-General since 1948, to pool the
resources of countries' forces and make them available
for peacekeeping operations, has shown its limitations,
especially with regard to settling current crises, which
have become more numerous, complex and deadly.
That serves to highlight the importance of today's
meeting and shows our Organization's determination
to confront the challenges in providing both standby
forces and the capacities and sufficient number
contingents with a view to contribute effectively to
peacekeeping on the ground where asymmetrical
threats are increasingly encountered.

It is encouraging that, following the leaders'
summit on peacekeeping organized on the sidelines
of the General Assembly in 2015 under the American
presidency, the Secretary-General established within
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations a Strategic
Force Generation and Capability Planning Cell
responsible for managing a new system for preparing
peacekeeping operations and the process of force
generation, known as the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System (PCRS). Despite those measures,
however, and the Ministerial Meetings held in London
and Paris, the shortfalls encountered in implementing the
mandates of peacekeeping operations remain glaring.

In addition to a lack of capacities owing to the
insufficient number of contingents already deployed,
the missions are having a difficult time meeting their
own needs - for example, in terms of engineering,
health care and aerial transport - although, as the
representative of Canada pointed out, those capacities
are available in numerous developed member countries.
Those capacity shortfalls are even more salient for
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs),
whose contingents are deployed in multidimensional
missions and lacking the necessary means within a
complex and insecure environment characterized, in
particular by asymmetrical threats and hostile actions
aimed increasingly at our Blue Helmets who are
supposed to be protecting civilians.

That observation consequently led Senegal, in
November 2016, to convene a ministerial open debate
(see S/PV.7802) during its presidency of the Security
Council on United Nations peacekeeping operations
facing asymmetrical threats. The goal of that debate
was to stimulate strategic thinking on planning as
well as generation and the mandates of forces that
must deployed in asymmetrical contexts. In truth, the
capacities required for the full implementation of the
mandates fall short in many cases in which the missions
are carried out in the absence of a political process and
the means to exit the crises. Consequently, the missions
become protracted and their engagement becomes
prolonged and uncertain.

In addressing that situation, and while
maintaining constant cooperation with the troop- and
police-contributing countries, the Security Council
must explore new options with Secretary-General.
One possibility is a framework for coalitions among
States from among the membership or the region
so as to generate forces within the structure of the
PCRS in order to fill gaps in the area of operational
capacity. In that regard, I recall that Senegal has
already experimented with the concept of joint
deployment - with Guinea within the framework of
African-led International Support Mission in Mali,
while waiting for the implementation of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, which we discussed in this very Chamber this
morning (see S/PV.8062). Similarly, together with
Burkina Faso, Senegal proposed to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations the deployment of a unit of
utility helicopters in Cote d'Ivoire prior to the closing
of the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire.

Based on firm partnerships between TCCs and
PCCs in pooling capacities, the Security Council
must strongly encourage seeking partnerships and
defining the basic needs that will allow for the rapid
mobilization of sufficient forces to respond to the
increasing number of crises, especially when the latter
emerge unexpectedly. Such an approach could include
non-regional partnerships supervised by the United
Nations. Accordingly, we believe that the upcoming
Defence Ministerial Meeting in Vancouver, which
the Ambassador of Canada mentioned earlier, can
be included in that type of cooperation within the
framework of smart pledges through, for example,
intelligent advertising.

In the context of cooperation involving regional
and subregional organizations, standby arrangement
systems and the African Capacity for Immediate
Response to Crises could also serve to fill the gaps. Our
experiences gleaned from the African Union Mission
in Somalia, the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali and the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic have
demonstrated that countries neighbouring those in
conflict were the most amenable to intervene in a timely
manner. Senegal therefore encourages strengthening
African systems through the deployment of Member
State contingents so as to contribute to overcoming the
difficulties observed, and, at the same time, draw on
the lessons learned from the transitions that have taken
place in Mali and the Central African Republic.

In that same regard, the Council and the Secretariat,
in tandem with TCCs and PCCs, could pursue and
further strengthen inter-mission cooperation, which
proved to be very constructive in sporadic or fixed-
period force generation to reinforce the operational
capacities of United Nations missions. In the same
vein, the Senegalese rapid reaction force, through its
deployment from C6te d'Ivoire to the Central African
Republic, was able to ensure the holding of the 2016
presidential elections in the Central African Republic,
thereby providing an inspiring example. That same
kind of operation is already envisioned, but this time
it will originate in Mali, where the Senegalese rapid
reaction force is already deployed, and take place in
Liberia, where general elections are to be held.

Henceforth, countries will be able to play the role
expected of them to fill the most glaring gaps, most
of which require enabling units or new technologies.
Fortunately, with the leaders' summit on peacekeeping
operations and the Ministerial Meetings in London and
Paris, the leaders of contributing countries have been
showcasing their firm belief, in and commitment to,
investing more in peacekeeping operations. In other
words, through strong political will, Governments
can show more commitment to the United Nations in
providing it with what is required.

In conclusion, I would like to return to the problems
often encountered in force generation by African
countries in general.

First, the Statement of Unit Requirements, which
defines the basis for generating and deploying United
Nations military units, poses non-conformity issues
with regard to how units from contributing countries
are structured. TCCs and PCCs should look for
solutions to the task of calibrating batallions, with a
view to completing the mandates and duties that they
must carry out.

Secondly, strategic force generation specifically
intended for peacekeeping can undermine the capacities
of contributing countries, whose scant security and
police personnel may already be facing significant
domestic undertakings.

Overall, we welcome the interest we are all
according to the effectiveness and efficiency of
peacekeeping operations in the wake of the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, the reform of the peace and
security pillar of the United Nations initiated by the
Secretary-General, the adoption of resolution 2377
(2017) and the meeting of the Council on this issue held
on 20 September (see S/PV.8051), where nearly every
Council was represented at the level of Head of State,
Head of Government or Minister for Foreign Affairs.

