Mr. Ayrault (France) (spoke in French): While
Syria has been mired in tragedy for five years, and
while each passing day propels the country further into
chaos and its people into horror, it is more urgent than
ever to work together to seek to end the conflict. That is
our collective responsibility. The peoples of the world
are watching. They will judge us severely if we fail to
uphold the mission that the Charter of United Nations
entrusts to the Security Council.

An agreement was signed last week by the United
States and Russia. France welcomed it as a response
to an emergency - that of saving human lives. For
five years, civilians have borne the heaviest toll of this
appalling war. Aleppo, a martyr city, symbolizes the
horror of this war. The fighting must stop, humanitarian
assistance must be delivered, and a momentum for peace
must be launched with a view to reaching a political
solution that includes reconstruction and the return of
refugees who have fled by the millions.

All of us around this table know how difficult
that is, as recent developments have unfortunately
demonstrated. Yet again, the logic of violence has
prevailed; yet again, the truce has collapsed; yet again,
the Syrian regime has stubbornly pursued its headlong
military strategy, although the military solution is
doomed. We are forced to wonder whether the unspoken
goal may be, after all, the fall of Aleppo and the de
facto partition and effective control of Syria.

This vicious cycle has lasted long enough. It has
lasted too long. In this conflict, where there are more
unknowns than knowns, one thing is certain - after
five years of a war that has claimed more than 300,000
dead and displaced millions, it is obvious that nobody
can win by force. There will be no winner, other than
the terrorist organizations that will continue to benefit
from the widespread chaos that will prevail. If there is
one certainty about this conflict, it is that its outcome
can only be political.

In the face of the Syrian tragedy and the risk of
failure, the time for second thoughts, short-sighted
calculations, tactical considerations and double-talk is
over, inside the Security Council and out. We must first
ensure the sustainability of the cessation of hostilities.
In that regard, the Russian-American agreement is for
now, I repeat, the only proposal on the table. But we
must be clear-sighted; the numerous violations on the
ground are in their overwhelming majority the acts
of the regime and its allies. The heinous bombing of
a humanitarian convoy in Aleppo, which has been
mentioned several times this morning, has outraged
international public opinion. It is a sorry illustration of
the spiral ofviolence. The constant bombings ofmedical
facilities and personnel are yet another aspect. The full
truth behind these tragedies and their sponsors must
be revealed, as the Secretary-General noted earlier.
Our common moral duty is to join forces to ensure
respect for the cessation of hostilities. Our collective
commitment must be to ensure the effective, just and
lasting implementation of the truce.

I emphasize that effectiveness is critical if Syrians
are to feel the concrete impact of the cessation of
hostilities. Humanitarian assistance must therefore
be delivered. It can longer be subject to the regime's
haggling. All bombing of civilians and moderate
opposition groups must stop. Strict monitoring is
vital. Experience teaches us that the regime exploits
truces, applied locally, to focus its military efforts on
other fronts. Why, then, do we not require the regime
to canton all its soldiers, since the effectiveness of the
truce depends on that? I propose, on behalf of France,
that the Security Council work practically to that end.

The second requirement is that of justice, which
demands that no crime be ignored, even in exchange
for a truce. It has been proved that the regime has used
chemical weapons, as has Da'esh. The perpetrators of
those crimes must be punished. There will be no lasting
peace in Syria if there is impunity. It therefore up to
the Security Council, acting under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, to condemn those attacks
and punish the perpetrators. It is a moral duty, but also
an obligation of the international community, which
has wanted to eliminate chemical weapons forever.

And the third necessity is that of sustainability.
The ceasefire agreement must be sustainable, for it is
essential for creating the conditions for a future peace.
A new governance arrangement must open up political
prospects and create a collective space. Certainly,
one cannot generate new hope around a figure who
divides Syrians and sows mostly death and destruction.
Resolution 2254 (2015), which Mr. De Mistura evoked
again a while ago, provides a road map for a political
transition and a devolution of power.

The United States and Russia of course have special
responsibility for the implementation of the agreement
they negotiated: they co-chair the International Syria
Support Group. But as I said at the International Syria
Support Group (ISSG) meeting, as well as to Sergey
Lavrov and John Kerry, and as I have said here before
members, France is convinced that only collective
mobilization will make it possible to achieve the goals
that I just mentioned. Everyone must take up their
responsibilities. It is true that this approach has its
value, but it also has its limitations. France is therefore
ready to take on its responsibility as part of the new
credible and effective monitoring mechanism we are
proposing. Such a mechanism must make possible
a shared assessment of violations of the truce and
the obstacles to humanitarian access, as well as to
determine consequences. We must leave behind the
approach of mutual accusations, which precipitated the
failure of previous agreements and was not conducive
to an atmosphere of confidence. There is too much
mistrust - a feeling I also noted at the ISSG meeting.
We must therefore create propitious conditions to
move forward. I therefore make this proposal for a new
monitoring mechanism. 1 have circulated here among
all Council and ISSG members the non-paper we
prepared for discussion.

Once an effective truce is in place and humanitarian
access is assured, which is the priority, negotiations for
a genuine political transition can, and must, resume. We
know what the parameters are, namely, the 2012 Geneva
communique' (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2015), which was mentioned frequently by previous
speakers. The High Negotiations Committee has
presented proposals and is ready to play a constructive
role for a Syria that is open, democratic and respectful
of its diversity. What have we seen from the regime if
not propaganda and delaying tactics? But proposals for
a negotiation? None to date. The burden of evidence is
therefore with them and its allies.

Finally, what is at stake in Syria is also a major
battle against terrorism. That fight has not ended,
nor must it. It must continue, both against Da'esh
and all other groups in Syria that espouse the same
ideology and violence, including, again Da'esh, as
well as Al-Qaida and the Al-Nusra Front. France again
reiterates that that must include all non-jihadist armed
groups, which should distance themselves from those
terrorist organizations - and fast.

France is playing its part in this common fight ofthe
international community against terrorism alongside
the coalition. We are acting militarily against Da'esh
and are prepared to do the same against any terrorist
group, which we must prevent from taking advantage
of the truce to strengthen themselves and prosper.
But nothing will be more useful in the fight against
Da'esh than our collective mobilization to ensure that
at long last Syria once again finds its way towards
peace and stability. If we yield to impotence, fatalism
and resigning ourselves, I think we will bear a heavy
responsibility. The press are already saying that it is all
over, definitively stating that we have failed and that
there is not even a slight chance for a ceasefire to take.
It is up to us here to demonstrate that that is not true
and that there is still hope. We must show that we do
not want to be complicit in the fall of Aleppo - which
I again say is a martyred city - or in the martyrdom of
the Syrian people. France will not resign itself to that.
And I have heard statements here this morning that
inspire me to hold out that hope.

What we need is a burst of will, a burst of
responsibility and a burst of unity to end a conflict that
has lasted far too long. That is the appeal I make before
the Council today in the name of France.

