Mr. Wittig (Germany): Over the past two years,
Germany has had the honour to chair the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011), and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. Advancing the work
of these bodies has been one of Germany's priorities
during its membership of the Council. Both the fight
against terrorism and the protection of human rights
are essential elements of our foreign policy. I therefore
appreciate the opportunity to share some personal
observations on this with the Security Council.

With regard to the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime, I would like to point out three of the challenges
we have had to tackle. First, we had to make the
regime more responsive to the changing nature of the
terrorist threat. Secondly, we have had to make sure
that the sanctions regime continues to serve its political
purpose. Thirdly, we have had to ensure continued
universal respect for the sanctions regime.

Those challenges could be met only with a
determined and united effort of Council members. Our
task was to forge a consensus in the Committee as a
basis for the needed reforms. These efforts culminated
in June 2011 when the Council adopted resolutions 1988
(2011) and 1989 (2011), establishing new landmarks
within the United Nations sanctions policy.

Resolution 1988 (2011) separated the Taliban
sanctions regime from the former Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime. This step rendered the instrument of
sanctions more nimble and more responsive, which is
of significant importance to the political process in
Afghanistan. It is an encouraging development that
Afghanistan is seeking an even stronger role in the
Committee's work and has presented proposals for
delisting reconciled individuals.

Resolution 1989 (2011) substantially strengthened
the role of the Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. This introduced a much-needed element of due
process that is crucial to ensure universal respect of the
sanctions regime.
It is time to consolidate the progress made and
to build further on it. Germany, together with our
partners in the group of like-minded States on targeted
sanctions, has made concrete suggestions to improve
due process in the sanctions regimes. In particular,
we are of the view that the Council should consider
widening the mandate of the Ombudsperson to other
sanctions regimes. We are convinced that all Council
members must have an interest in the universal respect
of the Council's political instruments, especially the
sanctions regimes. We are therefore looking forward to
the discussion of our suggestions in the Council.

I now turn to the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. Allow me to start with a couple
of words on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, because it is on our minds in terms of
topical developments. Just last month, more children
were killed due to the fighting in Eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo than in the whole year before.
In 2012, the number of children killed or maimed by
parties to the conflict almost tripled as compared to the
previous four years. Some estimate that up to 200,000
children suffer in this conflict. The Mouvement du
23 mars (M23) is estimated to have forcibly recruited
at least 300 children as child soldiers. Other armed
groups increased recruitment of children as well. There
are gruesome testimonies from children confirming
that M23 commanders have killed child soldiers within
their ranks who tried to escape.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a grim reminder that civilians - especially
women and children - continue to bear the brunt
of war and conflict. Their suffering continues to
oblige the international community. The Security
Council commands unique powers - and has unique
responsibilities - to advance the protection of children
in conflicts. Germany is convinced that the Council
must make use of those powers for the sake of the
children affected and for the sake of international
peace and security. In that spirit, my delegation has
focused on three tasks within the Working Group. First,
we have worked hard to significantly reduce the time
gap between the reports of the Secretary-General on
a given situation and the Working Group's respective
conclusions and recommendations. We appreciate the
cooperation ofCouncil members in this time-consuming
and labour-intensive endeavour.

Secondly, we have set out to strengthen the
existing protection mechanism. We are pleased that the
Security Council adopted resolution 1998 (2011) under
Germany's presidency in July 2011. The resolution
added a new trigger to guarantee that armed groups
that attack schools and hospitals, and persons related
to them, are listed by the Secretary-General in his
annual report. We also pleased with the Council's
adoption of resolution 2068 (2012) in September, again
during our presidency, focusing on how to put more
pressure on persistent perpetrators and achieve better
accountability. Furthermore, the Secretary-General
now has an open-ended mandate to present annual
reports to the Council. Let me stress that his reports
and the listings therein are very valuable and effective
tools for protecting children. They are part and parcel
of the international legal architecture for protecting
children in war.

Thirdly, we have ensured that the protection of
children enjoys high priority in all peacekeeping
mandates and sanctions committees. Most of the
relevant sanctions regimes now contain provisions
to hold those who violate children's rights in armed
conflict accountable.

The Security Council can be proud of the innovative
and successful mechanisms for protecting children
in armed conflict. However, we call on members to
remain vigilant and to prevent those mechanisms
from being weakened. In fact, members should strive
for further improvement. We firmly believe that the
Council should follow up swiftly on resolution 2068
(2012) and discuss what can be done to further advance
the protection of children and in particular to hold
persistent perpetrators accountable.

From our point of view, there are some practical
steps that the Working Group could already be taking.
It should make better use of its tool kit by issuing
press statements on situations of concern that occur
outside the reporting cycle. So far, there has been some
resistance to using that tool. I recommend discussing
the issue again, since the Working Group must be able
to react immediately to massive violations and abuses
of children's rights in armed conflict. The informal
so-called horizontal note by which UNICEF informs
the Working Group about current situations on the
ground is an ideal source of information in that regard.

The Working Group should continue to hear
briefings by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, such as those we have heard on Cote d'Ivoire,
Syria, Libya, Mali and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Such briefings are not only a valuable
source of information, but also send strong signals of
Council members' commitment. The Working Group
should also explore options for increasing the number
of country visits. We successfully conducted a highly
useful visit to Afghanistan in 2011 that was also part
of the preparation for resolution 1988 (2011). We are
certain that such visits can substantially complement
the work of United Nations staff on the ground.

In closing, let me take this opportunity to express
my appreciation for the tremendous work being done
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and her Office, as well as by our peacekeeping missions
and UNICEF. I commend them for their commitment.
They are the true cornerstones of the United Nations
mechanism for protecting children in armed conflict.

