Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting and the
important briefing by Assistant Secretary-General
Mr. Alexander Zouev.

Peru is a country committed to the elimination
of anti-personnel mines, in accordance with the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and
on Their Destruction - also known as the Ottawa
Convention. We believe that taking action against those
weapons, which are particularly cruel, insidious and
indiscriminate, constitutes a moral and legal obligation
of the international community, which is called on to
contribute directly to help the Council shoulder its
responsibilities relating to the protection of civilians
and the maintenance of international peace and security.
Accordingly, we believe that it is important for this
organ continue to focus on developments concerning
mine action, especially in peacekeeping operations
whose work in humanitarian demining is essential
to fostering transitions from conflict situations to
sustaining peace.

Based on our own experience in the area, we
can give a first-hand account of the new peace
dynamics that demining has created. Our armed
forces today enjoy an exemplary relationship of trust
and cooperation with those of our brotherly Republic
of Ecuador in conducting joint demining activities on
the shared border. Demining activities, outreach and
prevention, and reparations and assistance provided to
the victims of mines that the Peruvian State provided
while combatting terrorism during the last decades of
the twentieth century, have created today a positive
relationship between the State and those communities
most exposed to the violence at that time, in addition
to opportunities for development, reconciliation and
the return of displaced persons that was facilitated
by demining.

On the other hand, the continued presence of those
weapons constitutes a remnant of conflict running
contrary to international humanitarian law and tends
to prolong conflict, especially among those who
are most vulnerable. We underscore the importance
of the planning and programming of mine action
in close cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, local authorities, victims, humanitarian
workers, civil society and those members of the
population who risk being affected.

We would also like to highlight the work of the
United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) and
the usefulness of the report of the Secretary-General
on the issue (S/2018/623), in particular with regard
to peacekeeping operations deployed through the
Council's mandate. The cooperation of UNMAS with
the various relevant United Nations system entities
helps to develop capacities, common standards and
synergies aimed at more effective, safe and efficient
action on the ground. Furthermore, we believe that its
work must go beyond the removal and the destruction
of anti-personnel mines. In particular, we emphasize
the need to support the establishment and strengthening
of national capacities for demining, prevention and
assistance to victims. Establishing a rapid response
system to respond to anti-personnel mines wherever
they might appear is also of particular importance.

In conclusion, we would like to highlight
three points contained in the Secretary-General's
report that we believe to be of major importance
concerning peacekeeping operations deployed via the
Council's mandate.

First, there is a need to provide missions with
training, equipment and adequate technology and to
facilitate the transfer of those capacities to the country
affected. We commend the training that is being done.
Secondly, there is a need to prevent and mitigate the
destructive action of improvised explosive devices
used by non-State actors, which today represent the
greatest threat. We welcome the development of
manuals to that end. Thirdly, it is advisable to increase
women's participation in those activities, with a view
to promoting prevention strategies and linking with
civilian society more inclusively and effectively.

