Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the floor to share the
views of my delegation on this very important subject.
I wish also to thank the French presidency for having
convened this open debate.

Our main concern in dealing with this question
should be how the international community can ensure
that the people who, in most cases, contribute the least
to a conflict are not harmed by it.

It is a foregone conclusion that civilians continue
to account for the majority of casualties in conflict
situations around the world. The numbers of those
forced to flee their homes to escape violence, internally
or across borders, is quite staggering.

History is replete with examples of innocent
civilians who perished in the millions or were
displaced permanently by the unforgiving horrors of
war. The survivors of the initial onslaught often
succumb to the second stage of atrocities, where
lifesaving food, water, medicine and other forms of
humanitarian relief are denied them.

It is reprehensible to resort to armed conflict
whenever there is a small difference of opinion
between contending parties, each claiming exclusive
rights and control over the other. In this conflagration,
it is, unfortunately, the women and children who suffer
the most, as they are subjected to acts of violence that
include murder and maiming; sexual violence; forced
displacement from their homes; forced recruitment, in
the case of children, as child soldiers; and kidnapping
and human trafficking, as well as enslavement and
other traumatic psychological experiences.

It is deeply regrettable that violent attacks against
civilians continue to this day, even after the adoption
by the international community of a robust
international legal framework and conventions and
protocols designed to serve and protect civilian
populations to a much greater extent than had been
intended by the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907,
which centred on the danger of indiscriminate warfare.

Half a century later, the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and their Additional Protocols, which act as the
central pillar of international humanitarian law, have
not enjoyed strict observance by warlords and other
aggressors.

While the international community remained
united in the utilization of this body of international
law to effectively curb the effects of conflict and
protect those who do not take part in the hostilities, the
instigators of violence undermined that objective by
directing attacks at vulnerable segments of their own
populations, killing their own people and depriving
them the basic necessities of life, even to the extent of
impeding the delivery of humanitarian relief supplies
to them.

In their actions, belligerents deliberately choose
to blur their vision in distinguishing between active
combatants and non-combatants and often fail to abide
by the intents and purposes of the provisions of
landmark resolutions such as General Assembly
resolution 2444 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, which
stipulates that a distinction should be observed between
persons taking part in hostilities and members of the
civilian population, so that the latter can be spared as
much pain and suffering as possible.

We note that there have been significant steps in
providing guidance for the effective protection of
civilians, especially through the production by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of
the fourth edition of the aide-memoire
(S/PRST/2010/25, annex), which serves not only as a
practical tool for facilitating the Council's
deliberations but also as a repository of useful
information for the benefit of Member States.

We note with appreciation that, following the
Council's adoption of resolution 1894 (2009), there has
been forward movement in the five core pillars
identified in the resolution as the main challenges to
ensuring more effective protection of civilians, namely,
enhancing compliance by parties to a conflict with
international law; enhancing compliance by non-State
armed groups; enhancing protection by United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions; enhancing
humanitarian access; and enhancing accountability for
violations of international law.

The resolution places primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians on the States themselves, as
well as on the authorities on the ground. The critical
question of countering impunity cannot be
overemphasized. Even though arrests and prosecutions
for crimes against humanity, war crimes and human
rights violations remain disappointingly low at both the
domestic and the international levels, there is a
necessary deterrent value in the establishment of the
international legal architecture represented by bodies
such as the International Court of Justice and the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Besides the
deterrent value of ending impunity, promoting
accountability on the part of leaders and thereby saving
thousands of lives, international judicial bodies such as
the ICC have provided victims with their only avenue
to justice, especially in situations where local judicial
systems are either unwilling or lack the capacity to
prosecute crimes and acts of violence.

In order to give impetus to the effective
protection of civilians in armed conflict, Botswana has
ratified many of the main international law
conventions, including the 1949 Geneva Conventions
and their 1977 Protocols, as well as the main
conventions on refugees. In addition, Botswana
continues to host refugees and asylum seekers from a
number of countries in the region. My delegation
shares the view expressed by other delegations that the
burden of providing and sustaining security and
humanitarian assistance in refugee camps and
settlements should be shared by the rest of the
international community, including in the area of
demobilization and repatriation.

Allow me to seize this opportunity to pay tribute
to those countries that have been at the forefront of
saving lives by sending their own men and women to
the front lines to assist in the management of conflict
and the protection of civilian populations around the
world. Although Botswana does not presently have
active military contingents in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, due to its limited resources,
the country has in the past contributed troops to the
African Union Mission in Sudan before it was replaced
by African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, as well as in Somalia and in Mozambique. We
are proud of our modest contribution to international
peace and security in this regard.

Let me conclude by raising the thorny issue of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. This is
an issue that unfortunately does not receive sufficient
attention in the recent report of the Secretary-General
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579). However the issue is featured
prominently in the aide-memoire I referred to earlier in
my remarks. The aide-memoire contains
recommendations for consideration by the Council
involving arms embargoes, sanctions and legal
measures against corporate actors involved in the
manufacture and supply of weapons used to sponsor
and sustain conflict. Even though resolution 1894
(2009) highlights the point that the accumulation of
such weapons has a destabilizing effect and poses

"a considerable impediment to the provision of
humanitarian assistance and [has] a potential
to prolong conflicts, endanger civilians and
undermine security and the confidence required
for a return to peace and stability" (resolution 1894 (2009), para. 29),

it does not go far enough.

My delegation is of the view that perhaps it is
time for the Security Council to adopt more aggressive
measures to deal with the problem of the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons and their supply and
use, as well as the undesirable effect of such weapons
in the sustenance of conflict. The Security Council has
enough capability to be more rigorous in addressing
the challenge and destabilizing effect of small arms
and light weapons with possibly the same vigour as
that devoted to the effects of landmines and other
explosive remnants of war.

In conclusion, my delegation is of the humble
opinion that consideration should be given to extending
to small arms and light weapons the call of the

ll-33lll
Secretary-General in his report for "more systematic
data collection and analysis of the human costs"
(S/2010/579, para. 50) ofthe use of explosive weapons
in order to deepen similar understanding of the
humanitarian impact of these weapons, to guide and
strengthen the implementation of international and
human rights law and, above all, to increase the
chances of survival of innocent civilians in conflict
situations.

