Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I am
in fact not really certain of the nature of the statement
we have just heard. Is it an attempt to exercise the right
of reply or is it the second statement by Israel during
the same meeting of the Security Council? The more
important question is perhaps about its content, which,
to say the least, is a reflection of the usual Israeli
arrogance and intransigence. In fact, we had thought
that the Israeli Ambassador would have made a
different speech, but it seems that we are all supposed
to be committed to the official statement he made
earlier.

I would like to refer once again to the meeting
that took place between Israeli Foreign Minister
Shimon Peres and the Security Council and to the
results of that meeting. Various press agencies have
today quoted Mr. Peres as follows:

(spoke in English)

'"Negotiations with the Palestinians will not be
resumed as long as the Palestinians continue
calling on the United Nations to station observers
in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip', Foreign
Minister Shimon Peres said on Monday."

(spoke in Arabic)

I do not really know whether that constitutes a threat to
us or a threat to the members of the Security Council.
Why are the Israelis rejecting negotiations? One of the
parties is merely resorting to the Council, in
accordance with international law and without having
violated any of the agreements signed between the two
parties, for the purpose of restoring the situation to
what it was so as to bring about peace. Israeli logic
here is quite different from Israeli logic as we know it.

I would now like to refer to the content of the
statement made by the representative of Israel and to
the expressions he used, specifically his reference to
the "terrorist" aspect of the intifada and so on.

This of course represents a serious and dangerous
return to the lexicon that prevailed before the advent of
the peace process. We, on the other hand, are speaking
in an objective manner about the serious violations of
the Fourth Geneva Convention being committed by the
occupying Power, as well as about the war crimes that
have been perpetrated by that Power. If the Israeli side
insists, then we too are prepared to use the same
expressions that were in use before the peace process
began.

Another point I wish to make has to do with the
fact that the Israeli Ambassador indicated that 97 per
cent of the Palestinian people and 42 per cent of
Palestinian territory are under Palestinian control.
These figures lie, of course, given the fact that
occupied Jerusalem itself has over 200,000
Palestinians. We also know that over half of the land
under the control of the Palestinian Authority remains
under the security control of Israeli forces. What is
important to note here is that the Israelis believe that it
is acceptable for Palestinians to live in isolated
cantons, and that it is even a good thing. This in fact is
a reflection of racist thinking that is no different from
racial discrimination under apartheid and the
establishment of bantustans in South Africa.

Perhaps it would have been possible to make such
claims about the Palestinian people actually being
under the control of the Palestinian Authority in many
forums prior to the beginning of the actions that started
six months ago - that is, before the imposition of
siege, blockades, strangulation and all the other types
of suffering we have experienced. It would be
extremely ludicrous and unacceptable to talk about
such issues as Israel no longer being an occupying
Power due to the supposed fact that the Palestinian
people are under the control of the Palestinian
Authority.

We would have liked to hear something more
serious and quite different. In fact, the main issue is the
occupation. The essence of the tragedy is that the
Israeli side does not want to understand that, and that is
the reason we find ourselves in this position. I hope
this situation will not deteriorate because of such
persistence and insistence.

The Israeli Ambassador did not like the reference
made by another colleague to the importance of not
distinguishing between Israeli blood and Palestinian
blood. What is the problem here? What is the problem
concerning not distinguishing between the blood of
both sides? The problem is that the positions taken by
Israel and Israeli officials affirm our suspicions that
they believe that Israeli blood is more precious and
more valuable than Palestinian blood. How, when there
are 10 times as many Palestinian victims, can we talk
about Palestinians as the real cause of the present
tragedy? What is worse is that the Israeli Ambassador
made many accusations against Palestinians in his first
statement. These accusations can only mean that the
Palestinians are very strange and abnormal creatures.
They are not human beings because they are happy
when they are repressed; they seek repression, and they
are very happy when their children are killed. What do
these accusations mean? How can we accuse an entire
unarmed people of practising force and violence
against the most powerful military force in the Middle
East? What does this mean?

The Israeli Ambassador has also talked about
something another colleague had mentioned,
concerning the essence of the Israeli position rejecting
the Palestinian position on the return of refugees. This
is not the situation in Palestine. Of course, we say that
it is important to preserve the rights of Palestinian
refugees. We emphasize that Israel should accept in
principle its obligations and responsibilities vis-a-vis
the Palestinian refugees and their right to return and
that compensation should be given to those refugees
who do not wish to return, in accordance with
international law.

But this is only half of the truth. We have also
said that we are prepared to negotiate with the Israeli
side on certain mechanisms that would take into
consideration all Israeli fears, including Israel's
security requirements. Even if the Israeli side does not
accept this, it should not depict our position as a
request for Israel to commit suicide. Therefore, there is
a conceptual problem here.

The Ambassador said that President Arafat has
refused to sign an agreement with Mr. Barak despite
the many concessions made by Mr. Barak. This is not
true. We talked about this in our earlier statement and
we will not repeat what we have already said. But what
is important now is what Mr. Sharon, the present Prime
Minister, is actually saying about the peace process.

Will Israel accept the resumption of negotiations,
or will it try to avoid this, giving various pretexts and
excuses, pretexts that it has created and for which it is
responsible? Will Israel accept the resumption of
negotiations at the point at which they were
suspended? Will Israel take into account the progress
that has been made? Even more importantly, will Israel
accept responsibility for the agreements already
concluded and thus negotiate the final status?

Or would Israel like to destroy all this and impose
a new transitional process on the Palestinian people?
This is what the Israeli Prime Minister is actually
saying in public: he would like to put aside all
agreements concluded until now. The Israeli
Ambassador then comes here to lecture us about
Israel's peaceful position.
Until now, we have not understood the reason for
Israel's rejection of the establishment of an observer
force under the auspices of the United Nations. What is
the real reason for that? The Israelis used to talk about
the internationalization of the problem and the fact that
Israel rejects the internationalization of the problem.
Perhaps they have concluded that this is not really
acceptable. They have talked about the fact that video
cameras and the mass media are more dangerous than
acts of violence. They have not given us a reason for
this. The accusations they are making against the
Palestinians are false, and the mass media will come to
reveal the acts of violence carried out by Israel against
the Palestinians.

He posed the question, if the Palestinian side
"renounces" violent acts when military observers are
invited, is it really rejecting violence? Our answer is
that we believe that the presence of the observers
would contribute positively to controlling all forms and
acts of violence. It would also contribute to restoring
the situation to what it was before 28 September, until
we reach an agreement on the final status.

What is the problem here? The problem here is
that the international community has hesitated before
Israeli intransigence, the reason being that the most
powerful member of the Security Council continues to
support Israel. Israel is not forced to deal seriously
with the Security Council because of the Council's
continuous hesitation before Israel. Who could do this?
How can a Minister for Foreign Affairs, after a
Security Council meeting, threaten the Palestinian side
by saying, "If you go to the Security Council, we will
not resume negotiations." Why is this?

We extend our thanks, of course, to all the
countries that have participated in the discussion
during these two days. In fact, the majority of these
countries have spoken very positively. Once again, we
thank them all for their positions.

There are a few speakers who have used logic
with which we have a problem. Such logic contributes
to the present Israeli position.

Our problem is in establishing a dialogue with
those few States, thus reaching a so-called artificial
balance. We have a legal, political and moral problem
vis-a-vis this so-called artificial balance. In fact, we do
not accept any comparison between the power of the
occupation force and the power of the people
subjugated by this occupation. There is no comparison.
In truth, we are very worried about the hesitation of
those few countries in the face of the escalation of
Israeli repression against the Palestinian people. The
problem is that those few countries believe, whenever
Israel eases the blockade and siege that have been
imposed, that this is a positive thing. Why? How can
we deem positive the easing of the blockade instead of
calling for a halt to such a blockade? This is an
invitation to Israel to intensify the blockade imposed
on the Palestinians whenever it faces a problem. That is
why they are behaving this way. Whenever Israel faces
any form of criticism it escalates its aggressive
measures; then it returns to the previous situation; then
we, the representatives of the international community,
applaud Israel for such behaviour. Is this logical or
reasonable?

We are calling upon you, Mr. President, and the
Council, to commit yourselves to upholding the
minimum of international law, international
humanitarian law and the provisions of the Security
Council resolutions. This is all we are asking for -
nothing more. Do not support any position that does
not serve the peace process. Do not support any
position that calls upon you to go beyond international
law. It is our right to call upon the Security Council to
take up its responsibilities in accordance with the
provisions of international law and of its own
resolutions, and even in accordance with the peace

agreements signed between the Palestinians and the
Israelis, as well as the Charter, and to take the
necessary measures to provide minimum protection for
the Palestinian people and to halt this tragedy that is
occurring in Palestine. Mr. President, this is what we
want you to do.

We will try to approach this with an open mind
and an open heart, and we hope that it will come about
in order to send the correct message to the two parties

so that the Security Council can finally contribute to
changing this rapidly deteriorating situation.

