Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you today to the
Council, Sir.

The best guarantee of ensuring the successful
execution of reforms in the areas of security and the
rule of law in post-conflict countries is achieving solid
peace, a broad national consensus and sustainable
development. There can be no question that the
conduct of security sector reform (SSR) is the
sovereign right of national Governments. They have
primary responsibility for the results. In this regard,
Governments must define their priorities themselves,
and their executive bodies must be in charge of their
practical implementation.

In addition, the international community's help
with security sector reform is clearly essential.
However, the countries receiving such assistance must
be in charge of defining the strategy and coordinating
action. There can be no ready-made solutions, which
often do not take into account the specifics and needs
of post-conflict States. Any assistance on the part of
the international community, whatever form it takes,
must be provided with the agreement of the national
Governments and with respect for the principles of
sovereignty and political independence.

The United Nations plays a central role in
providing SSR assistance to post-conflict countries.
Today, many preliminary tasks in the area of SSR, such
as peacebuilding efforts, fall to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In accomplishing their main
tasks - establishing peace and creating the conditions
needed for general national dialogue and sustainable
post-crisis development - United Nations
peacekeepers play a critical role by establishing a
climate conducive to the provision of peacebuilding
assistance on a larger scale, and in particular by
contributing significantly to setting up law
enforcement and security institutions in countries
emerging from conflict.

We support the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission in making recommendations for the
provision of consistent international support for a

number of countries emerging from conflict. The
complexity of the tasks confronting States that have
come through the "hot" stages of a crisis demands the
formulation of a balanced strategy to resolve them,
based on the interrelated issues of security, social and
economic development and the protection of human
rights. This requires a comprehensive approach based
on unified objectives and predictable material,
technical and financial support.

In the area of security sector reform, regional
capacities have demonstrated great effectiveness.
Neighbouring countries and subregional organizations
have a better understanding of sore points and can
propose effective remedies. Africa, which is
represented at the head of today's Council meeting, is a
clear example of such regional cooperation.

In this context, we support the activity of African
States in the area of SSR. We believe that, first and
foremost through the frameworks of the African Union
and their subregional organizations, they bear primary
responsibility for directing the settlement of conflicts
and post-conflict peacebuilding, and that the
international community should support these efforts,
which aim not only to resolve regional crises but also
to address problems related to social and economic
development and humanitarian issues. Russia is an
active participant in such efforts, including those
involving international financial institutions, United
Nations specialized agencies and other initiatives.

We are grateful to the Nigerian delegation for
coordinating the drafting of the presidential statement,
and we support its adoption.

