Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (Spoke in French):
I would also like to congratulate you, Sir, upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.

Rwanda had planned to speak tomorrow during
the debate on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Sanctions Committee, but the adoption of resolution
2076 (2012) this evening and the statement just made
by the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have forced us to take the floor now.

Let us recall events. The ceasefire decided upon
at the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR) had held for three months when it was
brought to an end by attacks that Rwanda immediately
condemned. We condemned the resumption of fighting
and asked both parties to cease hostilities and respect
the decisions of the ICGLR.
Several times since the fighting resumed, Rwanda
has suffered rocket and mortar attacks originating in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those attacks
resulted in two deaths and more than seven injured. We
raised those incidents with our Congolese colleagues,
and the first reaction from the Forces armees de la
Republique de'mocratique du Congo was to accept and
acknowledge that shots had been fired from Congolese
territory, to apologize and to promise that it would not
happen again. That was the first reaction. Subsequently,
we read newspaper reports that the spokesperson of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo Government had
said that the attacks of mortar fire from that country
had not taken place and that Rwanda was firing on its
own population to justify intervention. That was the
second version. Then the third version, which we read
in the letter submitted by the Permanent Representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is that it was
Rwanda that fired mortar shots into the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We would therefore now like
to ask the Security Council to condemn those attacks
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo against a
State that is not a party to the conflict.

This very day, Rwanda, together with our friends
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is
participating in an ICGLR meeting in Kampala in an
attempt to resolve the situation. Rwandan President Paul
Kagame, President Kabila of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Ugandan President Museveni will
meet tomorrow to discuss the situation. If we have
learned one thing during this war and the fall of Goma it
is that so-called military solutions are failures. Military
solutions will not work. What is needed is dialogue, but
not a dialogue between the wrong people. The dialogue
needs to be among the Congolese parties - among
those who are fighting in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Our position is therefore that it is high
time for the two parties to sit down at a table to have
a dialogue and find a peaceful solution to the conflict.

We would like to draw the attention of the
international community to the fact that decisions
leading to sanctions are counterproductive on the
ground. We therefore appeal to the Security Council and
other international actors to work for further dialogue
so that we can bring to an end once and for all the war
raging in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as it is also having effects on our country.
Rwanda stands ready to participate in that effort in the
context of the ICGLR, as well as to cooperate with the
agencies of the United Nations to assist refugees and
other persons in distress.
Rwanda refutes the accusations of the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo and calls for dialogue as the only
route that could lead to a lasting solution to the conflict.

