Mr. Al-Otaibi (Kuwait): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Malaysia on its presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to welcome the
convening of this open debate of vital importance for
the protection and well-being of children in conflict
by His Excellency Dato Sri Anifah Aman, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.

We deeply appreciate the role played by Malaysia,
the Chair of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. The adoption today of
resolution 2225 (2015), which includes abductions as
an additional violation whereby parties engaging in
abduction will be listed in the annexes of the Security
Council's annual report, is a step forward towards
ending this grave violation committed against children
in contravention of international law.

I have the honour to deliver the following statement
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), in my capacity as Chair of the OIC Group.

The OIC Group has carefully reviewed the report of
the Secretary General on children and armed conflict
(S/2015/409). We would like to express our profound
appreciation for the efforts made in the preparation of
the report and the role played by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, in identifying the
cases that fall within the scope of her mandate. They
highlight the situations of children growing up in areas
affected by conflict, in particular, as mentioned in the
report, those children in several countries affected by
major crises f Israel, the State of Palestine, the Central
African Republic, Syria, South Sudan, Iraq and Nigeria.

Despite all that, the report excludes Israel from
its annexes of parties committing grave Violations
against children in armed conflict, which, regrettably,
contradicts the legitimate recommendation of the
impartial and evidence-based report, naming Israel
as a grave violator of children's human rights. Such a
decision will not only put United Nations integrity and
credibility at stake, it also further emboldens Israel, in
terms of impunity, to continue committing its flagrant
and systematic violations of human rights, which have
been persistently carried out with total disrespect
for international law and disregard for the lives and
rights of the Palestinian people, including children.
The Group is therefore deeply disappointed by that
deplorable decision.

The OIC believes that the 2015 annual report on
children and armed conflict, prepared by Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, constitutes
a credible instrument, among other documents, for
identifying and illustrating Israel's innumerable
violations, perpetrated mainly against Palestinian
children. In that regard, the OIC reaffirms the need
for it to remain committed to the substantive mandate
of the United Nations Office and to serve as a leading
United Nations advocate for strengthening the rule
of law and ensuring the protection and well-being of
children, as enshrined in international conventions and
human rights standards.

In the meantime, the OIC shares concerns over the
continuing crimes committed by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people, including
children, who have been enduring severe Violations that
are not limited merely to murder, arrest, interrogation
and torture, but include the destruction of their
education, recreation and health facilities, among other
things.

There is no need to recall that the human rights
indicators for Palestinian children, who compose 53 per
cent of the total population, have deteriorated sharply
as a result of the latest Israeli military offensive - in
summer 2014 - which left more than 550 children
dead and 3,370 injured, more than 1,000 of whom were
left permanently disabled, as well as at least 370,000
children, according to reports of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, who require
specialized psychological support. Furthermore, the
devastating impact of Israel's restrictions on movement
by way of checkpoints, the apartheid wall and the
ongoing blockade of the Gaza Strip have worsened the
rising poverty, isolation, despair and deprivation that
scores of Palestinian children have been experiencing
at an alarming rate.

The Organization of Islamic Cooperation reiterates
its call on the international community, particularly the
Security Council, to uphold its responsibility to avert
the deteriorating situation in Palestine and to ensure
justice and protection for the rights of the vulnerable
Palestinian children and the integrity of efforts to
provide a political horizon for moving forward. That
will help to empower the Palestinian people to regain
their inalienable rights and provide hope, at a time
of widespread desperation, to the new generations of
Palestinians that their legitimate aspirations to a future
free of abuse and violence will be achieved.

The OIC Group expresses its profound concern
with regard to the negative impact of armed conflict on
children, including the recruitment and use of children
in conflict, mass abductions of children, sexual Violence
committed against them, their killing and maiming and
attacks on schools and hospitals committed by various
actors. The international community should respond to
threats to peace and security in full compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law.

In that regard, we greatly value the Special
Representative's initiatives to include child-protection
provisions in peace negotiations and agreements, and
her "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign aimed at ending
and preventing the recruitment and use of children by
the end of 2016. We welcome Chad's full compliance
with the measures detailed in its action plan as the first
country to be delisted from the annexes to last year's
Secretary-General's report (see S/2014/339, para. 217).

In conclusion, although wars and armed conflict
affect society as a whole - men, women and children
alike - children are the most vulnerable and the most
in need of our protection; they are the hope ofthe future.

