The President (spoke in Chinese): At the outset,
I should like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the
members of the Security Council, to express our
profound condolences in connection with the tragic
train accident in Amagasaki, Japan, which has taken
the lives of at least 50 people and has injured over 400.
The Security Council expresses its sympathy and
condolences to the victims and their families and to the
Government of Japan. On behalf of the Council, I
should like to request the representative of Japan to
convey those sentiments to his Government and his
people.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council

Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities

Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism

Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004)

The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Chile, Cuba,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Morocco, Spain,
Venezuela and Viet Nam, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, Without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
aforementioned representatives took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ambassador Cesar
Mayoral, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities; Ambassador Ellen Margrethe
Loj, Chairperson of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism; and Ambassador Mihnea
Ioan Motoc, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2005/266, containing the text of a letter
dated 21 April 2005 from the Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee transmitting the Committee's
fifteenth 90-day work programme.

At this meeting, we will hear briefings by the
Chairpersons of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).

I now give the floor to Ambassador Cesar
Mayoral, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities.


