The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.

I would like to begin by thanking the Under-
Secretary-General for his very thought-provoking
briefing.

It is striking that, three years since we first began
to debate this issue, the situation in the Sudan, and in
Darfur in particular, remains desperate, and that, worse
still, despite the efforts of the Security Council, the
United Nations family and everyone else, the situation
has infected neighbouring countries.

In the Sudan, humanitarian workers, including
those of non-governmental organizations, have been
helping the most vulnerable, in the face of significant
and continued obstacles. I think they deserve the
support and recognition of the Council. The joint
communique is very welcome, but it will be useful
only if it is implemented. Too many arrangements in
the past have fallen into disuse or have not been
applied. We will therefore hold all those involved to
account and will expect them actually to put in to
practice what they have said they will do.

To make a real difference to the humanitarian
situation we have heard about, the Government of the
Sudan and, today especially, the rebels, need to take
further concrete steps. The arms embargo needs to be
complied with. We need to agree upon and implement a
ceasefire, engage in a political process and reach an
agreement, stop the attacks on humanitarian workers,
stop attacks on the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(AMIS) - and, like others, we mourn the deaths of the
five AMIS soldiers earlier this week - and everybody
involved must fulfil their responsibilities to uphold
international humanitarian law. Quite separately, the
Government of the Sudan has to maintain its block on
aerial attacks. Of course, we anticipate seeing the
deployment of the heavy support package and the
hybrid force as soon as possible. For without urgent
action on all those points by all those involved, we will
face a further crisis. The real choice will be whether we
take tough measures against perpetrators.

With regard to Chad and the Central African
Republic, we have heard the evidence and have had the
terrible reminder of the attacks on the villages of Tiero
and Marena on Saturday. As regards the need for
adequate protection of civilians - and, perhaps above
all, of people in United Nations camps, who have been
given sanctuary but not yet been given safety - we
need to deliver safety. I very much hope that there will
be agreement with President Deby and his Government
soon. Of course, the willingness of the Central African
Republic to support and accept an effective United
Nations presence is welcome. But it is also an
indication of how dire the situation is and of why it
needs assistance.

Finally, in terms of Southern Sudan and Juba,
however difficult it is, we must continue our support
for the Juba process and the prospect it offers for
bringing relief and, hopefully, a solution to the ongoing
and very substantial humanitarian crisis in northern
Uganda. Above all, we must continue our attempts to
bring an end to the activities of the Lord's
Resistance Army. We therefore very much welcome
President Chissano's efforts, and confirm what the
Council said in its 22 March presidential statement
(S/PRST/2007/6).
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Holmes to respond to the
points made in the discussion.

