Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Thank you,
Mr. President, for having taken the initiative to
convene this wrap-up meeting focusing on the role of
the United Nations in post-conflict situations. The
theme you have chosen is both timely and
appropriate - timely because of the increasing number
of post-conflict situations which the international
community has had to address since the end of the cold
war, and appropriate because post-conflict situations
demand as much, if not more, of the attention of the
international community as the conflicts themselves.

There are a number of profoundly important tasks
that must be undertaken in post-conflict situations to
address humanitarian needs and to ensure peace and
stability. These include responding to the immediate
needs of refugees and internally displaced persons and
promoting their resettlement; restoring internal
security; disarming ex-combatants and collecting their
firearms; removing landmines; restoring basic services,
such as health care and primary education;
reconstructing basic infrastructure; advancing new and
effective governance; and promoting reconciliation
among the groups that had been fighting each other. I
could go on and on, but what is important to stress here
is that the committed response of the international
community to these issues is indispensable. Our failure
to respond to them effectively and appropriately could
very well result in the resumption of conflict.

Japan has for some time been emphasizing the
concept of human security at the United Nations. As
globalization proceeds, it is becoming increasingly
difficult to protect the lives, livelihood and dignity of
individuals solely within the traditional framework of
State security. This is especially true in the case of a
so-called failed State or bankrupt State. In post-conflict
situations, the framework of the State has often been
severely damaged and rendered dysfunctional. It is
precisely in such a situation that appropriate human
security measures are required. The Council may recall
that, as a result of the initiative taken by my country
during the 2000 Millennium Summit, the Commission
on Human Security was established. The Commission,
which is co-chaired by Mrs. Sadako Ogata and
Professor Amartya Sen, will submit its final report to
Secretary-General Annan, and will make it public, on
1 May. At a meeting organized by the International
Peace Academy earlier this week to brief interested
parties on the contents of that report, I learned that it
emphasizes the task of protecting and empowering
people in post-conflict situations as one of the most
important to be tackled from the standpoint of human
security.

Allow me to make three brief comments on the
role of the United Nations in post-conflict situations.
First, the United Nations system has broad experience
in dealing with post-conflict situations-experience
through which it has developed the capacity to respond
to the specific needs of each post-conflict situation and
thereby to contribute to the consolidation of peace. But
this does not, of course, mean that the United Nations
is not confronted with serious challenges. For example,
in the United Nations system those responsible for
humanitarian assistance and those in charge of
reconstruction and development activities belong to
separate bodies. As a result, the coordination of their
tasks has not always been adequate. Indeed, we have
witnessed a number of cases in which gaps emerged
between the provision of humanitarian assistance and
the provision of reconstruction and development
assistance. We must realize that for people in post-
conflict situations, both kinds of assistance are
indispensable. As far as they are concerned, there is no
reason why those two types of assistance should be
planned and carried out according to separate policies
and schedules. Japan believes that it is crucial for the
United Nations to consider how to implement the
seamless and coherent delivery of assistance, from the
humanitarian stage to the reconstruction and
development stage.

Secondly, the United Nations has an important
responsibility in maintaining the international
community's interest in and commitment to a post-
conflict situation until peace has been consolidated and
the situation is stable. It might be inevitable for the
attention of the international community to turn to a
conflict which has broken out recently and in a
different area. However, once the United Nations, and
especially the Security Council, undertakes to address
the problems of a post-conflict situation, it must
continue to make a steady effort to secure the
cooperation and interest of the international community
until peace has been fully and irreversibly restored.

Thirdly, the United Nations, made up of 191
Member States, is the only genuine universal
Organization in the world today. Once it makes a
decision to become actively involved in a post-conflict
situation, therefore, that decision will be regarded as
reflecting the will of the international community as a
whole. Such a decision, and the consequent presence of
the United Nations in a post-conflict situation, can be
very effective in promoting reconciliation between the
parties to the erstwhile conflict and in providing them
with a sound basis on which to work together for
nation-building. The United Nations is also in a
position to provide those Member States that wish to
extend assistance in a post-conflict situation with the
legitimacy to do so. We should not forget that in
countries emerging from conflict - from Afghanistan
to Sierra Leone, from Timor-Leste to Kosovo - as
well as in countries like Iraq, which is emerging from
the shadow of a cruel dictator, international assistance
would be much enhanced through the active
involvement of the United Nations.

