The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative
of Chad.

1 thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and
Prosecutors Brammetz and Jallow of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal Rwanda (ICTR) and
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, respectively, for their briefings. I join
other members in commending the role played by
both Tribunals in prosecuting international crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda,
and for their contribution to the fight against impunity
and to the development of international law.

Since the last debate of 5 June (see S/PV.7192),
progress has been made both in the implementation
of the completion strategy for their work and for
the establishment of the Residual Mechanism. Four
accused were tried, with sixteen appeals heard at the
ICTY and four at the ICTR. The completion strategy
has continued to move forward thanks to the provision
of administrative, technical and legal support.
Meanwhile, the Mechanism has begun to take over the
responsibilities of both Tribunals, providing protection
to victims and witnesses, receiving transferred files
and moving ahead with its judicial duties.

The Tribunals have continued to support victims,
to strengthen their legacy, to build national capacity
and to intensify efforts designed to raise awareness.
Unfortunately, the completion of the legal process,
in particular at the ICTY, will not take place before
31 December, as mandated by resolution 1996 (2010).
Ten pending trials concerning the 20 individuals most
recently accused are now scheduled for 2015 and 2017.
The reasons adduced since our last debate, especially
the delayed arrest of the accused, technical issues, the
complexity of certain matters and other unforeseen
circumstances, have contributed to the postponement.
The reduction of often qualified personnel as part of
the completion strategy has also been a fundamental
problem, which leads us to call for maintaining a
significant number of such staff in order to fill the
gaps left by the departure, voluntary or otherwise, of
other staff members who have found more lucrative
employment.

Turning to the matter of extending the terms of
the judges, the members of the Council have not been
able to reach consensus on the terms. We therefore
encourage them to do so as quickly as possible within
the framework of the draft resolutions currently under
discussion, in order to permit the ICTY in particular
to meet its obligations under the completion strategy
within the required time frame.

To date, the ICTR has been unable to arrest any
of the nine Rwandan fugitives despite the efforts of
the United States and Rwandan Governments to track
them. We encourage the President and the Prosecutor
of the ICTR and we congratulate the Government of
Rwanda as well as INTERPOL for their cooperation.
We also thank the European Union and the Government
of Finland for financing the work on awareness-raising
and a study on reparations for victims. Like other
delegations, we appeal to States to cooperate with
the ICTR and with the Mechanism in order to find
the fugitives who remain at large and to welcome the
dozens of others who were acquitted or freed by the
Tribunals.

While we deplore the delays reported by the
Tribunals, we nonetheless recognize their enormous
efforts, especially the 141 brought before the ICTY
of 161 who were sought. We welcome that result and
encourage them to persevere, with a view to concluding
their work as quickly as possible with due respect for
the judicial process.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

