Mr. Danon (Israel): I thank Ms. DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs. I also thank the representatives of EcoPeace
Middle East for their statements.

We come together at a painful time for the Jewish
people. On Saturday, as Jews everywhere were
concluding the holiday of Passover, a gunman ran into
the Chabad of Poway, California, and opened fire. Over
100 people in the middle of prayer were forced to duck
for cover as bullets flew across the room. Lori Kaye
was shot and killed as she jumped into the line of fire to
protect Rabbi Yisroel Goldstein, who had founded the
synagogue and sustained injuries. Despite having been
shot, Rabbi Goldstein continued his sermon. Thirty-
four-year-old Almog Peretz and eight-year old Noya
Dahan were also shot and injured. That is the second
synagogue shooting in six months. It is unacceptable
that we live in a time in which worshippers must be on
guard or look behind their backs while praying, out of
fear of being shot. We pray for Chabad of Poway and
stand with the families affected during this painful time.

When we last gathered in the Chamber under
this agenda item (see S/PV.8449), the President of
the Council, the Ambassador of Germany, asked me
to explain how Israel implements international law,
specifically with regard to the Jewish communities of
Judea and Samaria. Today, I will provide the answers.
But before we discuss international law, we must
understand the context and facts. Today, I will present
to the Council the four pillars that prove the case for
Jewish ownership of the land of Israel.

The first pillar is the Bible. The Jewish people's
rightful ownership of Eretz Israel, the land of Israel,
is well documented throughout the Old Testament and
beyond. The second pillar is history. The Jewish claim
to the land of Israel is confirmed time and again, not
just through Jewish history, but through the history of
the world. The third pillar is a legal claim. Our rights to
the land are codified in international law, including in
the document that founded this very organ. The fourth
pillar is the pursuit of international peace and security.
A stronger and safer Israel means a stronger and safer
world. It is through those four pillars that I will provide
the Council the answers to its questions.

Let us discuss the first pillar of proof, the Bible.
The Jewish people's right to the land of Israel is
mentioned over a dozen times in the Tanakh - the
Hebrew Bible - which includes the Torah, the Old
Testament, the Prophets and the Writings. In the book
of Genesis, the very first book of the Old Testament,
God says to Abraham:

"And I will establish my covenant between me and
you and your descendants after you throughout
their generations for an everlasting covenant, to
be God to you and to your descendants after you.
And I will give to you and to your descendants after
you the land of your sojournings, all the land of
Canaan, for an everlasting possession, and I will be
their God." (The Holy Bible, Genesis, 17:7-8)

That is the deed to our land. From the book of
Genesis to the Jewish exodus from Egypt, to receiving
the Torah at Mount Sinai, to the realization of God's
covenant in the holy land of Israel, the Bible paints
a consistent picture. The entire history of our people
and our connection to Eretz Israel begins right there.
It is not just the Hebrew Bible or the 15 million Jews
worldwide who accept that right. It is accepted across
all three monotheistic religions: Judaism, Christianity
and Islam. The Qur'an itself accepts the divine deed of
the Jewish people to the land of Israel.

The second pillar is the history of the land of Israel
and the Jewish people over the past two millennia. The
Jewish kingdom in Eretz Israel comprised 12 tribes, the
largest of which - the tribe of Judah - lived in the
area now known as Judea. Everyone is familiar with the
words "Jew" and "Jewish". They come from the word
"Judea", a kingdom over which King David and King
Solomon ruled. It was a kingdom with Jerusalem as its
capital. It was home to the first temple, destroyed by
the Babylonians in the year 587 B.C.E. and the second
temple, destroyed by the Romans in the year 70 CE.
When the Romans destroyed the Jewish kingdom,
they sent our people into a 2,000-year exile that kept
most of us from our land. Even the Romans themselves
admitted that the land was ours.

Those who have visited Rome may recall that
Emperor Titus famously commemorated his victory and
the Jewish expulsion by building an enormous arch on
the Via Sacra in Rome. The arch includes an illustration
of his men carrying away the menorah from the Jewish
temple. Even though the Romans knew that the land
was ours and we belonged in it, they attempted to erase

our age-old connection to the land by renaming it Syria
Palestina. Why Palestina? Because they attributed it as
a southern province of the Syrian Empire. That is how
the narrow strip of land in Eretz Israel, nestled between
Egypt in the south and Lebanon in the north, came to
be called Palestine.
For the next 2000 years, the land of Israel was
conquered by the Crusaders, followed by the Ottoman
Empire, but despite centuries of wars and conquest,
the Jewish people never left. A Jewish community
remained in Eretz Israel, the land of Israel, throughout
that entire time. Although most of our community was
forced into exile by the Roman Empire, we knew that
someday we would return to our ancient homeland. For
two millennia, Jews across the world continue to pray
three times every day for our long-awaited return home
to Zion, to Jerusalem. As we just said on Passover last
week, and as we do every year, "Next year in Jerusalem".

If the Jewish people's deep and ancient roots in the
land of Israel are not sufficient proof, let us consider
international law, the third pillar. In 1917, Lord Balfour,
Britain's Foreign Secretary, issued a statement of
British support for the establishment of "a national
home for the Jewish people". The Balfour Declaration
designated that national homeland in Eretz Israel. The
Balfour Declaration also specifically endorsed the
Zionist cause, as Lord Balfour wrote:

"I have much pleasure in conveying to you on
behalf of His Majesty's Government the following
declaration of sympathy with Jewish Zionist
aspirations which has been submitted to, and
approved by, the Cabinet."

After the Ottoman Empire surrendered in the First
World War, the British took legal ownership over the
land of Israel. With that legal ownership, they were
able to issue the Balfour Declaration and commit to
helping establish a national home for the Jewish people
in our historical homeland. In 1922, the mandate of
the League of Nations not only stated its support for
the establishment of a Jewish national home; it also
encouraged and facilitated the return of Jews in the
diaspora to our homeland. It confirmed

"the historical connection of the Jewish people
with Palestine and to the grounds for reconstituting
their national home in that country".

These documents are Zionist documents by
definition. Zionism is the realization of the right of the
Jewish people to self-determination and sovereignty in
the land of Israel. That is what Zionism means - no
more, no less. It appears in international law, in essence
and word for word.

In 1945, the Charter of the United Nations, drafted
in the wake ofthe Holocaust, was adopted. It guaranteed
the right of people to exercise self-determination. It also
refers to "the inherent right of individual or collective
self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a
Member of the United Nations". One people's pursuit
of self-determination could not undermine the safety
and security of another nation.

Two years later, the United Nations Partition Plan
for Palestine called for the establishment of a Jewish
State and an Arab State in the land of Israel. What did
we do? We accepted it. But the Palestinians did not.
Instead of peace, they chose war and opened fire on
the Jews. Our small, tiny, newly declared nation was
suddenly under attack. In 1948, on the last day of the
British mandate, Israel declared independence and was
immediately attacked by five Arab armies that joined
the Palestinians, hoping to destroy it. Israel won that
war, and the hope and future of the Jewish people
was saved.

But the war of 1948 did not end with peace. It
ended with armistice agreements between Israel and
its neighbours. The armistice lines between Israel
and Egypt, Jordan, Syria and Lebanon were never
considered international borders. They were simply
lines designating the end of the first battle in the
Arab war against Israel. Jordan maintained control
of Judea and Samaria, and Egypt controlled the Gaza
Strip. Those agreements were formed in the absence of
permanent peace treaties, which would only be signed
decades later.

It was the Arabs who insisted that the armistice
lines would not be permanent borders. As stated in the
Jordanian-Israeli agreement of 1949, those lines "are
agreed upon by the parties without prejudice to future
territorial settlements or boundary lines." Because
those lines are not borders, the Jewish communities
in Judea and Samaria to this day have not crossed any
international borders; they are built on strategic land for
Israel's security, which, as agreed by the parties in the
Oslo Accords, would be classified as final-status issues.

To support the right of Israel to exist in our
homeland is therefore essential to international peace
and security - the final pillar. For decades, many Arab
leaders have chosen the sword over the olive branch,
long before even one of these so-called settlements was
established. Do those here know when the Palestinian
Liberation Organization was established? It was
established in 1964, three years before 1967. Does that
make any sense? What did they need to liberate before
1967? In 1964 not a single settlement existed in Judea
and Samaria, and our right to exist was still rejected.

To blame the Jewish communities of Judea and
Samaria for the lack of peace between Israelis and
Palestinians would be to deliberately overlook the
historical facts at best. The Arabs have rejected
opportunities for peace time and again: the 1937 Peel
Commission report was rejected by the Arabs; the 1947
United Nations partition plan was rejected; the 1948
Israeli offer for a truce was rejected; at the 2000 Camp
David Summit, peace was rejected; at the 2001 Taba
Summit, peace was rejected; at the 2007 Annapolis
Conference, peace was rejected; we are still waiting for
an answer on the 2008 offer from Israeli Prime Minister
Ehud Olmert; in considering the 2014 peace initiative
of Secretary of State Kerry, Abbas chose Hamas; and
today, as to the upcoming United States peace plan, the
Palestinians say that it is dead on arrival.

It weakens the mandate of this body, which is
charged with the task of making our world more
peaceful and secure, to continue blaming the side that
offers solutions and reward the side that rejects them. It
is dangerous to praise the side that encourages hatred
and bankrolls terrorism. Palestinian rejectionism is
chronic. Palestinian leaders refuse to acknowledge the
right of the Jewish people to self-determination in the
land of Israel and insist on having their people return to
the land in droves. This behaviour directly contradicts
all four pillars of the past and keeps us locked out of
forging peace in future. There should be no reward for
rejectionism. There should be no prize for aggression.

Real peace will be possible when the four pillars
of the past are accepted and realized, but real peace
will come when the four pillars of the future are put
into action. These are the four pillars of the future:
first, the Palestinians must accept and recognize the
Jewish State of Israel. No Palestinian leader has ever
said those words. Secondly, the Palestinians must end
the campaign of incitement. Enough is enough. How
can the international community expect us to make
any concessions to a leader who pays his people to kill
ours? Thirdly, in terms of regional cooperation, we are
already working together with many of our neighbours
on security, common goals and building relationships.
We want these relationships to flourish and present
themselves in the open. And fourthly, we will never
do or agree to anything that compromises our security.
We want a peaceful future with our neighbours, but our
security is non-negotiable, and we will decide where to
draw the line.

We are ready to work together, we are ready to
talk and we are ready to create a better future for our
children. It is only when the four pillars of the past and
the four pillars of the future are accepted that peace
will come.
