Judge Joensen: I would like to begin by
congratulating the Permanent Representative of
Morocco, who is presiding over the Security Council in
December, as well as the representatives of Argentina,
Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and
Rwanda for their nations" election to the Security
Council beginning in January 2013. I wish them all the
best for successful tours of duty. 1 would also like to
thank the representatives of Colombia, Germany, India,
Portugal and South Africa for their nations' service
to the Security Council as they near the completion
of their terms and to express the appreciation of the
entire Tribunal to all the Governments of the Security
Council for their continued support as we draw ever
closer to the completion of our work.

I am happy to report that the transition from the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
to the Arusha Branch of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals is now well under
way and progressing according to plan since the
Mechanism's opening on 1 July. With the transfer of
nearly all judicial functions to the Mechanism and the
imminent completion of the Tribunal's final genocide
trial, the administrative energies of the Tribunal are
increasingly spent on downsizing and providing the
necessary support to the Mechanism in order for it
to continue to progress toward full assumption of the
residual functions of the Tribunal upon our closure. In
the coming months, the major challenges will be the
continued transition of the remaining functions to the
Mechanism and the preparation of archives for handover
amid the continued departure of key staff prior to the
planned abolition of posts.

The Tribunal has continued to focus on reducing
the judicial workload, having referred three additional
cases to Rwanda during the current reporting period of
12 May to 5 November 2012. Those referrals reduced
the Tribunal's workload to one trial judgement and
have helped us to remain on track with the current
Completion Strategy goals for a timely closure. Only
one referral request, the Munyagishari case, awaits
final conclusion. The Trial Chamber's decision to refer
that case to Rwanda is currently under appeal, with a
decision in the matter expected to be rendered in early
2013.

During the reporting period, two trial judgements
were delivered in the Nzabonimana and Nizeyimana
cases. Nizeyimana was one of the fastest trials for its
size, further showing that efforts to improve efficiency
in recent years have had a positive impact, especially
in single accused trials. One appeals judgement was
delivered in the Gatete case in October 2012, marking
the completion as projected of four appeals judgements
concerning four persons in 2012.

Despite the continued premature departures of staff
in Chambers, combined with unanticipated litigation
challenging the ability ofjudgement drafting and trial
teams to complete their work on time, all projections
for trial and appeals work during the reporting period
were met and the final genocide trial judgement in the
Ngirabatware case will be rendered this month in line
with the projection in our last report. The delivery ofthe
Ngirabatware judgement, scheduled for 20 December
2012, will mark the end of substantive trials at the ICTR,
and unless the decision to refer the Munyagishari case
to Rwanda is reversed on appeal or arrests are made
in the two contempt of court or false testimony cases,
which would not go to the Mechanism, the ICTR will
have only the pending appeals to finish. The remaining
appeals remain projected to be completed by the end
of 2014, with three appeals concerning seven persons
to be delivered by the end of 2013 and the final four
appeals concerning ten persons expected by the end of
2014.

I would like to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to the Council for adopting resolution 2054
(2012), which permitted me, as President, as well as the
trial judges on the Ngirabatware case, to serve beyond
the expiry of our terms of office in order to complete
our remaining work. The swift action taken on that
request helped ensure that the Tribunal will continue to
meet its completion strategy targets.

As projected in my last report (see S/2012/349), all
other trial judges demitted office by 30 June, with the
exception of Judge Bakhtiyar Tuzmukhamedov, who
was redeployed to the Appeals Chamber to further
strengthen the complement of judges working towards
timely completion of the remaining appeals. Two of the
three judges on the Ngirabatware bench are expected
to demit office once the written trial judgement is
filed, and the third, Judge Sekule, is expected to be
redeployed to the Appeals Chamber at that time.

I recently submitted a request for extension of the
terms of office of the ICTR appeals judges until the end
of 2014 or until the completion of the cases to which
they are or will be assigned, if sooner. The President
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) has filed a similar request with respect to the
ICTY appeals judges who also sit on ICTR appeals. The
ICTR request is based on the projected completion of
our appeals work, which has remained on track despite
delays in translation and recruitment of the additional
judicial support staff necessary to handle the increased
workload in the Appeals Chamber. The extension of
the terms of these judges, as well as those of the ICTY
appeals judges, is imperative for the timely completion
of our remaining work.

Next, I turn to staffing. Staff recruitment,
retention and separation continue to be a challenge as
we progress through the completion process. Where
recruitment is required, the Tribunal continues to have
difficulty attracting suitably qualified candidates,
given the limited contractual security that we, as a
closing institution, can provide. The ICTR continues to
experience difficulties in retaining experienced staff,
due to the lack of financial incentives to stay with the
Tribunal to complete their work and the few possibilities
for upward mobility. Many staff members, therefore,
have been leaving the Tribunal to accept offers of
employment elsewhere, either within or outside the
United Nations system. It is Vital that we work to retain
the necessary staff until the expiry of contracts in line
with the downsizing plans in the remaining time, so
that we may complete all the necessary work within the
current projections.

The downsizing process continues apace, with an
overall reduction of more than one third of the authorized
2010-2011 levels expected by the end of 2013. However,
ensuring the existence of a fair and transparent
decision-making process for the downsizing of posts
has put additional strain on programme managers.
Thus they are required to perform retention exercises
in addition to their regular workload. Moreover, their
workload is already greater, due to restructuring plans
that require all retained staff to perform an increasing
range of functions.

I again express the gratitude of the Tribunal to the
Department of Management, especially the Office of
the Controller and Human Resources Management,
which continue to provide the Tribunal with support
for exploring and adopting additional measures and
a common strategy to address the challenges of
downsizing and separation of staff. I must also praise the
Human Resources and Planning Section of the Tribunal,
which continues to prepare staff for the transition to
other jobs after the Tribunal amid an already increased
workload in that Section due to retention and separation
activities.

I now turn to the persistent problem of relocating
persons who have been acquitted by the Tribunal. I
am the third ICTR President to call on the Council to
assist with our perilous problem of finding countries
to receive acquitted persons. With the imminent
completion of current trial activities, I continue to see
as a cornerstone of my presidency that I should enhance
my role in those efforts. I will continue to increasingly
apply my energies to persuade Member States to assist
with relocation.

There are five acquitted persons who remain
in the safe houses in Arusha under the Tribunal's
protection, one of whom has been in Arusha for more
than six years since the confirmation of his acquittal
by the Appeals Chamber. The resettlement of acquitted
persons is considered a fundamental expression of the
rule of law, and the ICTR is deeply concerned about
the consequences of failing to fulfil that obligation
and leaving relocation for the Residual Mechanism. 1
therefore continue to call on all members of the Council
to do their part in helping to ensure that we uphold this
fundamental right of freedom to live one's life after
being acquitted by an international tribunal.

I will now provide further detail on the transition
to the Arusha branch of the Residual Mechanism. As
previously stated, the Arusha branch was launched on
1 July 2012 with the immediate transfer ofmostjudicial
and prosecutorial functions from the Tribunal to the
Mechanism. Any appeals filed after 30 June are now
the responsibility of the Mechanism. That includes any
appeals that may be filed after the Ngirabatware trial
judgement is rendered later this month.

The judicial function of monitoring cases referred
to national courts is now also the responsibility of
the Mechanism. However, the ICTR Registrar and I
continue to oversee the administration of the monitoring
of the already pending Uwinkindi case in Rwanda, in
close consultation with the Mechanism. The ICTR and
ICTY currently provide the administrative support for
the Mechanism, and plans are in place to reduce the
reliance of the Arusha branch of the Mechanism on the
Tribunals by the beginning of 2014, or earlier where
possible.

In terms of preparing the ICTR archives for
the custody of the Mechanism, much progress was
made during the reporting period. In July 2012, the
Secretary-General's bulletin on information sensitivity,
access and handling of the records of the Tribunals
(ST/SGB/2012/3) was promulgated, and the ICTR
retention schedule was approved in August. By the
end of 2012, the ICTR will be in a position to transfer
25 per cent of its hard-copy records to the custody
of the Mechanism. The actual handover process for
those records will begin as soon as renovations of
the record repository are completed. The target date
for the completion of the archive handover process is
December 2014, bearing in mind that the records that
are still in active use in support of ICTR functions
cannot be transferred to the custody of the Mechanism
until the ICTR officially hands over responsibility for
the related functions.

As the work of the ICTR concludes, the Tribunal
is striving with renewed vigour to preserve the efforts
of the international community to help bring justice to
Rwanda and build sustainable peace in the region. The
Tribunal's activities geared towards seeking justice,
national reconciliation and capacity-building remain
strong, so that the ICTR can serve as an example for both
creating and closing an international legal institution.
Member States and Tribunal staff members have been
indispensable in providing the support and hard work
necessary for the ICTR to become a court that has not
only challenged impunity but has also added a new
dimension to international law.

After nearly two decades of work, the ICTR will
shortly deliver judgement in its final genocide trial,
marking the end of our work with respect to the trials
of 93 persons indicted by the Tribunal. The 93 men
and women indicted by the Tribunal stood accused
of planning and executing one of the most brutal and
efficient campaigns of targeted killing of civilians that
the world has ever seen. Although the Tribunal did
not manage to arrest all of those indicted, through the
referral to Rwanda of six fugitive cases and handing over
of responsibility for the tracking of the remaining three
top-level fugitives to the Mechanism, the fight against
impunity will continue unabated. The international
community and Rwanda have made it clear through
their continued intensive tracking efforts that although
the Tribunal will soon close, the remaining suspects
who stand accused of some of the most heinous crimes
known to man will not escape justice.

The world of international criminal justice has
undergone an immense evolution in the 18 years since
the ICTR began its work. In that short time, we have seen
the creation of hybrid tribunals where nations may take
a more active role in the prosecution of war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed on their territories,
a permanent International Criminal Court promising to
prosecute all perpetrators of the most heinous crimes
of concern to the international community, and vast
advancement in national legislation enabling States to
prosecute crimes they were previously unable to handle
alone.

As the ICTR becomes the first ad hoc tribunal to
complete its trials, we have faith that the Council's
creation of the Mechanism for International Criminal
Tribunals will continue the important work that was
started by the ICTR and ICTY and further the evolution
of global criminal justice. It has been and continues to
be an honour and privilege to be a part ofthis important
stage in history, and it has been a great honour for me to
address the Council today.

