Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for his briefing.

The Committee has recently done a great deal of
effective work in facilitating the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and in enhancing capacity-
building and technical assistance. Its successful
adoption of this year's programme of work has resulted
in a preliminary scheduling of meetings for the year,
while initial preparations for a comprehensive review in
2021 have been initiated. China commends the efforts
of the Chair of the Committee and his team.

In recent years, thanks to long-term joint efforts
of all parties, the international non-proliferation
consensus has steadily grown, its mechanism has
gradually improved and cooperation has further
developed. At the same time, the global security
landscape remains complex and grave. In a globalizing
world with technological advances, the risk that
non-State actors, in particular terrorists, might gain
access to weapons of mass destruction and related
materials and technologies still exists. Under the new
circumstances, the international community should
continue to enhance cooperation and further strengthen
global governance in the area of non-proliferation.

First, we must safeguard multilateralism and
foster an enabling security environment. All countries
should embrace the concept of shared, comprehensive,
collaborative and sustainable security; foster a security
environment of justice and fairness that is built and
shared by all; build an international and regional
environment that is safe for all; seek common security,
while taking into account the legitimate concerns of all
States in the area of security; and eradicate the breeding
grounds of terrorism and extremism, as well as the
drivings force of proliferation, thereby fundamentally
removing the threats of proliferation.

Secondly, the international community should
uphold international rules and consolidate the
international non-proliferation regime. It has adopted
the Charter ofthe United Nations as its guiding principle
in ensuring international non-proliferation and used
as its legal basis the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, the Biological Weapons
Convention, the Chemical Weapons Convention and
the implementation of the relevant Council resolutions,
such as resolution 1540 (2004). All parties and countries
should effectively uphold the authority, universality
and effectiveness of the international non-proliferation
regime and prevent non-State actors, especially
terrorists, from acquiring weapons of mass destruction
and related materials and technologies.

Thirdly, we must strengthen State responsibility
and promote pragmatic cooperation. The primary
responsibility for non-proliferation should be borne
by Governments. We must respect and support
countries in formulating non-proliferation policies
in accordance with their national conditions and
improve non-proliferation laws and regulations. All
countries should enhance pragmatic non-proliferation
cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual respect,
focus on meeting the international assistance needs of
of developing countries in the field of non-proliferation
and help developing countries strengthen their capacity-
building.

Fourthly, it is necessary to strictly abide by the
mandate of the resolution 1540 (2004) and strengthen
the full and effective implementation of the resolution.
The 1540 Committee should adhere to the principle of
consensus and ensure the primacy of Member States in
non-proliferation efforts. We should balance the various
efforts and effectively enhance the ability of States to
implement the resolution. At the same time, we need to
strengthen planning and facilitate the work on the 2021
comprehensive review in an orderly manner.

China is firmly opposed to the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery.
China has consistently and strictly implemented its
international non-proliferation obligations, committed
to the political solution of non-proliferation hotspot
issues and made positive contributions to that end.
China is ready to further its cooperation with the
Committee and will continue to work with all other
countries to make a positive contribution to improving
the international non-proliferation regime, enhancing
global non-proliferation governance and building
lasting peace and security for all.

