Mr. Jevremovic' (Serbia): At the outset, I would
like to welcome Judge Fausto Pocar, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and Ms. Carla Del Ponte, its Chief
Prosecutor. I also wish to thank them for their report.
Before I proceed, let me take this opportunity to
recognize all the efforts of Ms. Del Ponte in the past
eight years in performing her duties as Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. Her commitment and determination to
bring to justice those indicted for the most serious
violations of humanitarian law deserve our
appreciation. I wish Ms. Del Ponte every success in her
new assignment and in her future work. I would also
like to congratulate Mr. Serge Brammertz on his
appointment as the new ICTY Prosecutor.

A successful completion of cooperation with the
ICTY is one of the objectives of the Serbian
Government. During Ms. Del Ponte's recent visit to
Belgrade, the President and the Prime Minister of
Serbia reiterated our full commitment to bring
cooperation with the ICTY to a successful end. We
firmly believe that it is in the best interest of Serbia
and in the best interest of our people.

While bearing in mind the criticism expressed
today, let me reiterate that in the seven years since the
establishment of a democratic Government in Serbia,
in 2000, our cooperation with the ICTY has been
significant and effective, both in terms of arrests and
indictee transfers and with regard to other forms of
cooperation. Indictee apprehensions and surrenders are
essential for the work of international criminal
tribunals. Let me recall that, out of the 161 persons
accused by the ICTY, only four are still at large. There
is no doubt that all those who committed war crimes
and were indicted by the ICTY should be tried. I
believe that the four remaining fugitives - Zuplijanin,
Karadzic, Mladic and Hadzie - will be located and
apprehended in the near future.

The Government of Serbia is doing its utmost in
that regard. Progress at both the political and
operational levels was recognized by the Prosecutor in
her latest assessment. That includes better coordination
between various services and close cooperation with
the Office of the Prosecutor. Paragraph 24 of annex II
in the report in document S/2007/663 states that
"progress in improving coordination between different
services to track fugitives" has been made; that, at
the political level, the National Security Council
improved "coordination between services involved in
cooperation with the Tribunal"; that, at the operational
level, "the Action Team, comprised of various services,
meets on a regular basis and has become more effective
recently"; and that, since mid-October, "a senior
representative of the Office of the Prosecutor attends
the biweekly Action Team meetings and thus the Office
of the Prosecutor has become more closely associated
with the current efforts of Serbian authorities geared
towards locating and arresting the remaining
fugitives".

It is also worth mentioning that the Serbian
Government has promised rewards to those who
provide information leading to the arrest of ICTY
fugitives and that the Serbian Parliament passed a law
expanding the role of the war crimes prosecutor,
including jurisdiction over those who aid and abet war
crimes fugitives.

Let me point out that other aspects of cooperation
are equally important, even though they may
sometimes be overlooked, namely, access to witnesses,
the production of documents, access to archives and
effective regional cooperation. Thus far, Serbia has
received more than 1,600 requests for assistance by the
ICTY Prosecutor, and more than 1,000 requests for
assistance by defence representatives. In replying to
various requests, Serbia has provided the ICTY with
hundreds of thousands of pages of confidential and
sensitive State documents. So far, the Government has
waived the obligation of more than 500 military, police
and Government officials to keep State, official and
military secrets.

The Government of Serbia decided to allow the
Tribunal's Prosecutor's Office general access to
Serbian archives. As a result, thousands of additional
documents have been provided to it. At the same time,
responses to the Prosecutor's requests for assistance
have increased considerably.

Serbia supports the Completion Strategy of the
ICTY, defined in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004). One of the basic preconditions for the success
of the strategy is, we believe, the capacity of domestic
courts to process cases that have been transferred from
the ICTY. To that end, the Chamber for War Crimes
was established within the District Court of Belgrade
on 1 July 2003, as was the War Crimes Prosecutor's
Office, both specially authorized to deal with such
cases. Since then, proceedings in several cases have
proved the effectiveness of these new judicial
institutions.

The District Court in Belgrade and the War
Crimes Prosecutor's Office are properly equipped to
try cases according to legal standards. To further their
cooperation, an agreement allowing the Serbian
Prosecutor's Office access to the ICTY electronic
database was signed in July 2006.

Investigating and bringing to justice those who
perpetrated the most serious crimes in recent history is
a common moral and political obligation of all of the
countries affected by the recent conflicts in the region.
Regional cooperation in this field among the judicial
institutions of those countries is therefore of paramount
importance.

Serbia welcomes the agreement between the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) and the ICTY, enabling the OSCE missions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and
Serbia to monitor the trial of war crimes in the
domestic courts of those countries. It also expresses its
gratitude to the OSCE, the United Nations
Development Programme, the Council of Europe and
other institutions and States that have rendered
assistance in harmonizing domestic criminal legislation
with ICTY standards and in training war crimes
prosecutors and judges.

Serbia consistently cooperates with the ICTY to
the best of its abilities. That is our international
obligation, which confirms Serbia's full respect for the
international standards related to individual
responsibility of persons who have committed war
crimes and other violations of international
humanitarian law. It is also our firm resolve to make a
clear break with the legacy of the Milosevic regime,
and it is our pledge to support a life of peace and
security for the present and future generations of our
people. That is our contribution to the process of
reconciliation in the territory of the former Yugoslavia.

