Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (interpretation from French): My delegation would also like to associate itself
with the words of welcome addressed to General
Carneiro, Vice-Minister for Territorial Administration of
Angola, and to the members of his delegation.

The extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) until 30 June
1998, which we are about to decide on, is resolutely in
conformity with the desire of the United Nations to see
the culmination of the peace process in Angola through
the full implementation of the arrangements set out in the
Lusaka Protocol and the pertinent resolutions of the
Security Council.

During its last consideration of the situation in
Angola, the Security Council stated its concern at the
state of insecurity which persists in certain regions of the
country, and the failure of several areas to return to the
fold of the State's authority. Nevertheless, the report of
the Secretary-General in document S/1998/333, dated 16
April 1998, and the additional information provided by
his Special Representative, Maitre Blondin Beye, to the
Council during its informal consultations, have indicated
that discernable progress has been made recently.

In fact, the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation has taken several encouraging steps, such
as recognizing UNITA as a political party, promulgating
into law the status of Mr. Savimbi and installing the
political leadership in Luanda.

For its part, UNIT A has proceeded to put a stop to
the broadcasts of Radio Vorgan.

 

All the conditions having to do with the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol now seem to have
come together to justify the withdrawal of MONUA
according to the timetable put forward by the Secretary-
General and approved by the Council.

In view of this, and taking into account the
particularly privileged relations which exist between Gabon
and Angola, my delegation would like to express the hope
that this fraternal country will recover its stability so that it
can devote all its efforts to the weighty task of economic
and social development facing it.

My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us.

