Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): We are grateful
to Under-Secretary-General Egeland and Ambassador
Rasi for their time and their insights today. I am
grateful to you, Mr. President, for giving the Council
the opportunity to discuss this daunting subject.
Perhaps because it is so daunting, we have got very
limited attendance here; that is disappointing because
the subject is very important.
Your excellent non-paper, Sir, has helped pose
many of the questions. I want to focus on just three
areas: first, the need for good early-warning systems;
secondly, the need to translate early warning into early
action; and thirdly, the need to tackle the root causes
underlying instability. Under each of those headings, I
am at least in part addressing the question of conflict
prevention. I would like to note how striking it is that
virtually every speaker this morning has stressed the
importance of the Council's addressing itself to conflict
prevention.

First, long-range early warning is difficult and is
something that nearly all Governments and
international organizations struggle with. My own
Government is working through the issues involved
and trying to develop a more systematic methodology
for horizon-scanning for future crises. But short-term
early warning is less difficult. Over a time scale
required for planning humanitarian responses of some
six to 12 months, it is not too difficult to spot a crisis
coming. The humanitarian community, in the form of
non-governmental organizations and the United
Nations, has some of the best short-term early-warning
systems in the world. The United Nations, in particular,
has one of the best information-gathering networks in
the world - agencies and offices spread throughout
the globe, experts working on issues from human
rights, economic development, humanitarian issues,
health, education and the environment to political
analysis.

So the United Nations should be one of the best
informed institutions in the world. But in fact it is not.
One reason is that we, the Member States, have been
reluctant to give the Secretariat the additional capacity
needed to analyse and assess the vast amount of
information it has access to - a real problem, in the
view of my delegation. A second reason is the question
of how well the United Nations system, in all its
complexity, uses its existing capacities to coordinate
and apply the information already available to it.

A third area to look at under early warning relates
to the capacities outside the United Nations system.
Perhaps enabling the United Nations to tap into these
capacities in non-governmental organizations, the
private sector, regional organizations and academic
institutions would be one way of providing the United
Nations with the tools it needs. We hope that that can
be explored.

In short, the United Kingdom believes that to be
truly effective and to keep its staff safe in conflict
prevention and peacekeeping situations, United Nations
systems need to be strengthened somehow to deal with
short- and long-range early-warning factors.

I would like to turn now to translating early
warning into early action, but on the way to note that if
we can manage to lend greater support to a United
Nations capacity for early warning, we will in the
process make it easier for ourselves to address conflict
avoidance, for which several delegations have called.

Translating early-warning information into early
action is, however, a complex task. Political will and
resources are essential. The Security Council can play
a role. In resolution 1366 (2001), the Council
confirmed that the prevention of armed conflict was an
integral part of its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security. But the Council has
not kept situations of potential conflict under close
review since that resolution was adopted. We rarely
invite briefings on complex crises that are not already
under consideration. Of course there are sensitivities
about including new crisis situations on the Council's
agenda. But we have to find ways to make the
inclusion of new situations more welcome to all
concerned - a point that the Chinese delegation made
this morning.

In this context, the United Kingdom would
welcome greater use of one old, one existing and one
new mechanism. The old one, referred to by at least
four other delegations - Brazil, Chile, Benin and
Spain - is Article 99 of the Charter. The Secretary-
General may bring to the attention of the Security
Council any matter which in his or her opinion may
threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security. We would like to see that mechanism used.

The existing tool, which was provided for under
resolution 1366 (2001), is the ability of the Council to
invite the Emergency Relief Coordinator and relevant
United Nations agencies to brief its members on
emergency situations which it deems represent a threat
to international peace and security. This is a valuable
tool for the Council to use in order to prevent complex
crises from deteriorating. Recent briefings on Darfur
and on northern Uganda by Under-Secretary-General
Egeland have been very valuable. My Government
believes that such briefings can play an important role
in reminding the Council about so-called forgotten
emergencies.

Thirdly, a new and potentially helpful
development is - as the delegation of Spain noted -
the Secretary-General's intention to appoint a special
adviser on the prevention of genocide. That role could
be crucial in bringing complex crises to the attention of
the Council.

My third area is tackling the root causes of
conflict and instability. As many delegations have
pointed out, it is necessary to address not only easily
understood threats, such as those from uncontrolled
militia, arms proliferation and terrorism, but also
harder-to-measure threats, such as human rights
abuses, the spread of disease, population movements,
the scarcity of resources, weak governance, lack of
democracy, poverty, social injustice, environmental
degradation and an almost endless list of other
important issues. Clearly, as most delegations have said
this morning, sustainable security is intimately bound
up with development. The United Nations family,
including the Bretton Woods institutions, have an
indispensable role to play in mitigating these threats.
That does not in any sense contradict the point just
made by the United States delegation that there has to
be space for bilateral efforts alongside those of the
United Nations.

I have three suggestions about how the United
Nations system and its Member States can address the
full spread of threats more effectively. The first relates
to strengthening partnerships between the Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council on peace and security matters - several
delegations have made this point. It is useful to remind
ourselves of Article 65 of the Charter, which says that
the Economic and Social Council may furnish
information to the Security Council and shall assist the
Security Council upon its request. Do we use that
enough? We are pleased that Ambassador Rasi is here
today. The ad hoc groups of the Economic and Social
Council on Burundi and Guinea-Bissau are interesting
developments to build on. Perhaps those groups signal
an emerging role for the Economic and Social Council
to work with countries to build their conflict
prevention and peace-building capacities and to raise
awareness of potential needs among the wider United
Nations membership.

Secondly, we need to make sure that Council
mandates for peacekeeping operations take sufficient
account of the less tangible threats. I believe that we
are doing better on this. It does not mean that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations need carry out
all the activities or that all of these activities be funded
by the assessed budget, but simply that the Council
should recognize the full range of issues needed to
bring a given situation to stability and peace.
Thirdly, the United Nations system needs to
strengthen the coordination of conflict-prevention and
peace-building activities. Many speakers this morning
have mentioned this. However, speaking as a donor
country, it is worth noting that donors too need to
improve their coordination. Within the United Nations
system, we welcome recent work by the United Nations
Development Group/Executive Committee on
Humanitarian Affairs working group on transition
issues to try to define better tools for working in
countries moving from conflict to reconstruction. We
also fully support efforts amongst United Nations
agencies working on the peacekeeping surge to
strengthen their coordination, a subject we covered at
length on 17 May (see S/PV.4970).

In conclusion, I would note that many of the
issues raised in today's debate are being examined by
the Secretary-General's High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change. These are difficult issues; we
do not envy the Panel its task. But we hope that it will
provide strong direction to the United Nations and its
Member States on the key issues that we must get right
and that it will point us to vital areas for further work,
with a view to taking decisions in the course of the
sixtieth session of the General Assembly. The United
Kingdom looks forward to engaging fully in that
process.

