Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Just as
Lebanon's present situation cannot be separated from
the history of Mesopotamia, our common future is
equally connected to the present situation in Iraq.
That is by no means an exaggeration. There is a little
bit of Iraq in each and every one of us. We eat what
we harvest today because humankind discovered
agriculture between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers.
We have treaties, constitutions and laws that govern
our relations today because the oldest code of law
known to humankind is that of King Hammurabi. And
we acknowledge the importance of science, reason and
culture in the progress of the human race because of
the role played by Harun al-Rashid's Abbasid capital,
Baghdad, in hosting scholars, philosophers and artists
with their richly diverse creations.

Today Iraq is in danger and that which threatens
it also threatens our future and that of our countries,
peoples and societies. A wave of blind terror has
invaded parts of Iraq. If we do no act quickly to end it,
it will spare no one inside or outside of Iraq, for it does
not recognize countries, acknowledge their borders
or accept their institutions. It is barbarism that knows
no religion, ethics or values, although it pretends to
follow Islam and hides behind its precepts. Muslims are
innocent of it. It is obscurantist in its war on modernity
and civilization and in its aggression against human
rights and human dignity, as well as in its denial of the
principle of freedom and the concept of difference.

Lebanon appreciates the role of the Council in
adopting resolution 2170 (2014) and today's presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/20. Lebanon calls upon the
Council to remain united and to advance further with
the necessary international policies or decisions aimed
at mobilizing the resources required to eliminate the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other, similar
terrorist organizations. It must work to prevent terrorists
from avoiding punishment and hold them accountable
for their crimes.

We all know that successful efforts to eliminate
terrorism cannot be limited to military operations and
financial measures, however important they may be.
Such efforts will also require a comprehensive political,
economic and social approach to deal with the roots of
terrorism. We welcome the formation of a new Iraqi
Government and the confirmed policy of openness
and national unity. We expect the Council to provide it
with all support necessary to succeed in its functions.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm that an Iraq with
a firm foundation of national unity to safeguard its
national, religious and cultural aspects will benefit
not only Iraqis, but all Arab and Muslim peoples and,
indeed, all of humankind.

Lebanon has suffered and continues to suffer from
terrorist acts, the latest ofwhich took place this morning
against its armed forces in the region of Arsal, after the
kidnapping of a number of its soldiers. Lebanon stands
with all countries represented here, as it did recently
in Jeddah and in Paris, in our common war against
terrorism. This war will require the Council to help my
country by supporting its armed forces, its economy
and its national institutions.

