Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. We have full confidence in your
leadership and your wisdom, which eminently qualify
you to conduct the work of the Security Council. I wish
also to thank your predecessor, the Ambassador of
Germany, who presided over the Security Council
during the month of February, with great effectiveness
and competence, and whose efforts were crowned with
success and accomplishments.

The decision taken at the Arab Summit, held at
Sharm el-Sheikh on 1 March, categorically rejected any
attack against Iraq or threat against the security or
territorial integrity of any Arab State. It considered that
any such attack would constitute a threat to the national
security of all Arab States, and reaffirmed the need to
find a peaceful solution to the Iraqi crisis in the context
of international legitimacy, as represented by the
Security Council.

That decision also called on all States to support
Arab efforts aimed at averting the war and stated that
that goal would be achieved through Iraq's full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1441
(2002) and by granting the inspectors sufficient time to
complete their mission.

The Arab Summit also recalled Iraq's assurances
of its respect for the independence, sovereignty and
security of the State of Kuwait. It also called on Iraq to
cooperate in finding a rapid solution to the question of
prisoners and detainees, in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions; to return the
remaining archives and properties; and to pursue
policies of goodwill.

The report of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC),
presented by Mr. Blix, and the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
presented by Mr. ElBaradei, to the Council on 7 March,
stated that positive achievements had been recorded in
the conduct of the inspection process and noted the
responsiveness and cooperation shown by Iraq. For this
reason, we would reiterate the need to continue the
inspections in order to close the Iraqi file and lift the
sanctions imposed on it, in accordance with
paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991).

Mr. ElBaradei's report of 7 March stated that:
(spoke in English)

"The IAEA has made important progress
there is no indication of resumed nuclear
activities there is no indication that Iraq has
attempted to import uranium since 1990 there
is no indication that Iraq has attempted to import
aluminium tubes for use in centrifuge
enrichment." (S/PV.47I4, p. 8)

(spoke in Arabic)
Mr. Blix stated the following:
(spoke in English)

"We are able to perform professional no-notice
inspections all over Iraq and to increase aerial
surveillance. [The Al Samoud 2 missile]
destruction undertaken constitutes a substantial
measure of disarmament. Lethal weapons are
being destroyed. initiatives that are now taken
by the Iraqi side can be seen as active or even
proactive. UNMOVIC is currently drafting the
work programme. How much time would it
take to resolve the key remaining disarmament
tasks? It would not take years, nor weeks, but
months [just months]. (supra, pps. 3-6).

(spoke in Arabic)

In the light of the conclusions of the report of the
inspectors, there is absolutely no justification for
waging war against Iraq. We therefore wonder, why
war? What present danger or looming threat make war
imperative? The insistence on waging war at a time
when inspections are proceeding vigorously towards
the verification of the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq poses questions as to whether the
actual objective of such a war would be the elimination
of weapons of mass destruction, or whether there are
other aims and schemes.

The affairs of the Arab homeland and the
development of its systems of government are to be
decided by the peoples of the region, in accordance
with their national and regional interests, free from any
foreign intervention. Reports of changes to be imposed
on the region and of intervention in its domestic affairs
are offensive and unacceptable.

While we were hoping and waiting for the
initiation of good offices to put an end to the Israeli
occupation of the Arab territories and to the Arab-
Israeli conflict, in accordance with the Arab initiative
and relevant United Nations resolutions, we were
surprised at the massing of armies in preparation for
the invasion and occupation of Iraq. The danger that
threatens the security and safety of the Arab nations is
Israel's possession of weapons of mass destruction -
chemical, biological and nuclear - and their delivery
systems; Israel's continued occupation of the Arab
territories; its policy of destruction against the
Palestinian people; its rejection of Security Council
resolution 487 (1981), which provides for the
placement of its nuclear programmes and capabilities
under IAEA safeguards; and its rejection of the
implementation of paragraph 14 of Security Council
resolution 687 (1991), which provides for the
declaration of the Middle East as a zone free from
weapons of mass destruction.

Why, then, be silent about the Israeli arsenal,
Israel's violation of Security Council resolutions and
its threat to the security and safety of Arab States?

The inspectors have asked for a few months to
complete their task, in order to finalize their
verification of the peaceful elimination of weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq. Such a request is an
insignificant price for averting a hideous and uneven
war that will sow devastation and destruction, incite
rage and violence and destabilize the Arab region and
the entire world.

We are at a historic juncture that will determine
the destiny of succeeding generations and the future of
international legitimacy for a long time to come. The
war that is being planned against Iraq will be a prelude
to other wars. Humanity will revert to the pre-1939
period: principles and values will collapse, the strong
will dominate the weak and chaos will reign supreme.

The Preamble of the Charter states that

"We the peoples of the United Nations
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime
has brought untold sorrow to mankind".

