Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): At the
outset, Trinidad and Tobago wishes to align itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Barbados, on behalf of the Caribbean Community, and
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Belize, on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States.

Allow me to also congratulate the Dominican
Republic on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and to confirm your leadership, Mr. President,
in bringing this significant and urgent issue before
this Chamber. As small island developing States, both
Trinidad and Tobago and the Dominican Republic
remain at the forefront of this pressing challenge, and
the convening of this open debate reflects the necessity
for the international community to truly pursue
ambitious commitments and, above all, action towards
addressing the impacts of climate change, in particular
the nexus between that phenomenon and international
peace and security.

Over the past few years, Trinidad and Tobago
has experienced harsh dry seasons, record-breaking
rainfall and flooding and coastal erosion at an alarming
rate. Those experiences are not unique to my country;
they are the current reality facing many small island
developing States. During the twenty-fourth Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, in Katowice, Poland,
the Secretary-General stated that the international
community is in deep trouble concerning climate
change. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change's special report Global Warming of 1.5 °C
found that the effects of human-induced climate change
are worse than previously projected and, therefore,
increase the risks to health, livelihoods, human security
and economic growth.

However, those climate change-related risks do
not occur in a vacuum. At this critical juncture, the
far-reaching economic, environmental and social
consequences of climate change can exacerbate the
vulnerabilities of many countries, including my
own. As a threat multiplier, climate change applies
additional stress on limited resources, social and
economic pressures and the adaptive capacity of our
fragile ecosystems, all of which can lead to scarcity,
population displacement and conflict.

It is therefore undeniable that the complex and
interrelated causes and consequences of climate change
on people and the planet require a comprehensive and
integrative approach that spans across all the relevant
mechanisms and agencies of the United Nations
System, including the Security Council. In that
regard, Trinidad and Tobago welcomes the Security
Council's recognition of the adverse effects of climate
change in several specific contexts - the Lake Chad
basin, West Africa, the Sahel and Somalia - while
also stressing the need for improved climate-related
security risk assessments to more effectively predict
potential conflicts.

Notwithstanding that, there is a need to further
enhance the understanding about climate change-related
security threats and the security implications of
climate-related disasters in order to better inform the
Security Council about those threats, especially in
those regions that are most vulnerable, including small
island developing States. By leveraging the institutional
knowledge of the Council's peace and security
machinery with that of the wider system, there is
considerable potential to create synergies among States
and the United Nations system towards effectively
building resilience through early action aimed at
investigating and mitigating climate change-related
threats to peace.

Lastly, and probably most fundamental, is the
determination of the long-term role of the Security
Council and its engagement on this issue. While
my delegation fully recognizes the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
Paris Agreement as the primary forums for coordinating
the global response to climate change, Trinidad and
Tobago is of the view that an enhanced understanding
of climate-related security risks and how to address
them in the Security Council should not, and will not,
duplicate the responsibilities ofthe General Assembly or
other United Nations bodies. Rather, it will strengthen
the coordinated response of the United Nations and its
entities to better deliver on their respective mandates.

In conclusion, Trinidad and Tobago thanks you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate,
which serves to galvanize increased attention around
the security implications of climate change. For my
country, which is on the front line of this existential
threat, now is the time for ambitious and earnest action
towards addressing climate-change disaster risks to
international peace and security.

