Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I welcome
the opportunity for my delegation to participate in this
debate on the activities undertaken by the three
Security Council Committees on the fight against
terrorism. In that regard, we would like to fully
endorse the content of the statement to be made by the
representative of the delegation of the European Union.

We all know that terrorism is a global, complex
and constantly changing threat that requires us to keep
adjusting our response capacities. For that reason, we
must continue to promote and to strengthen
cooperation at all levels. We must not overlook the fact
that the ideological factors behind organized crime,
unresolved conflicts, alienation, social marginalization
or the lack of peaceful integration in local communities
often converge in terrorism. Therefore, apart from
critical police and judicial activities, the response
should often include an element of development.

One-sided or ad hoc solutions are not a valid
option. A legitimate and systematic approach based on
international cooperation is therefore needed. To that
end, we have been developing a very satisfactory
multilateral system in many respects. However, we are
aware that there are still challenges in combating that
scourge.

We may congratulate ourselves on having helped
establish such an approach with, first, the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, adopted by
consensus under General Assembly resolution 60/288
in 2006, which we will jointly review for the third time
next June; secondly, relevant Security Council
resolutions; and, thirdly, existing international legal
instruments. The United Nations system has been
undertaking significant work in the fight against
terrorism. It must continue to play a prominent role as
the guarantor of international law. Spain is committed
to that.

In that regard, I wish to reiterate the strong
commitment of Spain in the fight against all forms of
terrorism, whatever its motive or manifestation. I
would also like to reaffirm my Government's wish that
such a task be an ongoing priority of the United
Nations agenda.

In addition to our cruel experience of jihadist
terrorism with the attacks of 11 March 2004, Spain
suffered the blows of the Euskadi Ta Askatasuna
terrorist organization for more than four decades. With
unity and determination, we managed to defeat it
through a democratic response, on the basis of our
constitutional model of rights and freedoms, as well as
international cooperation, which we greatly appreciate.
We are a worthy example that, as States, we cannot
successfully act alone in the fight against terrorism.

Spain demonstrates particular solidarity with the
victims, who so often suffer, apart from the attack itself,
the added injustice of rejection or neglect. We believe
that our national legislation is an advanced model of
recognition, protection and assistance for the victims of
terrorism, whose spirit we wish to disseminate and
promote at the international level. We also call for a
new meeting to provide follow-up to the symposium on
victims of terrorism, convened by the Secretary-
General in New York in September 2008. That meeting
gave significant impetus to giving a face and voice to
such victims. We should be mobilized into providing
assistance and support to victims of terrorism on moral
grounds.

I wish to thank the Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities; resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism; and resolution 1540
(2004) for the information provided and for their work
with their respective groups of experts.

Spain would like to highlight the work of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities. We value the Committee's
efforts to increase the transparency of the system to
review and update the names of persons and entities on
the sanctions regime Consolidated List.
The adoption of resolution 1989 (2011) led to an
improvement in the Committee's procedures and the
calibre of the consolidated list. We underscore the need
to continue to ensure that such procedures are impartial
and transparent. We also emphasize the important role
of the Ombudsperson in improving that impartiality
and transparency. In that regard, we would also like to
stress the important work of the Committee's
Monitoring Team.

Spain would also like to underscore the work
carried out by the Counter-terrorism Committee (CTC)
and its Executive Directorate (CTED) in ensuring the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2011), 1624
(2005) and 1963 (2010) and the provision of technical
assistance to countries that need it and request it. In
that regard, I would like to point out the progress made
regarding victims of terrorism with the adoption of
resolution 1963 (2010), as it demonstrates deep
solidarity with the victims of terrorism and their
families.

It is also worth mentioning CTED's efforts to
execute its mandate. In particular, we support its work
on technical assistance in implementing resolution
1373 (2001). Convinced of its very valuable
contribution, we believe that its human and material
resources should be strengthened to ensure stronger
direct presence and assistance on the ground in the
relevant countries.

The proliferation and possession of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors or by rogue States
or those that violate international law are serious
threats to international peace and security. We have
shown our support for the 1540 Committee's efforts to
design monitoring mechanisms for the implementation
of that resolution and to further its universal
application.

Spain welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1977 (2011), since it extends and
strengthens the mandate of the 1540 Committee in the
essential context of Member States' full and strict
compliance with their obligations with regard to
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems
in all its aspects. In that context, Spain wishes to
underscore the work of the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism, and calls for further cooperation
among all stakeholders in the fight against nuclear
terrorism.
During this debate, the need to further improve
cooperation among the three Committees and their
expert groups has been pointed out. We also deem it
important that the United Nations system entities that
depend on the Security Council, as well as those that
are part of the Secretariat and most closely tied to the
General Assembly, maintain smooth relations in a
context of flexible and effective coordination, so as to
allow for consistent, complementary and holistic action
in our efforts to eradicate terrorism. Hence we
welcome the announcement by the Secretary-General
of his intention to establish a single coordinator in the
combat against terrorism. We are ready to continue to
reflect and debate as required to continue to improve
the system that we have created, with a view to
promoting the implementation of the Global Strategy
through operational, rigorous, open and participatory
procedures.

I should like to conclude by expressing my
appreciation for the efforts of the three Committees to
enhance the effectiveness of their work. It is also
encouraging to see the growing awareness of the need
for all measures to respect individual human rights.
With this essential respect for human rights, the entire
international community must demonstrate its firm
resolve to tackle the barbarity of terrorism.

