Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate New Zealand on its presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I would like
to express appreciation to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of New Zealand, Mr. Murray McCully, for
organizing this debate on the situation in Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I also wish to thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing and
to congratulate him on his assumption of that important
responsibility.

Bangladesh welcomes the agreement reached
by the G5+1 with the Islamic Republic of Iran on its
nuclear programme. We hope that the agreement will be
a pathway to security, peace and stability in the Middle
East by way of the international community giving the
same attention to freeing the region ofweapons of mass
destruction.

The Palestinian issue is now the number-one
longstanding issue in the field of international peace
and security and deserves top priority for resolution.
We should ask questions: can the people of Palestine
live with this uncertainty of life and livelihood forever?

We regret that the appalling human rights and
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the repeated appeals of the international
community to improve the deteriorating conditions
of the Palestinian people remain unheeded, The
people in the occupied territories continue to suffer
due to Israel's blockades, closures, confiscation of
land and demolition of houses. The illegal separation
wall continues to divide and isolate communities,
destroying livelihoods and preventing access to jobs,
families, markets, schools and hospitals. Let us demand
that those walls be torn down, including the walls in the
mindset of the neighbours.

Gaza's borders have been subject to a regime of
closure that is without precedent anywhere. Such closure
is tantamount to strangulation of an entire population
in the form of collective punishment. The quality of
life of the Palestinians had already diminished to a
subsistence level. The periodic escalation of violence
only leads to further despair and destitution. Israel
is doing that purposefully, to generate fear, fury and
distress among the Palestinians. We deplore the Israeli
policy of collective punishment, of forcing Palestinian
people off of their land, of detaining people for a
long time without charge, of restricting freedom of
movement and property ownership by the Palestinian
people, of deporting Palestinian inhabitants and
depriving people of their legitimate claims over natural
resources, including scarce water resources.

The Government of Israel has continued its
settlement campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territory, with a particularly aggressive settlement
expansion in East Jerusalem. Those measures have
been soundly rejected by the international community
and their illegality unanimously confirmed, but
they continue unabated. All settlement construction,
including the so-called natural growth, is illegal under
international law and must be halted immediately.
Settlement activities constitute grave breaches of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and are war crimes under
article 8 of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. We appreciate the decision made by
the Palestine Authority to become a member of the
International Criminal Court, in order to seek justice
for the people of Palestine.

Having monitored the situation closely, we would
like to register our concern about the grave financial
crisis besetting the Government ofthe State ofPalestine,
which undermines the accomplishments of its national
institution-building programme. The crisis has been
exacerbated by the decision of the Government of Israel
to withhold the tax receipts it collects from Palestinians
on behalf of the Palestinian Authority, as mutually
agreed through the Oslo Accords.

We urge Israel to fulfil its legal obligation, as
the occupying Power, to ensure that all inhabitants
are safeguarded against all acts of violence and
threats; to cease the illegal detention of Palestinian
people, including children; to stop the destruction of
homes and land confiscation; to allow the Palestinian
people access to their lands, employment and natural
resources; to desist from transferring its population to
the territories it has occupied; and to lift its embargo
against the Palestinians and immediately open all
border crossings to allow free movement of goods,
persons and humanitarian aid.
It is needless to mention that the people of Israel,
who have suffered for years, know better. They
know that neither force nor extermination, nor illegal
occupation or subjugation or deprivation, can win and
bring peace and stability in the long run. For sustainable
peace and stability there is a two-State solution 4 the
State of Palestine and the State of Israel living side by
side in peace and harmony.

We express our total solidarity with the Palestinian
people and reiterate our full and unwavering support for
the legitimate and inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to a sovereign and independent State, and we
support its full membership in the United Nations and
demand an end to the Israeli occupation that began in
1967. We look forward to a two-State solution on the
basis of the pre-l967 borders and the just resolution of
all final status issues without delay.

