Mr. Begec (Turkey): As we approach the fiftieth
year of the occupation of the Palestinian territories,
prospects for a lasting peace are fading away. The
revitalization of the peace process is not only necessary
to grant a dignified life to the Palestinian people, but
also a fundamental requirement to achieving stability
in the region. In this regard, we support initiatives
that would address the long-standing vacuum on the
political track.

However, the continuing occupation and Israel's
practices in contravention of international law,
particularly the systematic expansion of settlements,
erode the viability of a two-State solution. In addition,
house demolitions, land confiscation, administrative
detentions, denying Palestinians' right to development,
as well as efforts to undermine the status and sanctity
of Al-Haram Al-Sharif breed desperation and anger
among the Palestinians, who have being collectively
punished for decades. These facts, particularly the
concerns regarding the settlements, were underlined
by all the Council members during the Arria Formula
meeting on 14 October. Their words must be backed
by action.

The international community can no longer
afford to turn a blind eye to this historical injustice.
Inaction not only aggravates the daily suffering of the
Palestinians, but creates deplorable consequences for
the region and beyond, as it fuels radicalization. In
order to overcome the current impasse, the Palestinians
should be able to sit at the negotiating table as the State
of Palestine, with equal standing with Israel. In this
regard, the recognition of the State of Palestine by more
countries and its full integration into international
forums are vital.

To reach a lasting peace, it is also crucial for
Palestinians to voice their legitimate demands in unity.
In this regard, Turkey will continue to encourage the
reconciliation of the Palestinian groups. Empowering the
Palestinian people and improving their living conditions
through development assistance and investments is
more urgent than ever. In that understanding, Turkey's
$200-million pledge for the period of 2014-2017 is
channelled into various projects. In the past two years,
we have provided a total of $100-million worth of aid.

The agreement on the normalization of Turkish-
Israeli relations, which was concluded in June, enabled
us to restore our bilateral relations in many fields
and further increase our assistance to the occupied
territories, particularly Gaza. The first Turkish
shipment of 11,000 tons of humanitarian aid reached
Gaza on 4 July through Ashdod port, and a second
shipment arrived on 7 September. In addition, the
Turkey-Palestine Friendship Hospital built in Gaza,
with a 200-bed capacity, will be operational soon. The
construction project for 320 housing units in Gaza for
Palestinian families will be completed by the end of
2017.

Turkey will contribute to efforts for a just and
lasting settlement of the Palestinian issue with
the establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

The ongoing catastrophe in Syria continues to
unravel the very principles the Charter of the United
Nations. The regime and its supporters are reducing
Aleppo to rubble. The inhabitants of eastern Aleppo are
faced with unprecedented cruelty under indiscriminate
air strikes and shelling. The brutal scenario is well
known - besiege the city, starve the people and force
them into submission. Impunity for these war crimes
and crimes against humanity only encourage the
regime to go further. The perpetrators of these horrific
acts, including the use of chemical weapons, must be
held accountable.

Aleppo is the latest test for the international
community. Failure will mean further death,
displacement, despair and the rise of radicalization.
Failure will mean the end of the multicultural Syria
as we know it. In this regard, initiatives, such as the
11 October joint letter on Aleppo, sponsored by 62
countries, as well as the informal meeting of the
General Assembly to be organized upon the request
of 70 countries tomorrow, are promising steps. They
should be supported by concrete actions on the part of
the overall membership and the Security Council in
order to make a difference on the ground.

After six years of brutality and crime, the Syrian
people are looking to us, the international community.
They want to see our commitment to bringing peace
to their country. We need to feel the weight of this
expectation every single day and strive to deliver it.
This is our collective responsibility.

