Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank all the
briefers - Mr. Yamamoto, our colleague Ambassador
Djani, Permanent Representative of Indonesia, and
Mr. Yury Fedotov - for their comprehensive briefings.
I would also like to thank our colleague Ms. Adela
Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for her
statement. We reiterate the support of the State of Kuwait
to Mr. Yamamoto and the staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for all
their tireless efforts given the difficult circumstances in
which they work. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his quarterly report (S/2019/703), which sheds light on
the situation in Afghanistan over the past three months.

Today we meet days ahead of the presidential
elections in Afghanistan. We note with satisfaction
that the recent period witnessed significant progress
in preparing for the elections while creating new
opportunities for political participation towards
achieving peace despite the ongoing serious challenges
that must be addressed

The current stage in Afghanistan is a historic one
that is witnessing intensified consultations between
the various political Afghan parties in order to elect an
Afghan President who can shoulder the responsibility
for the country's transition to an inclusive and
sustained peace. We are also seeing preparations for
the presidential elections by the Independent Election
Commission (IEC). Those elections are supposed to be
held on 28 September. In that regard, I would like to
commend the vital role of UNAMA as well as the IEC
in registering voters and candidates and the preparation
of the polling centres for the elections.

The total number of voters stands at 9.6 million,
and that figure demonstrates the desire of the Afghan
people to choose the path of democracy despite the
security threats. We pay tribute to the valiant Afghan
people in stressing once again that the political solution
must be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led.

In the context of the political developments,
we must emphasize the importance of national
reconciliation and the Afghan peace process. The State
of Kuwait is closely following the steps taken by the
Government of Afghanistan, the most recent of which
was the formation of the Ministry of Peace as part of
the Government's efforts to support reconciliation and
intra-Afghan talks. We also follow all regional and
international efforts to bring about a comprehensive
and inclusive peace process in Afghanistan. We hope
that such efforts ultimately lead to a de-escalation and
promote the interests of the Afghan people above any
other interests.

With regard to security, Afghanistan unfortunately
still suffers from a lack of stability in the country. The
report of the Secretary-General includes several figures
with regard to security incidents and the protection
of civilians, which demonstrate the critical security
situation in Afghanistan and the ever-increasing
responsibility to reach a peace agreement with regional
and international support. That agreement would lead
to putting an end to violence once and for all.

A discussion of the situation in Afghanistan must
include the fight against terrorism, crime and drugs.
In that regard, we would like to reiterate the support of
the State of Kuwait to Afghanistan in its war against
terrorism and its tireless efforts to extend its control
and sovereignty over all its territories. We reiterate the
importance of addressing the threat of terrorism, which
is a main factor for stability in Afghanistan. That is part
of the international community's joint efforts against
the scourge and of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. We also commend the efforts of
the Afghan authorities to combat crime and drugs, as
clearly noted in the Secretary-General's report.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan and the
region can be achieved only through a negotiated
political settlement. Consequently, we urge all parties
to participate constructively in the diplomatic efforts to
achieve peace and promote the interests and prosperity
of the Afghan people.

