Mr. Kariyawasam (Sri Lanka): Mr. President,
allow me to first congratulate you on your able
stewardship of the Security Council this month. At the
outset, allow me to convey my sincere appreciation to
you and the members of the Council for convening this
meeting, which provides an opportunity to focus our
attention on the use of children in armed conflict.

This debate takes place in tandem with the
10-year review of the Graca Machel report, which
brought this issue to the fore. It is therefore time to
take stock of action taken thus far by the international
community to address the detestable practice of the use
of children for violent purposes in conflict situations.
We recognize the role of the Secretary-General and the
contribution of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, to
this cause, which we believe can be more focused and
results-oriented.

As Sri Lanka celebrates the 60th anniversary of
our independence this month, we take pride in the
remarkable strides we have made in the social sector,
especially in health care and education. For the past 60
years, Sri Lanka has invested heavily in children. Free
compulsory primary education leading towards free
university education, and free health care have been the
hallmarks of our efforts. We are determined that our
children continue to reap the benefits of those
measures. We do not want our children to succumb to
the diabolical efforts of non-State actors who use our
innocent children for violent purposes.

Recognizing the need to safeguard our children
from non-State actors who recruit children as agents of
violence and terrorism, the Government has unveiled
specific measures to strengthen the existing regime of
protection of children and child welfare in its blueprint
for peace and development for the country.

We are conscious that the primary responsibility
for the protection of children and promotion of their
welfare lies with the State, and that it is imperative for
the State to ensure that children are not in danger and
to prevent them from being used as accessories for
violence. Therefore, just as we reject terrorism, we also
continue to reject the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict as unjustifiable under all circumstances.
We seek the support of the international community to
eradicate this menace and urge stronger international
measures against those who perpetrate such crimes.

In that context, the Government of Sri Lanka
reiterates its long-held policy of zero tolerance towards
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict.
The Government believes strongly in addressing issues
of children and armed conflict pursuant to resolution
1612 (2005). In that context, we reiterate our View that
the Security Council must consider this issue on the
basis of supporting the establishment of security and
consolidating peace in conflict-afflicted societies, to
enable States to protect their children from non-State
actors who violate children with impunity.

The report of the Secretary-General, referring to
the situation in Sri Lanka, calls upon the listed
offenders in annex II of the report to mend their
despicable behaviour and calls upon the Security
Council to consider deterrent action against repeated
violators. Specifically identifying the terrorist group
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) as
responsible for numerous repeated grave abuses, the
Secretary-General has listed that group as a persistent
violator, repeating its listing since 2003. The Karuna
faction of the LTTE has also been listed as a violator.
We look forward to the opportunity to soon consider
the issue as it relates to Sri Lanka, in depth and in all
its aspects, in the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflicts.

The Secretary-General suggests in paragraph 149
of his report that increased pressure is required against
persistent and recalcitrant violators of child rights such
as LTTE by further considering the need to impose
targeted measures against those parties. This
suggestion of the Secretary-General is in accordance
with his recommendation in paragraph 163 of his
report, which welcomes the Security Council's
continuing consideration of effective targeted measures
against parties to armed conflict who continue to
systematically commit grave violations against
children in armed conflict in defiance of
recommendations by the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and of Council resolutions. This
clearly singles out the terrorist group LTTE as
deserving stronger targeted measures.

Almost a decade has now passed since the LTTE
gave a public undertaking to cease the recruitment and
use of children as combatants, and also to release
children within its ranks. This commitment was never
implemented by the LTTE, which continued to recruit
and use children as combatants even after the Council
adopted resolution 1612 (2005), under the terms of
which parties to armed conflict that recruit or use
children for armed hostilities must cease such practices
forthwith, release children within their ranks and enter
into action plans with UNICEF or relevant
peacekeeping missions.

Repeated violations of all undertakings given to
the international community by non-State actors, like
the LTTE, must stop. It is our collective responsibility
to find ways and means to make such non-State actors
fall in line.

The Security Council's initiative to address the
issue of children in armed conflict and subsequent
efforts by the Security Council Working Group must be
made to focus more on the real underlying core issue:
the recruitment of children. We must be cautious in
considering the expansion of the mandate without
addressing the core issue, since such an approach may
not usher a change on the ground and will not inspire
confidence in the process undertaken by the Security
Council.

We agree with the views indicated in paragraph
132 of the report concerning the responsibility of
Governments in relation to rehabilitative measures for
children who seek special protection and surrender to
Government forces. The rehabilitation of children, who
have been used as combatants by non-State actors, is as
important as preventing children from being recruited
for armed conflict. However, rehabilitation efforts to
ensure the successful reintegration of children into
society require resources and expertise. Tangible
international assistance and support for such efforts, as
opposed to mere declarations of concern, will be
invaluable not only in promoting the welfare of
children but also for consolidating peace and
peacebuilding efforts.

Collective will is required to take focused action
with respect to real issues of concern on the ground.
Therefore, first and foremost, the Security Council
needs to be more resolute in taking action to prevent
children from being used as soldiers and accessories in
all conflict situations.
