I wish to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines continues to follow with concern the developments affecting the State of Palestine and its people. We are deeply concerned about Israel's latest announcement, regarding the annexation of large areas of the West Bank as early as July, and we call for the cessation of the construction of new settlements and of all other illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem. Annexation constitutes a serious violation of international law and severely undermines the viability of the two-State solution. My delegation remains committed to the international consensus on the illegality of the Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the rest of the occupied Arab territories. Moreover, we remain concerned with the continued deterioration of all Palestinian territory occupied by Israel since 1967 and call on all parties to abide by their obligations under international law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention and the relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016). We reaffirm our support for a negotiated two-State solution based on the pre-1967 lines with mutually agreed land swaps. Any solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict must adequately and justly address the needs of both sides. Resolution 2334 (2016) calls for "immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence against civilians, including all acts of terror, as well as all acts of provocation and destruction" (para. 6). However, we continue to receive reports of clashes between Israeli forces and civilians across the West Bank and in the Gaza Strip, resulting in injuries and loss of human life. We condemn these acts of violence and call on Israel to abide by its obligations and responsibilities under international law. Amid these worrisome developments, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) continues to face chronic financial deficits. We urge the international community to continue providing funding for UNRWA and bilateral programmes in the West Bank and Gaza, in order to improve and preserve access to primary and secondary medical care for refugee and non-refugee populations. To conclude, we urge Israel, the occupying Power, to reverse the settlement policy in the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem. A comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Palestinian question should take into account the legitimate concerns of both the Palestinian and the Israeli sides and should include internationally guaranteed provisions for bringing an end to the occupation and achieve the two-State solution.
