Mr. Begec (Turkey): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate. I also thank the
Secretaries-General for demonstrating, through their
participation, a strong commitment to the issue at hand.

The following is a shortened version of our remarks.
The full text will be circulated.

It is no secret that this is not the world and state of
affairs we were hoping to face 25 years after the end of
the Cold War. Conflicts in and around Europe threaten
international peace and stability. This should be properly
addressed by the Security Council as the primary organ
tasked with the maintenance of international peace and
security. We support any discussion of the challenges
to doing that, including under this format. But first, as
delegations speaking before us have done, I wish to put
on record briefly our position on these conflicts.

Turkey aligns itself with the statement of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation that will be
delivered by the representative of Uzbekistan on the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict. The conflict continues to
be the most important impediment to peace, stability
and cooperation in the South Caucasus. As a member of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation (OSCE)
Minsk Group, Turkey will continue to support all
efforts to find a just and viable solution to the conflict
through peaceful means and in respect for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Azerbaijan.

We support all efforts aimed at finding a peaceful
solution to the situation in Ukraine, including Crimea,
based on Ukraine's territorial integrity, sovereignty
and international law. The full adherence of all parties
to the Minsk agreements is still the only way forward.
Turkey does not and will not recognize the illegal
annexation of Crimea. We pay special attention to the
security and the development of the Crimean Tatars.

The international community should remain
vigilant about the potential challenges that threaten
both the political stability and security in the Balkans.
Turkey fully supports Georgia's territorial integrity
and sovereignty. We will contribute to any effort that
will resolve the conflict peacefully. On the other
hand, any step that would hamper Georgia's territorial
integrity and sovereignty will not be welcomed.

Ofcourse, each conflicthas its unique characteristic,
which is why opinions and analogies among them are
often misleading, but never helpful. Nevertheless, there
have been ample words of encouragement and support
by delegations to the settlement process of the Cyprus
issue. We are more than pleased to take note of them.
Needless to say, as the motherland and guarantor,
Turkey is fully committed to efforts for a just, lasting
and comprehensive settlement to the Cyprus issue
that would bring about a bicameral and bicommunal
federation, based on the political equality of two sides.
We hope that the latest chance for the establishment of a
new partnership State on the island will be seized, and
that the Cyprus issue will come to a conclusion without
further delay. We believe that a Cyprus settlement would
also contribute to peace, stability and cooperation in
the eastern Mediterranean and the wider region.

We also wish to contribute to the discussion
by sharing our views and recommendations on the
question in the President's concept note (S/2017/108, annex). In most cases, chronic conflicts are sustained
due to a lack of will on the part of at least one side
to the conflict. But the problem of a lack of political
will is not restricted to the parties of the conflict; it
extends to the very members of the Security Council.
The Council possesses the necessary mandate and most
of the tools to prevent and manage conflicts. However,
in most cases, the failure to take action arises from the
threat or use of veto by a member.

That is why the Council needs to be reformed.
Turkey, as a member of the Uniting for Consensus
group, supports a model that foresees an expansion
of the number of elected members only. But the threat
or use of the veto is a pressing issue even beyond the
discussion of reform. It is closely related to the working
methods of the Council in its current format. We
support initiatives aimed at limiting the use of the veto
or a negative veto, such as in cases of mass atrocities.

United Nations cooperation with other
organizations, including NATO, the OSCE and the
European Union contributes to the maintenance of
peace and security. Other measures that can help the
Council better respond to conflicts could be, inter
alia, keeping the right balance between thematic
debates and conflict-specific situations; revisiting the
penholder system to increase the interaction among
Council members, particularly with the non-permanent
members; and using the available tools, such as visiting
missions, more efficiently.

The Security Council has the primary role in
maintaining international peace and security. Tackling
the obstacles that hinder the Council's ability to perform
its most crucial duty is an urgent necessity. We believe
that today's discussion has been fruitful in helping us to
understand the nature of these obstacles.

Before I conclude, let me reiterate our deepest
condolences to the delegation ofthe Russian Federation
for the passing of Ambassador Churkin.

