Mr. Vassilenko (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
the Ukrainian presidency for convening this important
meeting and to warmly welcome the Chairperson-in-
Office ofthe Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Austria, Mr. Sebastian Kurz.

Despite our collective efforts, we are still far from
realizing the hopes enshrined seven years ago in the
OSCE's Astana Commemorative Declaration and
outlined in the organization's founding documents. The
Eurasian dimension ofthe OSCE security space is at the
heart of the Astana Declaration and should remain our
focus. It is also the area where we may be able to have
the greatest positive impact, replacing zero-sum games
with win-win scenarios. To achieve that ambition, we
will have to overcome the growing threats that are
fuelled by shifts in technology, the rise of radicalism
and nationalism, pandemics, economic turbulence, the
proliferation of nuclear materials and unprecedented
numbers of refugees.

The continuing crisis in Ukraine has also shown us
how a national tragedy can have global consequences.
It has undermined the security ofus all and has exposed
stark differences in the way that countries approach
security policy.

In the wake of such challenges, Kazakhstan fully
supports calls to strengthen the OSCE, its legal status
and its institutions. We support in particular the
efforts promoted by the Austrian chairmanship and
others to strengthen cooperative security, including by
strengthening conventional arms control mechanisms
and modernizing the Vienna document. We look
forward to further discussions on the modalities of
the structured dialogue that the Chairperson-in-
Office mentioned.
Let me now propose some recommendations on
bilateral cooperation between the United Nations and
the OSCE.

First, the OSCE should continue to be a good partner
for countries in transition. It can do that by continuing
to promote the principles of good governance, the rule
of law, institution-building and the nurturing of a new
political culture, working with the participating States
and not on them. Secondly, the United Nations should
step up cooperation with the OSCE on the promotion of
sustainable development, where it has long experience.
That partnership should play an active role in shaping
the debate regarding the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We believe that the OSCE and the United
Nations should work together to end extreme poverty
and ensure that we are the last generation to live with
climate change as a threat to the future of all of us.

We strongly share the priorities of the Austrian
chairmanship in the OSCE's second dimension, and
we would like to thank the Austrian chairmanship for
appointing the representative of Kazakhstan to chair the
Economic and Environmental Committee. Within the
context of that second dimension, we fully support the
main theme of "Greening the Economy and Building
Partnerships for Security", chosen by the Austrian
chairmanship as its slogan. We look forward to working
together with the Austrian chairmanship and the OSCE
Secretariat in holding a productive second preparatory
meeting of the Economic and Environmental Forum
during the Astana Expo-2017, on the subject of future
energy. It will be a major event in which more than
110 countries and 18 international organizations
will participate.

We consider improving connectivity to be a key tool
of long-term development. The OSCE has a part to play
in promoting regional trade and transport integration
and, ultimately, in the formation of a common economic
space from the Atlantic to the Pacific. As a country,
we remain committed to the idea of Greater Eurasia,
which can bring together the European Union, the
Eurasian Economic Union and the Silk Road Economic
Belt initiative in an effort to create a common space
of mutually beneficial economic development from
Lisbon to Vladivostok.

Thirdly, given the OSCE's special attention
to transnational threats, we see particular merit
in deepening cooperation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). Kazakhstan supports
the OSCE in signing joint action plans with United
Nations agencies. It is also of benefit to the United
Nations to work closely with the OSCE - the world's
largest regional security grouping - on transnational
threats. Those threats range from the spread of
nuclear weapons to countering all forms of regional
transnational crime, including the trafficking in
persons, drugs and weapons. We welcome the signing
of a memorandum of understanding between the OSCE
and the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
to support regional work on resolution 1540 (2004). That
reaffirms that the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.

Fourthly, Afghanistan's security, political and
economic progress and the withdrawal of international
forces will continue to have major implications for
the OSCE. The exchange of military information
and contacts, particularly in the border areas, is of
paramount importance. Security in Afghanistan's
border areas is also critical to developing new trade
and transport corridors. This is a sphere in which there
is great potential for the OSCE to build on existing
cooperation with the United Nations.

Fifthly, we think that we need to step up our joint
efforts in the fight against human trafficking, which is a
key issue for both the United Nations and the OSCE. We
call in particular for more active cooperation between
the OSCE and UNODC, the Office ofthe United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Labour Organization, UNICEF and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
That must be done through a comprehensive human
rights-based approach to global crime within the
OSCE-initiated Alliance against Trafficking in Persons

and under the United Nations Global Initiative to Fight
Human Trafficking.

Last but not least, let me say that Kazakhstan has
always given the OSCE its best. We have supported the
organization and worked with all our partners within it
to strengthen it and help it to adapt to new challenges
before, during and after our chairmanship in 2010.
Today, we are prepared to give it one of our brightest
and most capable diplomats: the two-time Foreign
Minister Erlan Idrissov, whom we have nominated
for the position of Secretary General of the OSCE.
If elected, he would surely serve the best interests of
the OSCE and help steer it steadily forward in these
complex times.

Let me end by stressing that the OSCE remains one
of the United Nations key partner organizations. The
nature of our cooperation has to become closer and,
at the same time, more expansive, comprehensive and
multidimensional, so that it can address all issues of
concern for human well-being and security.

