Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the Kingdom of Jordan for proposing "War, its lessons
and the search for a permanent peace" as a topic for
Security Council debate. In so doing, it has raised
profound questions about the role of accountability, the
role of the United Nations and each of our individual
and collective responsibilities in preventing and ending
deadly conflict.

We know that the opposite of war is not peace; the
opposite of war is not war. And we have to remain alert
to the chasm between a mere suspension of hostilities
and the creation of lasting reconciliation based on the
acceptance of a shared historical narrative. The former
is the most urgent and achievable goal when conflicts
are raging and lives are being lost, but the later is
necessary if we are to improve the likelihood that
fighting does not resume. To move from "not war" to
peace, communities need to be able to know who did
what, how and why. To move from blaming Christians
or Muslims, Hutu or Tutsi, Shia or Sunni, Dinka or
Nuer, communities must begin holding not whole races
or religions responsible for their pain, but individuals.

Mr. President, you and I first met two decades
ago when you served as a political officer in the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and I was a journalist reporting on the conflict. We
both observed the virulent role the past can play in
poisoning relationships between people who have much
in common and, at least before the fighting begins,
no personal cause for anger. The ironic expressions
that made the rounds back then spoke to the role of
history in fuelling violence. "Nothing learned, nothing
forgotten" was one saying. "We in the Balkans have so
much history we do not need a future" was another.

Today, we see countless examples ofold unaddressed
grievances boiling over. In Burma, a country that has
taken historic strides towards democracy, Muslims
continue to feel the effects of a repugnant and deep
prejudice that is prevalent across society. This has
left the Rohingya without citizenship, vulnerable and
marginalized. Other Muslim populations are finding
themselves increasingly isolated from communities
with which they have lived for decades. Those emotions
have proven deadly. Over the past weeks, we have all
seen the alarming reports that Muslims have been
targeted and possibly dozens killed in Maungdaw
township in Rakhine state. Last year we saw similar
atrocities in Meiktila.

Burma has made positive progress in opening up its
political system over the last two or three years, but that
kind of violence poses grave risks and must be dealt
with before it claims more lives. To do so, there must
be a credible and independent investigation into what
happened in Maungdaw and there must be justice for
the victims. Otherwise the cycle of violence, grievance,
retributive violence, new grievance, more retribution
and so forth will take root, with each round getting
harder to stop than the one before.

Examples of disagreements about the rights and
wrongs of the past exist on every continent and may
have their origins as far back as antiquity or as near
to hand as last night. All too often, we are bedevilled
by divergent views of particular acts. One side sees
aggression where the other sees self-defence. One
side's justice is defined by its rival as vengeance. One
side's patriotic gesture is interpreted by its neighbours
as disrespect. More broadly, differences of perspective
come into play whenever we contemplate the history of
the great religions, the rise and fall of colonialism, the
two World Wars or any variation of the question, asked
in a multitude of contexts, "Who did what to whom?"

And all too often, even when diplomats know the
answers, it seems downright undiplomatic to articulate
them. We tend to describe outbreaks of violence in the
passive voice - "violence erupted" or "intercommunal
violence emerged". We use those phrases because
we are afraid to blame. Accountability is easy in the
abstract. In practice, it requires a willingness to assign
and in turn accept responsibility.

It helps no one when victims are forced to blame
their suffering on an entire religious, ethnic or political
faction. Crimes against humanity are committed by
individuals, including - no, especially - by those who
give the order and then stand back while underlings
shed innocent blood. That is why historical records
matter. They provide the evidence that can be used to
establish personal accountability, and unlike allegations
of collective guilt, individual accountability can heal
wounds without opening new ones. By developing and
preserving historical records, we can help ensure that
when disagreements arise, now or in the future, the
stakeholders can at least be informed by a common set
of facts.

My Government agrees that the recovery and
protection of such records and the creation of national
archives where none exist are useful steps and should
be encouraged and, where appropriate, assisted by the
United Nations. More generally, when seeking to bring
opposing sides together, United Nations representatives
should be encouraged to ask hard questions about why
conflict began and how it has been prosecuted. United
Nations missions, like national policies, should aim to
get at root causes, not just symptoms. The urgency of
that could not be more evident.

We need only look at the Security Council's
current docket. The Central African Republic has been
disintegrating along largely religious lines, despite the
fact that the country has not traditionally been prone
to sectarian violence. In South Sudan, even with a
cessation-of-hostilities agreement now in place, attacks
continue and each ethnic group involved is assigning
blame to the other, with personal rivalries only
compounding the finger-pointing.

In Syria, the Government's brutality has extended
without limit to torture, executions, indiscriminate
bombings, the shredding of medical neutrality, the use
of starvation as a weapon of war and gas attacks against

civilians. Terrorist groups have inflicted additional pain
on a people that, when they assembled to show support
for democracy, wanted no more than basic dignity for
themselves and for their children.

That is why the key challenge going forward is to
create a transitional body with enough capability and
credibility to restore a sense of mutual trust. But we
need only put ourselves in the shoes of those who have
suffered such brutality - who have lost livelihoods,
homes, friends, sons and daughters, mothers and
fathers, husbands and wives - to know how hard it
will be to trust again. And without accountability, the
trust deficit will only grow larger.

The duelling narratives that exist today will
continue to fester and polarize, providing oxygen
for authoritarians and militants. In each of those
cases - the Central African Republic, South Sudan
and Syria - the international community has wisely
launched commissions of inquiry to document events,
gather eye witness testimony and investigate competing
claims. And it is no accident that over the past several
years the United States has supported and the United
Nations system has produced more commissions of
inquiry, panels of experts and related fact-finding
bodies than at almost any other time in United Nations
history. We have done so not because there is more
war - though sadly there is far too much war - but
because we now all share a better understanding of the
role that fact-finding and, ultimately, accountability
plays in preventing rampant violence from becoming
endless, cyclical and uncontrollable violence.

Those who posit attention between justice and
peace need look no further than history. The evidence is
overwhelming that peace in the absence ofjustice rarely
endures. That is not to suggest that there is a single
model for achieving that goal - there are many - but
all begin with a search for truth. That was the case with
the war crimes trials following Second World War,
and it has been the case more recently in, among other
places, South Africa, the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda,
El Salvador and Sierra Leone.

Stability and peace begin with our willingness to
do what is necessary to deter those who would employ
violence to abuse the rights of others. As the fates of
Charles Taylor and Ratko Mladie now illustrate, the
narratives that are most likely to help douse the embers
of conflict are those that put the facts on the public
record and the worst offenders behind bars.

One hundred years after shots were fired in
Sarajevo, it is entirely appropriate that the Security
Council examine the question of how we might reverse
engineer war in order to understand better its causes
and, in so doing, what is necessary to achieve a lasting
and enduring peace.

In the past, we on the Council have shown ourselves
capable of learning. We have learned to be more
comprehensive in our approach to crisis situations. We
have become more alert to the threat of genocide and
mass atrocities and more aware of religious and cultural
factors. We are becoming more proactive in including
women in efforts to preserve security and make peace.
We have started giving more robust peacekeeping
mandates to Blue Helmets, and the peacekeepers
themselves are becoming more creative in their use
of technology and new tactics. All of this learning is
helpful. None of it is a panacea.

The same may be said of ensuring that an accurate
and objective record is kept of what happens in our
time, so that the dangers of bias are minimized and lies
are exposed before they become myths.

A wise man once urged us to pray for God's
protection against "those who believe that they are
the sole possessors of truth". King Hussein knew that
peace is built on reality and that reality will never mesh
perfectly with any one set of perceptions about the
present, the future or the past. It is the Council's task
to integrate that understanding into the daily business
of preventing conflict and nurturing reconciliation. No
job could be more difficult, and none more vital.

