Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, allow me to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Fall for his comprehensive review of the
question of West Africa. I also wish to thank you, Sir,
for arranging today's open debate.

The Chinese delegation has always held the View
that it is very important to analyse situations and to
offer solutions from a regional perspective. The issue
of West Africa is very complex. It touches on the
various aspects of the peace process in Sierra Leone,
such as the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants; the expansion of
Government authority; and general elections. It also
touches on the overall situation relating to Sierra
Leone, Guinea and Liberia; the security and
humanitarian situation in the region; and the illicit
trade in arms and diamonds. A comprehensive solution
to this issue will not only help to achieve lasting peace
and stability in that region, but also serve as a good
model for the current efforts of the Security Council to
resolve conflicts in other regions.

At present, the top priority is to formulate an
overall strategy for West Africa. The Chinese
delegation fully agrees with the proposal made by the
Secretary-General last April that the issue of West
Africa be approached from the regional and overall
points of View. The Chinese delegation also welcomes
the recent announcement by the Secretary-General of
the future establishment of a United Nations office in
West Africa, to be headed by one of his special
representatives. We hope that the office will effectively
coordinate the work of the various agencies and bodies
of the United Nations system and other international
organizations.

In this respect, we also support the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Mano River Union in their ongoing role. The Security
Council and the United Nations should maintain close
cooperation with ECOWAS and the Union and provide
necessary and strong support.

It has been our consistent View that a final
solution to the issue of West Africa rests with the
people of that region. No one knows better than the
African countries and their peoples how best to settle
the conflicts in West Africa once and for all. The
United Nations and the international community, while
providing support and making efforts to that end, must
respect the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter. They must act in recognition of the
specific conditions of West Africa and fully respect the
wishes of the countries and peoples of the region.

Since early this year, the Security Council and the
Secretariat have undertaken a number of active efforts
to find a solution to the issue of West Africa and have
made some progress. At the same time, it must be
acknowledged that the overall situation in the countries
of the Mano River Union remains unstable. The illicit
trade in arms and diamonds continues, while the peace
process in Sierra Leone has not seen a basic change for
the better. The armed conflict in Liberia has shown
signs of intensifying. The humanitarian situation along
the border regions of the three Mano River Union
countries remains serious, while the situation in
Guinea-Bissau and other West African countries is also
unstable. We still have a long way to go in finding a
solution to the issues of West Africa. We have no
reason to relax our efforts; on the contrary, we must
remain vigilant and continue to strive to maintain the
momentum for peace in West Africa.
It must be noted that, like other African regions,
West Africa has very real problems, such as poverty,
backwardness and inadequate peacekeeping capacity. It
is imperative that the international community, while
promoting settlements of the conflicts in the region,
pay attention to the issue of development. It should, in
particular, provide capacity-building assistance to
relevant countries. We call on the international
community and the relevant donors to continue to
provide political, economic and financial assistance to
Sierra Leone and other countries of the region; support
the efforts of the Organization of African Unity,
ECOWAS and other organizations; and help the three
Mano River Union countries to improve their relations.

