We thank the presidency of the Dominican Republic for having included this debate in its programme of work, in the framework of the fifth anniversary of the youth, peace and security agenda. We thank it also for the efforts made to hold, within current constraints, a meeting that is open to the membership of the United Nations. At the same time, we thank the Secretary-General for the presentation of his report on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167). We welcome the progress set out in the report, and, concerning the inclusion of young people in peace processes, we would highlight the participation of young leaders and their crucial role in the peace process in Colombia and in the interreligious dialogue in the Philippines and in other countries and regions around the world. We deplore the continuing serious human rights violations against young people, as reflected in the report, which we see as a call to continue working towards the fulfilment of the objectives of the agenda. Young people represent a majority of the population in countries and regions in conflict, yet, regrettably, they continue to be excluded from political, economic and social decision-making processes that have direct implications for their lives; they also lack opportunities, as can be seen in societies with high youth unemployment rates and limited training and development options. Such marginalization fosters distrust of political systems and of those institutions that are aimed at ensuring their well-being. Hopelessness and mistrust provide fertile ground for criminal or extremist actors to very easily exploit and manipulate such frustration. For example, in my country the phenomenon of criminal groups or gangs flows from a series of economic and social factors, including a peace agreement lacking measures for the reweaving of the social fabric. All those factors have created a breeding ground for gangs to establish themselves and expand. This phenomenon, which was ignored by various Government Administrations, over time has crystallized into organized criminal structures that feed on young people - the same segment of the population that suffers first-hand from the consequences of violence and the acts committed by gangs. Violence is a phenomenon and a social problem that does not spare young people; it represents a negative factor that limits their opportunities to achieve optimal sociocultural and economic development. That is why the Government of El Salvador is committed to empowering young people through public policies that allow for their personal, social and cultural growth, maximizing their potential for integration into the productive sector. The measures taken by the Government of El Salvador in the context of the commitment to make available alternatives for young people include the appointment of a presidential commissioner for youth, in addition to the already established National Institute for Youth, which will be in charge of implementing an integral programme aimed at addressing situations that affect and limit the development of young people. Its cross-cutting axis is its direct participation in the processes of transformation. The Institute is also comprehensively engaged in assisting youth at social risk through the "Cosostenible" programme, which seeks to create an equitable social environment that is more dynamic and free of expressions of violence, thus strengthening the sense of belonging to the community as well as organizational structures in order to prevent violence and promote community sports, urban art, culture and access to technology as tools to achieve that goal. Keeping in mind the need to provide comprehensive health care to young people with an emphasis on mental health, the Institute, through the POSITIVELY programme, provides psychological treatment to young people who traditionally have not felt comfortable receiving care from an adult professional who might stigmatize or discriminate against them because of their age. In addition, the Directorate for the Reconstruction of the Social Fabric was created, with the aim of reaching out to and assisting the territories most affected by crime and violence. Last October the "Young Government" programme was launched, which seeks to link the portfolios of various public institutions, international organizations, the Legislative Assembly, communities, non-governmental organizations and civil society, with the sole purpose of working for youth. Lack of security is a concern not only for young people but also for Salvadoran society in general. The Government is therefore implementing the territorial control plan, a strategy aimed at ensuring security for, and the coexistence of, its citizens. One of the plan's key aspects is prevention and the reweaving of the social fabric through programmes that offer opportunities for professional development and life options to young people at risk. The President announced the second phase of the territorial control plan, "Opportunities", an ambitious undertaking involving cooperative efforts on the part of institutions to assist municipalities throughout the country, providing basic education, health care, drinking water and recreation services, among other measures. The Salvadoran Government is also implementing a project to build 30 cubos, or youth development centres, mainly in communities that are stigmatized or at risk of violence. These development centres include, in a single location, libraries, early-childhood areas, play areas, areas for accessing new technologies and foreign-language courses, among other areas of development and learning. The CUBO project is a Government strategy that seeks to keep young people involved in productive activities and prevent them from joining gangs. We recognize that it is urgent to help youth get jobs and to invest in them during the transition from education to employment, offer vocational training and work on formulating strategies in the area of youth employment and entrepreneurship, in order to increase development potential in the short term. The "Empleate Joven" plan, which is part of the Young Government strategy, seeks to coordinate, along with various strategic partners including private companies, actors in the area of international cooperation, academia and civil society, a nationwide strategic effort aimed at benefiting youth at varying levels of intervention. Ongoing work with young people is extremely important in order not only to strengthen their knowledge base and provide opportunities, but also to create and intensify their commitment to working for a culture of peace and improve their environment and that of their families in order to build a better country. Given the urgent need to include consideration of this issue in a variety of multilateral forums, El Salvador promoted and sponsored General Assembly resolution 74/121, on policies and programmes involving youth, in recognition of the importance of realizing their human rights, addressing their needs and achieving their well-being, which is fundamental to achieving the common goals of the Organization. In addition, El Salvador, during its tenure as a member of the Peacebuilding Commission, proposed the holding of a meeting, which took place in November 2019, that was aimed at providing a platform for young peacebuilders to present their work and policy recommendations. El Salvador has promoted the holding of specialized meetings in various forums and multilateral bodies in order to achieve the meaningful participation of young people during and after armed conflict, with the goal of developing a youth, peace and security strategy. As the Secretary-General points out in his report, young people face various difficulties, including the short- and long-term effects of the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Furthermore, we deplore the fact that the response to the pandemic has exacerbated hate speech, inequality and restrictions on access to medical care, among other restrictions that undermine the human rights of all people and hamper the efforts of young people to make progress in the area of peace and security. El Salvador welcomes, and has joined the Secretary-General's call for, a ceasefire, which would allow countries to provide a more effective humanitarian response on their territories. We hope that this response will soon be complemented by one from the Security Council in order that solutions may be provided in the context of peace processes around the world in the midst of this global emergency, principally to counter those threats that affect the most vulnerable groups, including youth. The inclusion of young people in peace processes should be aimed not only at legitimizing our work but also at taking advantage of, and maximizing their potential in, the areas of peacekeeping, the creation and implementation of programmes that promote a culture of peace, and the strengthening of democracy and transparency, inter alia. We firmly believe that young people are the main authors of this story, and that as players therein, they have a key role in building a peaceful, sustainable and prosperous world. We want to thank the Secretary-General and his Envoy for Youth for their work in creating spaces within the United Nations for youth organizations, youth representatives of various Governments, students and youth in general. Young people now can have access to and participate actively and purposefully in the United Nations, for instance in the Youth Forum and the Youth Climate Summit, among other forums that have provided specific recommendations for Governments around the world in fulfilling the commitments they have undertaken in various multilateral bodies. Finally, we call for the youth, peace and security agenda to be strategically integrated into national, regional and global plans, policies and guidelines. At the same time, funding, in keeping with national capacity, should be increased for programmes that increase youth participation in peace, development and human rights protection processes.
