Mrs. Kawar (Jordan): I am the daughter of a
military man. I therefore promise that I will be very
organized.

(spoke in Arabic)

Let me begin by thanking all of the police
commissioners in the various United Nations
peacekeeping operations for their efforts and continued
sacrifice. We know the challenges and problems that
they are facing. I would also like to thank Mr. Ladsous,
Mr. Bent, Mr. Champion and Mr. Hinds for their
briefings.

We all know that the United Nations is developing
strategies and defining activities to maintain and build
peace. Those activities and strategies are implemented
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and focus on the rule
of law, respect for human rights and the protection of
civilians in the various peacekeeping operations. We all
know what the challenges are and how complex they
are in peacekeeping operations, and we are aware of the
importance of increasing the police component in the
peacekeeping operations.

We must reinforce the criteria for the rapid and
effective deployment of missions. We also need to
establish joint criteria to consolidate the capacity of
police and security personnel in host States, and we
must strengthen United Nations strategic planning with
a View to sparing future generations the fallout of wars.
We must have strategic guidance for peacekeeping
operations in the field. That was touched upon by the
various police commissioners. We need to define the
priorities and the various challenges on the ground. Our
focus should be on the following points.

First, we must focus on the nature of the training
programmes used by the troop-contributing and
police-contributing countries. Secondly, we must
strengthen the peacekeeping operations system and
ensure the safety of their personnel with a view to
protecting human rights and supporting the various
police and security institutions. We must also
strengthen the rule of law and train police on that point.
Jordan has set up a comprehensive training programme
on peacekeeping operations with the local police that
is aimed at enhancing respect for human rights. The
programme is based on various principles, including
the transformation of institutions into a citadel of
training for all peacekeeping components by focusing
on individuals and providing them with various kinds
of peacekeeping training. At present, Jordan's security
leadership has established training aimed at combating
terrorism and strengthening social integration through
a number of training programmes based on a document
published by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in order to assist support missions. That is
one of the most important objectives in peacekeeping
operations.

We must overcome the various challenges and set up
a comprehensive strategy for training police personnel
in the various components of peacekeeping operations.
We have also strengthened our strategic and security
plans in peacekeeping operations in order to meet their
main objective, namely, that peace and security is a
right for all. We support all efforts aimed at meeting
the objectives to which we all aspire, namely, meeting
the challenges that face peacekeeping operations on
the ground, strengthening the peacekeeping operations
system, which is one of the primary objectives of
peacekeeping operations, and providing necessary
assistance in the area of training, along with the
physical and financial resources for those operations.

Members already know that we are facing a number
of challenges that undermine the capacity of our
peacekeeping operations to carry out their mandates,
including the protection of civilians. That too was
mentioned by our briefers. I would like, therefore, to
focus on the various joint operations that are quite
complex in the way that they ensure peace and security.
We do not wish to duplicate the work of the police and
military forces. That raises the following question. Are
they addressing that issue in a manner that corresponds
to their mandates? Is there a lack of clarity in the
mandates with respect to the protection of civilians. If
so, how can the security forces tackle that issue?

