Mr. Osman (Sudan): The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Sudan, Mr. Ali Karti, who was supposed
to be at our meeting this morning, conveys his regards
to the Security Council. Minister Karti could not be
here owing to a problem with his flight. I will deliver a
statement on his behalf.

(spoke in Arabic)

"At the outset, I would to extend our
warmest congratulations to our brothers in
Southern Sudan. With all pride, I would like to
state that the Sudanese leadership and people
yesterday set a wonderful example in fulfilling
our covenants when our leadership, represented
by our President, fulfilled our promises in
accepting the outcome of the referendum. This
was in implementation of the words of God,
"Thou shalt fulfil every covenant. Verily! The
covenant will be questioned about". (The Holy Koran, XVII: 34)

"Keeping the promise by the Sudanese
leadership on such a strategic question -
fulfilling the covenant - demonstrates the highest
degree of nobility, as President Omer Al-Bashir
has said. Should fulfilling that promise not be

rewarded by the Security Council and all members
of the international community? Should that not be
reciprocated by a new vision rewarding the
keeping of the promise, a new vision that would
reconsider the position vis-a-vis the hero of peace?
That hero is President Al-Bashir, as he has been
described by the leader Salva Kiir, the First Vice-
President of the Republic and President of the
Government of the South. I am confident that the
Council will do so, and thereby will have
encouraged the pursuit of security, peace and
stability, which are the noblest tasks of the
Council.

"Yesterday, all members of the Council
followed the outcome of the referendum on the
self-determination of Southern Sudan. This was
one of the most important and precious elements
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. It was
the dowry of the self-determination of the South.
In other words, it was the unity of the Sudan,
which was sacrificed as the price of peace and
stability and out of respect for the desire of our
brothers in Southern Sudan. They have exercised
their right to self-determination, in consonance
with the Agreement.

"As the Council is aware, the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission announced the
outcome of the referendum on the morning of the
date that was specified, that of Monday,
7February. There was an official celebration,
witnessed by our President, Mr. Omer Hassan
Ahmed Al-Bashir, who was the first to bless the
outcome. That outcome reflected clear support
for the option of secession, with 98.8 per cent of
the votes in favour.

"The Chair of the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission has submitted the
outcome to the President, his First Vice-
President, Mr. Salva Kiir Mayardit, and the other
Vice-President, Mr. Ali Osman Taha. It was
subsequently ratified by the Cabinet in an
emergency session. The President, on behalf of
the Government of the Sudan, welcomed the
outcome and reiterated that the Sudan was
anxious to develop brotherly and sisterly relations
with the South on the basis of integration,
cooperation and a peaceful and stable coexistence
that would fulfil the aspirations of the South and

the North alike.

"The President also stated that the North
would extend help and assistance to the South in
establishing the nascent country. He specified that
it would help with training and the extension of
capacity-building in all areas. He added that
building the capacity of the South would also
enhance the capacity of the North. He affirmed
that the spirit that prevailed in dealing with the
referendum would also lead to a resolution of all
issues still outstanding between the two parties.

"For the past five years, we have reiterated
to the Council that we would continue to fulfil all
of our commitments under the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, including the referendum on
the self-determination of Southern Sudan. Today,
we announce here that we have fulfilled our
promise completely. We have done so in the
belief that unity cannot be imposed on the people
and that peace is the primary option. Peace
should take precedence over the option of unity,
as long as it is the desire of our brothers in the
South.

"It is in that spirit and with the same
commitment that I reaffirm to the Council that the
secession by the Sudanese South in no way
means that we would establish a geographic wall
that would separate the North and the South, or
sever the links and relations between the North
and the South.

"Entirely to the contrary, this means only a
new beginning for a new stage of close
cooperation and work between the North and the
South. That cooperation would reflect the linkage
of interests and the reciprocal needs of both
parties.

"From this rostrum, I would like to offer my
congratulations to the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission. This national mechanism has carried
out its duty in an exemplary manner, as certified
by all the regional and national observers
monitoring the registration and referendum
processes, despite all the difficulties it faced,
particularly the short period of time available.

"We would also like to thank all our
international partners: the international
community and this Organization, represented by
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan; the
Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan, led by Mr. Benjamin Mkapa; and the
Security Council, which has continued to closely
monitor all phases of the referendum to see the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement implemented.
We also thank the African Union panel of wise
men, led by President Thabo Mbeki, for its efforts
and initiatives to narrow the differences between
the two partners on the remaining issues.

"We affirm to the Council that we will
continue with the same resolve, credibility and
transparency to seek an objective settlement for
all outstanding issues, including the situation in
the Abyei region. Needless to say, the Abyei issue
is not merely a question of the demarcation of
administrative borders on the ground or of the
division of resources or wealth. It is about
addressing the future of the two largest ethnic
groups in the region, the tribes of the Dinka Ngok
and the Misseriya.

"This region has always been a bridge
between North and South. In view of its history
of coexistence and tribal interaction, addressing
this question requires us to adopt a
comprehensive approach of wisdom and reason in
order to achieve sustainable peace and stability.
We also affirm that continued negotiations
between the two parties, and their resolve to
achieve a settlement, represent the only assurance
of ending tensions in that region so that it does
not become an area of confrontation.

"As for Darfur, the Government of the
Sudan has always sincerely affirmed that its
policy is about resolving the conflicts there, not
managing them. This requires negotiations aimed
at achieving a comprehensive political settlement,
as we have done with Southern Sudan. Let me
reiterate our position of strong support for all the
efforts of the mediation in Doha, under the aegis
of our sister Government of Qatar and with the
support of the African Union and the United
Nations.

"However, and in order to guarantee the
participation of the majority of citizens of Darfur
in a peaceful settlement to achieve a sustainable
piece, the Government has adopted a Darfur
peace strategy. That is now being steadily
implemented in close coordination with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation

in Darfur (UNAMID). As Council members are
aware, the most important focus of the strategy is
to promote the peace process from the inside so
that it functions in parallel and in a
complementary manner to the Doha negotiations
through the completion of the Darfur dialogue
process.

"To that end, we have established a joint
working group to include the Sudanese
Government and UNAMID. In this connection,
preparations and coordination continue through a
joint working group so that the whole of Darfur
can take part in the political process from within,
especially in April the people of Darfur elected
their representatives for the National Assembly
and the assemblies of the three states of Darfur.
Those who were elected enjoy legitimacy as the
genuine representatives of the people of Darfur.
We thus reaffirm the importance of the Darfur-
Darfur dialogue as one of the most important
pillars supporting the achievement of a
sustainable peace in Darfur.

"Before I conclude, I would like to appeal
to all members of the Council and all donor
countries to extend economic assistance to both
parts of the Sudan, North and South, and to
forgive the country's debts so that we may enable
our brothers in the South to build their nascent
State and compensate the North for the
consequences of economic separation from the
South. In this regard, I also make a strong appeal
for the economic sanctions that have been
imposed on the Sudan to be reconsidered,
reviewed and lifted. The economic stability of the
North also means stability for the South. As the
First Vice-President of the Republic and the head
of the Government of the South, Mr. Salva Kiir
Mayardit, said on Monday at the Cabinet's
session in Khartoum, any threat to the North is a
threat to the South, and vice versa. There is no
greater threat than difficult economic
circumstances in either part of the Sudan.

"In conclusion, we again congratulate our
brothers in Southern Sudan on their choice.
Meanwhile, we reaffirm that peace is a single
entity that cannot be divided. The Government of
Sudan looks forward to the prospect of a sisterly
country, stable and safe, in the South. We will do
all in our power and resolve to achieve that.

"We are confident that our brothers in the
South share our understanding of the need for
cooperation and integration at this juncture.
These have become requirements in the age of
globalization, an age fundamentally characterized
by the need for small entities to integrate in order
to draw on the opportunities and face the
challenges of globalization. There is no doubt
that integration would reinforce the social and
economic links between our two countries and
realize the interests of our peoples, which in turn
would only benefit have positive effects for our
region and more broadly for the continent of
Africa."

