Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to
take the floor in my capacity as the representative of the
Republic of Cote d'Ivoire. My delegation also thanks
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, for his briefing on the situation in the Central
African Republic. We also thank Mr. Bedializoun
Moussa Nebie, Special Representative of the African
Union to the Central African Republic and Head of
the African Union Mission for the Central African
Republic and Central Africa, and Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
Managing Director for Africa of the European External
Action Service, for the quality of their statements.
My delegation welcomes the progress made by the
Central African authorities in the process of emerging
from the crisis, in particular in their implementation of
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration pilot
project; community violence reduction programmes;
security sector reform and the deployment of defence
and security forces; and the restoration of Government
authority, justice and reconciliation.

Despite the progress made, there are still many
political, security and humanitarian challenges to
overcome. At the political level, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes
the Central African authorities' stated willingness to
prioritize dialogue with all national and regional actors.
That willingness to engage in dialogue, particularly
with armed groups and all civil society actors, which
is perfectly in line with the African Union's African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, leads us to believe in a peaceful and
sustainable way to end the crisis in the Central African
Republic. Cote d'Ivoire therefore expresses its support
for the African Initiative and welcomes, in that regard,
the decision of the United Nations and the African
Union to jointly appoint a special envoy to foster efforts
to effectively implement the Initiative.

The recurrence of attacks against civilians,
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers, as well as the
looting and burning of many villages by armed groups,
particularly in the central and south-eastern parts
of the country, are areas of concern to which prompt
responses must be provided. We must also condemn
the violence perpetrated by those groups, which has
resulted in the deaths of several displaced persons
and three Russian journalists. My country encourages
the Central African authorities to continue efforts to
restore Government authority throughout the national
territory, which to date has enabled districts such as
Bangassou, Bouar and Paoua to regain relative security.
The process of restoring Government authority must be
carried out based on the joint deployment operation of
the Forces armees centrafricaines and United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) forces. In
that regard, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the efforts made by
the European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic, whose renewed mandate will
make it possible to train and expand the defence and
security forces of the Central African Republic.

On the humanitarian front, the situation on the
ground is marked by the looting and burning of
villages by armed groups in areas under their control.
Those acts of violence are causing massive population
displacement and worsening the humanitarian
situation; there are more than 600,000 displaced people
and 572,000 refugees. Similarly, frequent attacks on
humanitarian convoys by armed groups constitute major
obstacles to the delivery of aid to the population and
make the situation on the ground particularly difficult
and complex. My delegation pays tribute to the memory
of all the humanitarian workers who have lost their
lives during their noble mission in the Central African
Republic and wish the wounded a speedy recovery.

We urge MINUSCA to strengthen protection for
civilians and for humanitarian workers in carrying
out their tasks in the Central African Republic. In
that regard, my delegation commends the excellent
work done on a daily basis by Special Representative
Onanga-Anyanga and his colleagues. We also call on the
international community and bilateral and multilateral
partners, as well as donors, to increase their support
for the work of humanitarian agencies in the country.
Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its support for MINUSCA
and endorses the recommendations of the Secretary-
General aimed at strengthening its presence and tasks
in view of the renewal of the Mission's mandate.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire urges the United
Nations, the countries of the region and neighbouring
States in particular, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region to maintain
their level of commitment to the success of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.

