Mr. Jallow: My thanks, Mr. President, go not
only to you but to all the members of the Security
Council for their support and their encouragement.

Turning to the last issue that was raised in
relation to Kabuga, of course I would like to
acknowledge the support that the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) has received
from Kenya over the years in the form of the arrests of
several other fugitives in the late 1990s. But even at
that time, of course, Mr. Kabuga was one of the
indictees whose arrest we were seeking from that
country, and he was the only person to have escaped
arrest from Kenya in the late 1990s, when operations
were mounted jointly by the police force and our staff
to transfer indictees who were wanted in Arusha. Since
then, this has continued to be an issue. As I indicated
earlier, it is a simple matter; if the Kenyan Government
is saying categorically that he has left the country, we
would like to be advised of the circumstances of his
departure so that the case can be followed up
appropriately.

Regarding the matter of allegations against the
Rwandese Patriotic Front (RPF), we of course
recognize that this is a matter that falls within our
mandate, and we have been investigating those
allegations with the result that, last year, we were able
to reach an understanding with the Rwandans, who
wanted to prosecute the case that we had developed.
That was the Kabgayi case relating to the killings of
several clergy in Kabgayi by RPF soldiers.

As I have already reported to the Council, we
gave the Rwandan prosecuting authorities the
opportunity to proceed with that case against four
senior military officers for the killings of those clergy
and other civilians. At the trial level, two of them were
convicted and two acquitted; that decision was
confirmed by the Appeals Court in Kigali. The trial
itself was monitored by staff from my Office. It was an
open and public trial, and other parties monitored the
proceedings, which, were, in fact, also video recorded.
The report of my monitors indicates that the standards
of fair trial were observed, and we have now received
translated copies of the judgements.

That is not the only case that has been prosecuted
in Rwanda with respect to allegations against the RPF.
At my request, the Rwandan military prosecutor has
been able to provide me with details of up to two dozen
senior military officers who, between 1994 and now,
have been prosecuted before Rwandan military courts
with respect to allegations against the Rwandese
Patriotic Front (RPF).

So, a lot of work has already been undertaken in
this area; indeed, the work is ongoing. What I can say
is that, at this stage, other than on those cases that I
have mentioned, my Office does not have an
indictment that is ready in respect of these allegations
at this particular stage.

