Since the beginning of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, Security Council resolutions have recognized the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people living under Israeli occupation. Today, our collective and joint efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace for the Palestinians on the basis of the two-State solution stand in jeopardy. Preventing the annexation of the occupied Palestinian lands and creating horizons for re-engagement through direct negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians towards achieving two States, living side by side in peace and security, are urgent priorities. In this regard, allow me to voice Jordan's full support to the appeal by the Secretaries-General of the United Nations and of the League of Arab States warning against the ramifications of any unilateral annexation of parts of the Palestinian occupied territories, which would constitute a violation of international law and relevant United Nations resolutions. Annexation must not happen. Annexation would be a blatant violation of international law, the cornerstone of our world order. Any unilateral step would violate international law, international resolutions and the foundations of the United Nations. Annexation would deny the right of all peoples of the region to live in peace. Annexation must not go unanswered, for if it does there will only be fiercer conflict; it will make institutionalized apartheid an inevitability; it will diminish all chances for lasting and comprehensive regional peace. We cannot turn a blind eye to unilateral Israeli measures, such as the threat of annexation to Palestinian lands, the building and expansion of illegal Israeli settlements on Palestinian occupied lands and encroachments on the holy sites in Jerusalem, which are aimed at imposing new realities on the ground. Jordan condemns such measures as a violation of international law and provocative actions that will push the area towards more conflict and tension. The achievement of a just and lasting peace, which meets all legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, is a strategic Jordanian, Palestinian and Arab choice. Any other scenario is a threat to peace and to all of us in the region. We stand at a defining crossroads - either we fall deeper into the abyss of conflict and hopelessness, or we save the peace that is a regional and an international necessity. Jordan will continue to work with Arab countries and the international community towards realizing lasting and just peace. I reaffirm Jordan's support for the establishment of an independent Palestinian State based on the lines of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living in peace, side by side, with Israel, on the basis of the two-State solution, fulfilling the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, in accordance with international law. This is the only path to a comprehensive and lasting peace. We stress the urgency of launching serious and direct negotiations to solve all final status issues within a comprehensive solution in accordance with established terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and international law. Those who believe in peace must speak against annexation. All those who want an end to the conflict must act to prevent annexation. Preventing annexation is protecting peace. We must act, and we must act now, before it is too late. And the Kingdom will continue to work with all of Council members, partners and friends to achieve just and lasting peace, on the basis of international law and the two-State solution. This just peace is the right of all peoples of the Middle East, the key to regional stability and a must for global security.
