Mr. Danon (Israel): Before I begin, I must respond
to the hateful lies of the Palestinian representative
about the Palestinian prisoners. Marwan Barghouti,
the leader of the striking prisoners, is a terrorist and
a convicted murderer. Mr. Barghouti has overseen
dozens of suicide bombings and the murder of innocent
civilians. He was arrested and tried in a fair and open
trial. He was convicted of direct involvement in the
murder of five people, including three men at a seafood
restaurant, a monk driving to his monastery and Yoela
Chen, a mother of two children. Glorifying terrorists
not only distances us from peace, it dishonours the
memories of the innocent victims.

I would like to congratulate the United States for
a successful term at the presidency of the Security
Council this month. Israel appreciates the clear moral
stand and basic respect for fairness that you have
brought to that role.

For the past 17 years the Council meets regularly to
discuss the situation in the Middle East under the false
assumption that all the ills ofthe region can be traced to
Israel. When it comes to the Middle East, the Council is
stuck repeating the same statements instead of seeking
new ways forward to bring stability to our part of the
world. The truth is that in a region filled with brutal
dictatorships and an endless disregard for civil rights
and human lives, Israel remains the one beacon of hope.
We are still the only true democracy in our region and
the only country where people are truly free regardless
of their race, religion, gender or sexual orientation.
Quite simply, Israel is a true partner in the fight against
terrorism and for positive change in the Middle East.

There is no denying that the Middle East is in
disarray. States are dissolving, dictators are using
horrific weapons against their own citizens and
terrorists are killing innocent people. We welcome
the American Ambassador's insistence that today's
meeting actually discuss those real causes of so much
instability in the Middle East. Let me be clear. There
is one country that sows dangerous chaos throughout
the Middle East. Where there is terror, where there is
death, where there is complete disregard for human
life, there is Iran. Just a few weeks ago we witnessed
the most horrific manifestation of Iran's influence in
Syria. Our hearts ached as we saw the horrible pictures
of children, even babies, gassed by the Syrian regime.
It was devastating. What kind ofleader does this to his
own citizens? What kind of monster does this to his
fellow human beings?

Israel fully supports the American strike on the
Al-Assad regime. It was amoral stance on horrific crimes
against humanity. Now is the time for the international

community to finally fulfil its 2013 pledge and honour
its commitment to remove all chemical weapons from
Syria. There is no doubt that the primary blame for
these crimes lies with Damascus. But at the same time
we must not forget that Tehran is an accomplice to
the atrocities taking place every single day in Syria.
Al-Assad and his henchmen are puppets of the Iranians,
propped up with their funding, trained by their military
advisers and armed with their weapons.

Iran's influence in Syria can be found everywhere,
from the militias roaming the cities to Iranian attempts
to build a port in the Mediterranean. We in Israel know
firsthand about Iran's attempts to spread terror and
violence throughout the region. We have presented the
Council with our latest intelligence about the terror
organization Hizbullah in Lebanon. We showed in great
detail how their rockets are aimed at Israeli homes,
schools and offices. This Iranian proxy entrenched
along our northern border is placing its weapons in
homes, mosques and hospitals with the intention of
once again committing a double war crime - targeting
our civilians while using Lebanese women and children
as human shields.

We continue to warn that Hizbullah has increased
its stockpile from a mere 6,000 rockets and missiles in
2006 to almost 150,000 even more advanced weapons
today. Where do these weapons come from? Iran, of
course. The Al-Quds Force trains Hizbullah fighters,
funnels money to them and directly provides the
terrorists with those deadly weapons. We also know
that Hizbullah is constantly improving the range
and accuracy of their rockets and now are capable of
targeting 90 per cent of my country.

Hizbullah is also growing stronger politically.
Senior leaders in the Lebanese Government have
recently voiced support for those terrorists and some
have even gone as far as to describe Hizbullah as a
legitimate force in Lebanon. Instead ofworking with the
international community to implement resolution 1701
(2006), those extremists are drowning out the moderate
voices in Lebanon who wish to realize the true potential
of their country. Hizbullah is not only threatening the
delicate calm on our border but endangering the chance
of Lebanon ever becoming a stable and peaceful State.
Iran has stopped at nothing to arm Hizbullah. It sends
arms on convoys over land, tries to smuggle them in
from the sea and even unabashedly places them on
civilian airlines - such as Mahan Air - and flies them
into Damascus and Beirut.
Iran does not only threaten our region through
proxies. It also does so directly by supporting terror
throughout the Middle East and continuing their
ballistic missile tests. Those tests are in total defiance
of the international community and the Council has
clearly stated that Iran is "not to undertake any activity
related to ballistic missiles." (resolution 223] (2015),
Annex B, para. 3). Yet, since resolution 2231 (2015) was
adopted, Iran has conducted at least 14 ballistic missile
tests. The Iranians have not hidden their intentions.
In fact, just two days ago they wrote on one of their
missiles, "Death to Israel".

That same violent call for Israel's destruction,
written on that missile, can be found in the Hamas
charter. Let me remind the Council that Hamas is Iran's
proxy. It rules the Gaza Strip and holds the people of
that region hostage. The founding document of Hamas
states that "there is no solution for the Palestinian
question except through jihad". As the Council knows,
Israel withdrew completely from the Gaza Strip in 2005.
We did so in the hope that the Palestinians would create
a thriving economy and abandon the path of terror. We
destroyed every Israeli home, reduced every synagogue
to rubble and even removed every Jewish grave.

Sadly, those hopes for the possibility of peace and
better lives for Israelis and Palestinians were dashed.
Hamas took over the Gaza Strip and has spent millions
of dollars - much of it stolen from foreign humanitarian
aid - on rockets, guns and terror tunnels. Meanwhile,
the Palestinian people continue to suffer. Almost every
week, we uncover a new incident of Hamas manipulating
the goodwill of the international community. Employees
of recognized humanitarian organizations have been
caught aiding terror infrastructure. Food and goods
meant for the people of Gaza have been diverted to
the black market, where they are sold for funds to buy
arms. And official employees of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East not only incite violence against Israelis but
also serve simultaneously as Hamas officials.

In the decade that has passed since we left Gaza,
Israel has been forced on numerous occasions to fight
Hamas and defend our people. During the last round of
fighting in Operation Protective Edge, in 2014, Hamas
unleashed over 3,000 rocket attacks on Israeli civilians.
At the same time, it used sophisticated terror tunnels
to try to attack our border communities. Its plan is as
simple as it is evil. It aims to attack kindergartens and
community centres with the hope of massacring as
many innocent people as possible.
Members of the Council must understand that
Hamas is unfortunately leading us to the next conflict.
Since the end of Operation Protective Edge, we
estimate that Hamas has increased its arsenal to over
12,000 rockets. At the same time, it has continued to
dig its terror tunnels, day in and day out. Many of these
tunnels, which stretch into Israeli territory, are as long
as 2.5 kilometres, which is longer than the Lincoln
Tunnel connecting New York and New Jersey under the
Hudson River. The Lincoln Tunnel is used by millions
ofpeople to come to theirjobs and then go home to their
families. In contrast, the Hamas tunnels are intended to
kidnap and kill as many Israelis as possible.

I have here an image illustrating the reach and
scope of Hamas' network of terror tunnels from the last
operation in Gaza. The green line is the border. Here are
the openings of the tunnels in Gaza. Notice how they
use civilian homes and hospitals to hide the entrances.
Here is where these tunnels end up: next to Nahal Oz,
Saad, Kfar Aza, just metres from Israeli towns. They
spend millions of dollars on these tunnels.

Council members may ask how Hamas continues to
arm and replenish its weapons supply. The answer lies
in the words of Hamas leader, Mousa Abu Marzook,
who said last June that

"[t]he support offered by Iran to the Palestinian
resistance - be it in logistics, training or
funds - is unmatched and beyond the capabilities
of other countries. Iran's support and backing to
the resistance and the Palestinian cause is clear".

The Hamas representative does not exaggerate this
connection. Iran's Foreign Ministry spokesman,
Hossein Jaberi Ansari, said that "resistance movements
are part of Iran's foreign policy". We need to think
about that.

To so many members of the United Nations, foreign
aid to Gaza means donations to UNICEF or to the Red
Cross. This is money that goes towards clean water,
education, health. For Iran, foreign aid means supplying
deadly missiles and training terrorists.

We welcome the new position that has been
proposed with respect to the Security Council and its
meetings about the Middle East. We know from our
own experience that there is only one way forward
for those who really want peace in our region. As
we have said time and again, peace between Israelis
and Palestinians will not come from meaningless
manoeuvring in international bodies, and it most
definitely will not result from one-sided resolutions
here in the Security Council.

The chance for real peace to be pursued will
only come when the Palestinians abandon terror, end
incitement and finally return to the negotiating table.
More importantly, the chance for peace and stability
for our region depends on the Security Council, and
the international community as a whole, recognizing
real threats when we see them. I ask a simple question
to those who insist on keeping the focus here in the
Security Council on Israel: Is Israel at fault for the
spread of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant?
Is Israel to blame for the dire situation in Yemen? Is
Israel responsible for the daily massacres in Syria? The
answer is a resounding "no".

We welcome efforts to widen the scope of the
meetings of the Security Council to focus on the real
dangers in the Middle East. The time has come to finally
put an end to the obsessive focus on Israel. The time
has come to stop this scapegoating of the Jewish State
for every war and conflict in our region. The Council
should remain focused on stopping the countries that
support sadistic dictators who gas their own people.
The time has come for the Council to speak in a clear
voice and finally classify Hizbullah and Hamas as
terrorist organizations. We are warning that an alliance
of evil with Iran at its centre is spreading throughout
the Middle East. They seek to spread chaos, terror and
instability through a region once known as the cradle
of civilization. We call upon the Council to condemn
Iran's dangerous behaviour.

The good news is that Israel is no longer alone
in standing up to these threats. Countries of good
conscience throughout our region are putting the
chance for peace and security and the hope for a better
future for their people ahead ofthe conflicts ofthe past.
It is also Israel's hope that this body will begin to seek
true moral clarity when it comes to the Middle East.
Only then will the Security Council finally be effective
in fulfilling its stated role of maintaining international
peace and security for the world.

