The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

The Russian Federation voted in favour of the
draft resolution submitted by Kuwait (S/2018/516), on
the protection of civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territories, because its provisions corresponded to
the Russian Federation's principled approach to a
settlement in the Middle East. The international
community must of course deal with the important
questions reflected in the draft resolution, including the
humanitarian situation in Gaza, the re-establishment
of Palestinian unity and the return of control over
the sector to the Palestinian authorities. We must not
slack off our efforts in support of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, whose work significantly eases the burden
on Palestinian refugees. But all of these steps should
be subordinate to a resolution of the main strategic
objective of achieving a Palestinian-Israel settlement
based on the international legal foundation that we
are all familiar with. That settlement presupposes the
implementation of a two-State solution based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the decisions of the Middle East Quartet.

We reiterate that imposing a solution through force
and a rejection of direct dialogue is not a viable choice.
Such an approach would only exacerbate mistrust and
make the prospects for relaunching the negotiation
process ever more distant. We firmly condemn the
indiscriminate attacks on civilians that have resulted in
significant numbers of victims, as well as the firing of
rockets into residential areas of Israel.

For our part, as a permanent member of the Security
Council and a member of the Quartet, we will continue
to encourage both sides to resume direct negotiations
as soon as possible, since it is their absence that is the
reason for the current problematic situation regarding
a Palestinian-Israeli settlement. Russia has repeatedly
proposed its services as a mediator and offered to host
a summit between the leaders of Palestine and Israel in
order to relaunch a direct dialogue, and our proposal still
stands. We are ready to work sincerely and energetically
with every partner interested in achieving a speedy end
to the current impasse on a Middle East settlement.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution contained in document S/2018/520,
submitted by the United States of America. I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhana's.

Infavour:
United States of America

Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Kuwait, Russian
Federation

Abstaining:
China, C6te d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia,
France, Kazakhstan, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Sweden, United Kingdom

The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received 1 vote in favour, 3 against and
11 abstentions. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, having failed to obtain the required number
of votes.

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements after the voting.


