Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): We join others in
expressing our thanks and appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his report. We also welcome the introductory
remarks that he made this morning, which, in our view,
provide food for further thought. In our View, the Secretary-
General' s report on the role of United Nations peacekeeping
in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) is
very timely. It comes at a very crucial time, when we are
confronted with complex conflict situations whose
successful resolution may well depend on how
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are handled.

The report of the Secretary-General is comprehensive
and practical and we are of the view that it only remains
for all of us to study the recommendations contained
therein, as well as to take into account the additional views
which have been and will be made by our colleagues this
morning, so as to see how we can work them into United
Nations peacekeeping operations. For this reason, my
remarks will be very brief.

Let me also mention that an unsuccessful DDR
programme results in the recurrence of conflict, bringing
with it a complete breakdown of governing institutions,
the destruction of physical infrastructure, further
displacement of populations and subsequent massive
human suffering. Hence, in our view, DDR is an
important and indispensable part of peacekeeping and
peace-building.

The phenomenon of grinding, widespread poverty in
the midst of plenty should touch the conscience and the
political will of the international community. The conflict-
stricken countries, particularly those in Africa, cannot
emerge from their protracted civil conflicts without
generous assistance from the international community to
enable them to lay the foundations for durable peace and
recovery and to avoid a relapse into conflict.

It is also important to promote reconciliation, engage
civil society and ensure the total commitment of parties
to a peaceful resolution of conflict. Indeed, as has been
mentioned by colleagues who spoke before me, the
international community can only assist; the parties must
be willing to disarm and committed to doing so.
However, in situations where the causes of a conflict have
an external dimension, it is important that pressure be
brought to bear by all involved, directly or indirectly, for
the parties to disarm. More importantly, in our view,
faction leaders should be held accountable for the
disarmament and demobilization of their combatants.

Although every situation has its unique attributes,
DDR is a process whose parts cannot be treated in
isolation. All components have to be addressed, for they
complement one another. In approving peacekeeping
operations, therefore, clear mandates have to be given,
with a clear division of responsibilities among the various
United Nations organizations.

The rehabilitation and detraumatization of the
victims of conflict, especially child soldiers, have been
extensively elaborated in the Secretary-General's report,
and rightly so. The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of child soldiers should be given priority
attention. The situation of the girl child in particular has
to be taken into account. We also think that it would help
enormously if the situation of children and child soldiers

 

were taken seriously, addressed from the very beginning
and included in the negotiation of peace agreements. In this
regard, we greatly welcome the inclusion of a child
protection adviser in United Nations operations in Sierra
Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Women,
too, should be involved in DDR programmes, for they are
affected in a special way by conflict and are often left to
fend for themselves.

In this context, we believe that the recommendations
contained in the Beijing Platform for Action on women in
armed conflict can serve to provide valuable input.
Similarly, in our view, the Division for the Advancement of
Women has an important role to play here.

Demining operations, the reconstitution of State
structures and the restoration of industrial and agricultural
production are necessary for the realization of the DDR
process, especially during the reintegration process. In our
View, this is where international assistance is crucial.

Finally, we must, indeed, draw on lessons learned
from other United Nations operations, be they positive or
negative. In conclusion, I should like to say that we support
the draft presidential statement.

