The President (spoke in Russian): I would now like
to make some concluding remarks in my capacity as the
representative of the Russian Federation.

In his most recent report (S/2018/6l4) on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), the
Secretary-General rightly points out that regional
conflicts are interconnected, something that many
other speakers have talked about today. He also says
that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is iconic, and its
persistence helps to fuel the extremist agenda. I fully
agree with Mr. Guterres when he says that is precisely
why it is critically important to create conditions that
will enable us to bring the parties back to substantive
negotiations. In that regard, I would once again like
to recall our initiative to hold an Israeli-Palestinian
summit in Russia and our proposal to send a Security
Council mission to the region.
The effort to mobilize the Middle East Quartet
of international mediators is becoming ever more
pertinent. We firmly believe that the starting point for
our collective work should be through ensuring strict
adherence by all to the international legal foundations
formulated by the Security Council for resolving this
issue, refraining from taking unilateral steps, including
building settlements in the occupied territories, and
ending the violence. That is the only way we will be
able to open up the prospects for a two-State solution
by negotiating a package of final status issues. The
humanitarian situation in Gaza must be improved
and under the control of a legitimate Palestinian
Government. The efforts to unite Palestinians must
also be intensified.

The conflicts in Syria and Yemen are also awaiting
lasting settlements of their own. Russia and the other
guarantors of the Astana process have made a genuine
contribution to stabilizing the situation in Syria and
ensuring that it will not fall to terrorists. We now have
an opportunity to focus on the political process under
the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva, for which
we need constructive efforts on the part of all the
external stakeholders. At the same time, as stipulated
in the decisions of the Security Council and various
international formats, we must continue to relentlessly
combat terrorism until it is completely stamped out
in Syria.

I have listened carefully and respectfully to all
of those who have spoken so far, including to the
representatives of the United Kingdom and the United
States, who expressed particular concern about what
is happening in the south-western de-escalation area
in Syria. In fact, active peace negotiations are under
way there with the opposition groups that have rejected
the terrorists, while the fight against the terrorists
themselves continues. I want to emphasize that the
Russian Federation is firmly committed to meeting
its obligations, including those related to the ceasefire
regime. No one has done more than Russia and its
co-guarantors of the Astana process to bring about a
ceasefire and reduce the level of violence, and certainly
none of the countries whose money and weapons give
aid to illegal armed groups.

I would like to point out that the de-escalation
areas, including the one in south-western Syria, which
Russia set up in coordination with the United States and
Jordan, were certainly not created in order to break up
a State Member of the United Nations or perpetuate the
presence of terrorists there. However, I regret to say that
we have been compelled to conclude that at the moment
more than 40 per cent of the south-western area's
territory continues to be controlled by Jabhat Al-Nusra
and the Islamic State in the Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
which, as we are all well aware, have been designated
terrorist groups by the Organization. There can be no
ceasefire between us and them. At the same time, we
have to once again regretfully point out that in the
year that has passed since the establishment of the
de-escalation zone in south-western Syria, the United
States, in spite of the commitments it undertook, has
done nothing to support the fight against the terrorists
there.

On the Yemen crisis, I reiterate that there can be no
military solution to the conflict. We can reach a long-
term settlement only by taking into account the opinions
of all of its participants. Russia is maintaining contact
with all the opposing sides and assisting the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin
Griffiths. There is no question that special attention
needs to be paid to resolving the severe humanitarian
and food crisis there.

Significant international efforts are required
to get the political process in Libya moving so as
to unite the country, create unified governmental
institutions and put an end to internecine clashes. Much
more also remains to be done to help Iraq overcome
the consequences of the war with ISIL and achieve
sustainable national reconciliation.

In conclusion, I would like to express the hope
that today's debate will contribute to finding ways to
strengthen peace and stability in the Middle East and
North Africa.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.

