Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening today's meeting,
and the delegation of Kuwait for requesting it.

Eight-month-old Laila Anwar Al-Ghandour,
14-year-old Ezz Eldin Alsamaak, 15-year-old Wisaal
Fadl Ezzat Alsheikh Khalil, 16-year-old Ahmed Adel
Musa Alshaer, 16-year-old Saeed Mohamed Abu
Alkheir, 18-year-old Ibrahim Ahmed Alzarqa, 19-year-
old Eman Ali Sadiq Alsheikh, 19-year-old Zayid
Mohamed Hassan Omar, 20-year-old Motassem Fawzy
Abu Louley and 21-year-old Anas Hamdan Salim Qadee
were the first 10 people murdered by the security forces
of the occupying Power yesterday in Gaza. Today we

observed a minute of silence in memory of the Victims.
However, I also believe that minute of silence served to
remind us that the Security Council is ineffective.

The Security Council - not only now or in
recent years, but over the past decades - has failed
the Palestinian people. Therefore, as a member of the
Security Council, and through my brother, the observer
of Palestine, who is here with us today, I would like
to apologize to the 6 million Palestinian refugees
who have lost their homes and now live in camps far
from the land on which they were born. I apologize
for the promise to establish a Palestinian State that
has not been kept for more than 70 years. I apologize
for the more than 50 years of occupation and for the
ongoing construction of Israeli settlements on occupied
Palestinian territory. The international community
has failed them. I apologize for the 10-year inhumane
blockade in Gaza and for the construction of a shameful
wall along the West Bank. The international community
has failed them.

I apologize for the Israeli checkpoints, through
which they must pass daily on their way to work. The
international community has failed them. I would
like to apologize to the more than 97 Palestinians,
12 of whom were children, who lost their lives in
the past six weeks since the Great March of Return
began. The international community - the Security
Council - has failed them. I would like to apologize
to the more than 12,000 Palestinians - men, women,
the elderly and children - who have been injured as
a result of the Israeli aggression. More than 3,500 of
them have suffered injuries of varying intensity caused
by live ammunition that will leave them permanently
maimed. The international community has failed them.
I apologize to the more than 300 Palestinian boys and
girls detained in Israeli prisons or detention centres.
Some are tried in military tribunals, others are simply
held in administrative detention. The international
community - the Security Council - has failed them.

I would like to apologize to the 169 health workers
who were injured while providing emergency assistance
to Palestinians along the barrier that separates Israel
and Gaza. The international community has also failed
them. I apologize for the 18 ambulances that were
damaged in recent weeks and for the hospitals and
health centres in Gaza that have collapsed because
of inadequate supplies of gas, water and electricity. I
would like to apologize for the four hours of electricity
provided to them every day. The international
community has failed them.

I believe it is necessary to clarify that although there
are two parties to this ill-named conflict - because it is
not a conflict; we are dealing with an illegal occupation,
an occupying Power and an occupied territory - they
are not on equal footing. Israel is the occupying Power
and Palestine is under occupation. A historic and blatant
inequality exists. One party continues to use force to
occupy the territory of the other. One party forcibly
displaces civilians, confiscates land, demolishes
homes and continues to move settlers into illegally
built settlements. One party has imposed a blockade
on Gaza, which has led to dreadful humanitarian
consequences. As Mr. Mladenov so eloquently stated,
Gaza has become a sort of prison.

In addition, the unilateral decision taken by the
Government of the United States of America to set
up its Embassy in the occupied city of Jerusalem
only heightens tensions. Bolivia reiterates its firmest
condemnation of that decision, as it violates Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. The United
States, as a supporter of the occupying Power, has
become an obstacle to peace. It is part of the problem,
not of the solution.

After witnessing recent events, Bolivia believes that
the relevant International Criminal Court mechanisms
should be employed to conduct an investigation and
determine those responsible for the crimes committed
during the Great March of Return so that they can be
held accountable. Given the current landscape, we
firmly commit to taking part in all international efforts
to bring about a peaceable solution to the situation. In
that regard, we support initiatives such as the Quartet
road map, the Madrid Principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative, among others, that would ensure fair and
lasting peace and enable the two sides to live in safe,
recognized borders. We reiterate our belief that the only
long-term solution is the two-State solution, in which at
last a free, sovereign and independent Palestinian State is
established within pre-l967 international borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

In conclusion, we have heard much talk about Iran,
Iran,Iran.We have heardmuchtalkaboutHamas,Hamas,
Hamas. But we have heard nothing about the real reason
for the current situation, which is the occupation, the
occupation, the occupation. When the occupation ends,

we can discuss whether or not there is compliance with
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
Bolivia will never justify terrorism. At the same
time, we will not fall into the trap of claiming that the
problem lies with Hamas when the underlying issue is
that a State recognized by the Organization is illegally
occupying the territory of another and subjecting a
people to sub-human conditions. This is a systematic
violation of the Charter of the United Nations. Only
when the occupation comes to an end will we be able to
say that we have done our duty.

