Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation welcomes the opportunity to hold this
public meeting of the Security Council on the situation
in Africa. We are honoured by your presence,
Mr. Minister, to lead this meeting, and also by the
participation of the Foreign Ministers of member and
non-member countries of the Council who are here
with us.

We are also grateful for the introductory
statement by the Deputy Secretary-General of the
United Nations, and also for the very valuable
contribution to our understanding of Africa and its
hopes for peace made by Mr. Amara Essy, Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
We also welcome the presence of the President of the
Economic and Social Council, the Permanent
Representative of Croatia.

The Members of the United Nations, by virtue of
the Millennium Declaration, issued by our heads of
State and Government in 2000, have undertaken the
imperative commitment to respond to the special needs
of Africa. Our commitment was reflected very
explicitly in that Declaration:

"We will support the consolidation of democracy
in Africa and assist Africans in their struggle for
lasting peace, poverty eradication and sustainable
development, thereby bringing Africa into the
mainstream of the world economy." (resolution 55/2, para. 27)

For the Colombian delegation, this commitment
summarizes the challenges involved in Africa's
complete integration into the international community.
The exercise of democracy, the eradication of poverty
and the preservation of peace - these are three tasks
that the peoples of Africa have entrusted to their
political leaders and that we must all support, so that
the development of Africa and the benefits of peace
will be a victory achieved by the peoples of Africa
themselves.

I would now like to emphasize a few aspects that
the Security Council could promote in its endeavour of
maintaining international peace and security, which we
believe to be relevant to today's debate.

The first aspect is conflict prevention. We
welcome the fact that the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution, established in
1993, retains its relevance as the principal catalyst of
Africa's efforts for the management of African
conflicts. We believe that the Mechanism can
strengthen its own capacity to prevent conflicts
through, inter alia, greater coordination with the United
Nations and subregional organizations; the
establishment of short-term political and military
missions for fact-finding in potential conflict situations
and for building trust among the parties; and
implementation by the OAU of the measures envisaged
at the Harare Summit of 1997 and the Algiers Summit
of 1999 against Governments that attempt to take
power or stay in power by unconstitutional means.

The second aspect is peacekeeping operations.
While the primary responsibility to ensure international
peace and security rests with the Security Council, we
value and encourage the peacekeeping operations
established by regional and subregional organizations
of Africa, such as the Economic Community of West
African States and the Southern African Development
Community; they have better knowledge of the area
and are promoted by leading countries of each region.
In this respect, the Council could encourage, inter alia,
the use of Chapter VIII of the Charter for actions that
require broad support of the international community
and could promote the possibility of incorporating
United Nations civilian components in African
peacekeeping operations, as this would represent a
measure of growing confidence in African efforts.

The third aspect is actions against the
proliferation of small arms. This is a subject of great
importance to our delegation. In Africa, 100 million
small arms are circulating, a great many of them
supplied years ago by the protagonists of the cold war
in their eagerness to maintain their spheres of
influence. Many weapons have survived the peace
agreements and are used in post-conflict stages by
bands of criminals, mercenary groups in various
countries and persons concerned about their own
safety. For this reason, the Council could, among other
measures, urge arms-exporting countries to exercise
greater control over their sales abroad; request arms-
producing companies to provide technical and financial
assistance to counteract their effects, as suggested by
various organizations; support with concrete actions
the Moratorium proclaimed on the acquisition of small
arms in West Africa; and promote the public
identification of international arms dealers and of their
activities, in particular those who are in clear violation
of the embargoes established by the Council.

Fourthly, attention must be devoted to countries
emerging from conflict. The relationship between the
promotion of peace and economic development,
especially at the stage of rebuilding societies affected
by conflict, is widely recognized. It is one of the
considerations involved in the launching of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD), which
was agreed on at the OAU summit last July in Zambia.

For this reason, my delegation wishes, at this
meeting on Africa, to endorse the proposal to establish,
within the Economic and Social Council, a special
advisory group on those countries emerging from
conflict. That proposal received the support of the
ministers participating in the high-level segment of the
Economic and Social Council devoted to the needs of
Africa, which was held in July of last year.

It is to be hoped that this will be an opportunity
to achieve the coordination that should exist among
United Nations organs with a view to addressing post-
conflict situations and to request further contacts in
order to bring together the members of the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council in the
interests of peace in Africa. For this reason, I should
like to emphasize once again that the presence of the
President of the Economic and Social Council at this
meeting is of particular importance.

During its term on the Security Council, my
country would not wish to see its name linked to the
premature withdrawal of United Nations missions from
African countries in conflict in which adequate
arrangements have not yet been made for economic
reconstruction.

Fifthly, and lastly, with respect to Africa's
humanitarian needs, I wish to recall here the special
needs of the 15 million refugees and internally
displaced persons, as well as of the 30 million persons
infected with the HIV/AIDS virus, who live in Africa. I
do so in order to draw attention to the magnitude of
this humanitarian emergency and to the need for all of
our countries to respond to the appeal for contributions
made by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

Programmes amounting to $1.2 billion have been
put forward to meet the immediate needs of 14.6
million persons this year. However, under 50 per cent
of last year's requirements were met by international
donors. In countries such as Angola, the Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi, there
are many more people who require emergency
assistance, but international relief organizations do not
have access to them due to the lack of the necessary
guarantees for the provision of that assistance.

In today's conditions of conflict in Africa,
preventing war, as Secretary-General Kofi Annan has
said, does not mean defending States or protecting
allies; it means defending humanity itself.

