Mr. Oshima (Japan): I would like, first of all, to
express to you, Mr. President, and to the members of
the Council, Japan's appreciation for the opportunity to
present its views on the situation in Afghanistan - a
subject to which Japan attaches great importance.

Let me also at the outset express our
congratulations and best wishes to the Italian

delegation for having taken over the lead role on
Afghanistan this year from Japan. We appreciated the
presence at this meeting of Mr. D'Alema, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Italy.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tom Koenigs, and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, for their
informative briefings.

The Government of Japan regards as very
important that the whole process - all internal,
regional and international efforts that contribute to the
promotion of a constitutional democracy and to the
strengthening of the consolidation of peace,
reconstruction and development in Afghanistan -
must move forward with as little hindrance and as
much support from the international community as
possible. That is essential not only for bettering the
lives of the Afghan people, who have suffered for too
long from hardship, but also for enhancing stability in
the region of South, Central and West Asia, as well as
for advancing the collective efforts of the international
community on counter-terrorism.

The United Nations, and especially the Security
Council, plays a crucial role in this enterprise. The
unwavering commitment of the international
community through the Security Council was again
demonstrated when the Council dispatched its mission
to Afghanistan last November, on the results of which I
had the honour to report in this Chamber on
7 December.

The situation in Afghanistan now stands at a
crossroads, as was made amply clear in the most recent
report by the Secretary-General (S/2007/152), as well
as in the November Council mission report.

On the one hand, we can see many positive
achievements and signs of hope, such as the successful
completion of the Bonn process and the commitment
by the Afghan Government and people to address a
multitude of challenges and problems. The Afghanistan
Compact provides the essential vehicle and framework
of a strategy, and its consistent implementation is
clearly of central importance. We are encouraged that
one of the core values that we have emphasized - that
of Afghan ownership - is being respected to a large
extent in the ongoing process, as exemplified in the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy.
On the other hand, the challenges remain
enormous - in the areas of security, counter-narcotics,
the rule of law, good governance and development, to
name but a few. As I reported on behalf of the Security
Council mission, the people and the Government of
Afghanistan are expected to continue with their tireless
efforts on all of those fronts, and the international
community, for its part, must extend adequate support,
as envisaged in the Compact, so as to meet the
benchmarks established therein and not repeat the
failures of the past. Japan is committed in the long
term, and will continue to play an active role in this
regard.

On security, which remains the most
preoccupying concern, we welcome the continued
efforts by all the actors involved, including the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), to
contain the insurgency and the terrorist activities. We
support and encourage the efforts of Afghanistan and
Pakistan to improve security along and across the
border, and we encourage their plan to hold cross-
border jirgas aimed at confidence-building and
stability. We also support the endeavours pursued
under the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
on Afghanistan.

Japan is committed to promoting - after the
successful handling of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes - the next step in assisting
the security sector reform, namely, the disbandment of
illegal armed groups. We are concerned about the fact
that, as the Secretary-General's report notes, only
limited progress has been made so far on this. We take
note, however, of the fact that that some tangible
progress is being made - for example, in the province
of Kapisa, where progress in disbanding illegal armed
groups has allowed development projects to
commence, and, similarly, in the province of Takhar in
the north-east. The disbandment of illegal armed
groups should be closely monitored, as should other
efforts in security sector reform, including those
relating to the police, the national army and the judicial
sector.

In this connection, my delegation commends
Slovakia on its initiative to hold an open debate in the
Security Council on security sector reform during its
presidency last month.

Narcotics-related problems have indeed become a
main threat - one no less serious than the threat posed

by the Taliban-led insurgency - to Afghanistan's
peace and security. We fully support the view
expressed in the report that an urgent, concerted effort
by all stakeholders is needed to improve
implementation of the National Drug Control Strategy.
Japan has been assisting the efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and has
contributed to the Counter-Narcotics Trust Fund to
assist projects promoting alternative livelihoods. We
are also developing an assistance plan to eradicate drug
trafficking along Afghanistan's borders with other
Central Asian countries by strengthening border
control, in collaboration with the United Nations and
the United States.

Development is another essential element for the
consolidation of peace in Afghanistan. The role of the
provincial reconstruction teams is critically important
for this purpose. Upon his recent visit to NATO
headquarters, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe stated that
Japan would strengthen its cooperation with NATO in
this regard, and my Government subsequently decided
to provide approximately 2 billion yen in grant aid over
the coming several years for provincial reconstruction
team-related civilian projects, such as the construction
of schools and clinics.

On a bilateral basis, key infrastructure-building,
particularly in the roads sector, has been one of the
priority areas of Japan's development assistance in
Afghanistan. In addition to contributing to the
improvement of the ring road between Kabul and
Kandahar and between Kandahar and Herat, we have
been helping Afghan officials in charge of road
management to strengthen their capacity in order to
enhance their sense of ownership in this essential area
of economic development.

In this vein, outreach to the population in the
provinces is of critical importance. We note with grave
concern the Secretary-General's finding about popular
alienation. According to the Secretary-General's report,
as well as the November Council mission report, that
problem remains a key factor behind the revitalized
insurgency and stems from inappropriate Government
appointments, tribal nepotism, the monopolization of
power, and the marginalization of those outside the
dominant social and political groups. The ongoing
expansion of UNAMA into the provinces is an
important step to address that problem, and Japan
welcomes it. It is hoped that an expanded UNAMA
presence will contribute to the reconstruction and
development of the provinces and will lead to greater
support among the local population for the
consolidation of peace in the country. We expect that,
while remaining vigilant with regard to the safety of
their personnel, UNAMA's regional and provincial
offices will continue to work in close cooperation with
the Afghan Government and the International Security
Assistance Force.

Before concluding, I wish to draw the attention of
the members of the Council to a recommendation from
the Security Council mission that the list prepared by
the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee be
updated as necessary and on the basis of the most up-
to-date information. I hope that the Council will pay
due attention to that matter.

The role of UNAMA remains critically important
in ensuring the consolidation of peace in Afghanistan
within the key framework of the Compact. We pay high
tribute to the dedication of all UNAMA staff on the
ground. The delegation of Japan therefore supports the
extension of UNAMA's mandate for a further
12 months and urges the Council to adopt the necessary
draft resolution in a timely manner.

