Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Argentine presidency
for its leadership in convening this open debate. I
would also like to express appreciation to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-Moon for his briefing, as well as to
the representatives of various regional and subregional
organizations for their remarks.

Good cooperation and coordination between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations, are important for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is therefore quite
pertinent that the Council should allocate its time to
update and assess the ongoing collaboration between
them. That is why we find today's open debate timely.
I would like to make a few observations on the matter.

First, regional and subregional organizations are
well placed to play crucial roles in conflict prevention,
mediation and conflict resolution. They have a
comparative advantage in playing such roles because
of their proximity to conflicts and abundant knowledge
of the region and influence on the stakeholders. Japan
would like to commend the conflict-preventing,
mediating or other peacemaking roles played by such
organizations as the African Union in Somalia, the
Sudan and South Sudan; the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) in Mali; the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
in Central Asia; the Union of South American Nations,
in Latin America; and the League of Arab States in
addressing recent dramatic changes in the Middle East.

At the same time, the United Nations has played
a role in promoting political processes and achieving
peace agreements. It would be important for the
United Nations to lend its support to supplement the
peacemaking efforts of the regional and subregional
organizations, when and where necessary.

Secondly, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations can play their respective
roles in the area of peacekeeping activities. Regional
and subregional organizations can rapidly respond to
conflicts in order to settle disputes before they escalate,
while the United Nations remains primarily responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and could intervene, if necessary, with wide-range
international resources.

A recent example of this is the situation in Mali.
Japan commends the intervention of ECOWAS and
the African Union into Mali and the subsequent
smooth transformation of the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali into the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali.

Thirdly, we believe there is further room for
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
A mechanism such as the annual joint meeting of the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council certainly facilitates the harmonization
of their respective policies on specific issues related to
conflict.

A similar dialogue was held earlier this year between
the Security Council and the Political and Security
Committee of the European Union. The Secretariat
also has held similar consultative meetings with other
regional groups, such as the Caribbean Community and
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). The
continuation of those initiatives is encouraged.

The commitment of regional and subregional
organizations to the maintenance of peace and security
in their respective regions should be commended. In
order to help these organizations fulfil their intentions,
the international community should strive to support
their activities. Japan remains committed to extending
its assistance to these organizations. Since 2008,
Japan has extended assistance for capacity-building
to peacekeeping training centres in 10 African
countries - Benin, Cameroon, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Kenya, Mali, Nigeria, Rwanda and South
Africa - amounting to $30 million in total. Japan has
also provided other assistance to strengthen the African
peace and security architecture.

Japan also believes that it is important for the
United Nations to reach out to regional and subregional
organizations in the fields of conflict prevention and
preventive diplomacy. In that regard, Japan welcomes
the fact that the partnership between the United
Nations and ASEAN has been deepened in these
fields, and is proud to have supported the initiative
of the Secretariat to hold the ASEAN-United Nations
Workshop on Lessons Learned and Best Practices in
Conflict Prevention and Preventive Diplomacy, in
Jakarta, Indonesia, on 5 and 6 April.

Before concluding my remarks, I would like to
emphasize that Japan has always paid attention to
the enhancement of partnerships between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations. In
that regard, I would like to mention the fact that Japan
welcomed the African Union Commission to become
one of the organizers of the Fifth Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD V),
which took place in Japan in June, together with the
other organizers: Japan, the United Nations, the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Bank.

TICAD V was a huge success thanks to the
participation of 39 African Heads of State and
Government and heads of the five organizers, including
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Secretary-General of the United Nations. That
multilateral high-level policy forum will certainly
serve to create a more dynamic Africa by enhancing
economic growth, establishing inclusive and resilient
society and ensuring peace and stability in the region.

