Mr. Sajdik (Austria): Let me start by thanking
Lithuania for convening this important debate and
by expressing our appreciation for the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/3.

Austria aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, the Group
of Friends on the Protection of Civilians and the Human
Security Network.

In the interest of time, I will read out a shortened
version of my statement.

Fifteen years after the adoption in 1999 of the
first Security Council resolution mandating a United
Nations peacekeeping operation with the task of
the protection of civilians (resolution 1270 (1999)),
peacekeeping operations with protection-of-civilians
mandates are now the rule rather than the exception.
Significant progress has been made over the recent
years in implementing resolution 1894 (2009) with a
view to strengthening protection on the ground. The
work of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has contributed to an enhanced understanding
of protection-of-civilians activities among all the
relevant actors.

Other requests still need to be fully implemented.
In resolution 1894 (2009) and the presidential statement
adopted exactly one year ago (S/PRST/2013/2),
the Council reaffirmed its practice of requiring
mission-specific benchmarks in order to measure and
review the implementation of peacekeeping mandates,
and we hope for more information in the Secretary-
General's reports in that regard. Concerning the use of
targeted sanctions and the designation of individuals
or groups committing violations of international
humanitarian or human rights law, we call on the Council
to ensure a more coherent practice by sanctions regimes
that have listing criteria linked to such violations.

In order to complement the United Nations work on
protection-of-civilians training modules with national
efforts to better prepare peacekeeping personnel,
Austria has developed an interdisciplinary training
course on the protection of civilians that is open to
national and international participation by senior
decision-makers in the armed forces, police, civilian
administration and other civilian stakeholders and
experts. In addition, Austria continues its cooperation
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
will, for the second time this year, host a United Nations
training course on the protection of civilians for United
Nations peacekeeping personnel. Furthermore, Austria
stands ready to support the work of mobile training
teams on the protection of civilians with an Austrian
expert.
We commend the Secretariat's efforts, including
the Chatham House seminar organized by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs last year,
to raise awareness about the devastating humanitarian
consequences of explosive weapons for civilians and to
restrict their use in populated areas, where they cause
indiscriminate harm. Austria welcomes the Secretary-
General's recommendation to avoid the use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas and
the Secretariat's efforts to develop practical measures
and guidance to reduce their humanitarian impact. We
stand ready to assist in those endeavours.

Arms technology is undergoing rapid changes.
We fully support the Secretary-General's call on
Member States to ensure that attacks by armed drones
fully comply with international law. Unfortunately,
the circumstances of such attacks all too often
lack transparency, which in turn results in limited
accountability and limited or absent avenues for the
victims of such attacks to seek redress.

In anot-too-distant future, fully autonomous weapon
systems might become available. The implications
of those developments on the implementation of
international humanitarian law require a truly urgent
engagement by the relevant United Nations forums, as
well as further discussions.

Finally, parties to conflict have to take all feasible
measures to mitigate civilian harm resulting from
their operations. Innovative mechanisms have been
created by the International Security Assistance
Force in Afghanistan and the African Union Mission
in Somalia. The same is expected where United
Nations peacekeeping missions are authorized to
carry out targeted offensive operations. The provision
in resolution 2098 (2013) relating to MONUSCO's
Intervention Brigade to take into account "the need to
protect civilians and mitigate risk before, during and
after any military operation" is a welcome step in the
right direction. We welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendation for a common United Nations system
to systematically record civilian casualties, and we look
forward to receiving an update on those efforts.

