Mrs. Eilon Shahar (Israel): At the outset, Sir, I
would like to thank you for convening this timely
debate. I would also like to thank you for your
leadership as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, and I further recognize the Croatian
stewardship of the Council of Europe's Committee of
Experts on Terrorism. I also welcome the participation
of the President of Croatia and the Secretary-General
in this debate.

Israel believes that the issue of terrorism deserves
to be among the highest priorities of this Council, the
United Nations as a whole and all Member States. We
welcome the opportunity to help reinvigorate
international resolve to combat terrorism.

The recent horrific events in Mumbai clearly
demonstrated that terrorism is one of the greatest
global threats to international peace and security in
recent history. My Government extends its condolences
to the Indian people. Citizens from a number of other
nations, including Israel, were also killed in those
horrific days, and we also extend our condolences to
the citizens of those countries, and especially to the
families of all those who were lost and injured.

Among the locations targeted by the terrorists
was the Chabad House, where Israelis were singled out
for cold-blooded murder. Rising out of the maelstrom
of unspeakable acts was an Indian caregiver, who
risked her life to save a two-year-old Israeli child. The
caregiver's actions are proof that, while terrorists seek
to destroy our way of life, the noblest human impulses
and values must and will prevail.

The events in Mumbai have shown, once again,
that terrorism knows no borders and that international
cooperation is crucial to defeating it. The chain of
cooperation, from country to country, must be strong
and complete. Otherwise, the terrorists will find the
weak link and exploit it. We must control our borders,
shut off the valve of funds to terrorist networks,
including through sources such as drug trafficking, and
face terrorism with a seamless, united front, pursuing
terrorists wherever they may be. We also urge States to
fully implement all their obligations under
international law and to adhere to all relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Israel lies in a region heavily scarred by
terrorism, and my country, in particular, has been on
the front line of efforts to combat that evil for many
decades. Israelis and Jews are targeted at home and
abroad because of the passport they carry or their
religion. Like any other terrorist group, Hezbollah and
Hamas, two organizations committed to the destruction
of my country, could not operate without the support
given to them by States, in this case, Iran and Syria.
We urge the international community to stand firm
against those organizations and to speak in one voice
against any State sponsorship of terrorism.

Terrorism is spreading at an alarming rate,
expanding both in geography and in the audacity of the
crimes. Terrorists abuse the benefits of globalization,
including the free flow of people and information, in
order to bring fear, misery and death to innocent
civilians. We must also be acutely aware of the dangers
of cyberterrorism. The perpetrators of terrorist acts
operate outside the conventions of international
relations and, indeed, in violation of basic human
behaviour norms. They are not constrained by law,
reason or even self-preservation. It is precisely those
factors that have made this plague so difficult to fight.

Yet, in spite of the scale of the threat, we are
hopeful. We have the tools to combat terrorists, but
what we are lacking is universal political will. There
are some regions and nations that have not displayed
the needed sense of urgency. In some cases, States may
turn a blind eye to terrorists in their midst. In other
cases, they may even use terrorist organizations as a
tool of foreign policy. However, whether the support is

active or passive, it is still support. States that assist
terrorists will, at the very least, alienate themselves
from the international community. They must also be
made to understand that they are helping to undermine
their own sovereignty and that it is difficult to reverse
that downward spiral.

Around the world there are failed States and
States in danger of collapse that have the destructive
capacity in either raw materials or developed
technology that can be used in weapons of mass
destruction. In that environment, it is critical that while
we combat terrorism, we do everything within our
power to ensure that terrorists cannot gain access to
any capacity to inflict mass destruction.

There can be no excuse or justification for
terrorism, for State sponsorship of terrorism or States
closing their eyes to the problem within their own
borders. All manifestations of terrorism must be
condemned, and we should deny any attempt to
legitimize certain kinds of terrorism or to make the
distinction between good terrorism and bad terrorism.
The General Assembly and the Security Council
consistently reaffirm this position.

Religious and political leaders have a special
responsibility to speak out against fanaticism and
extremism. Terrorist movements indoctrinate their
adherents - often susceptible youth - into believing
that violence is the only means available to realize
their goals. Some movements glorify martyrdom. We
need to address incitement to violence at all levels, in
the political sphere, in schools and in houses of
worship.

Combating terrorism is a difficult task, but one
which no State, no matter how limited in resources or
capacity, need tackle alone. Technical assistance in
many fields is available through a number of
international mechanisms, including the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We
applaud the work of these bodies and urge States to use
and support these available resources.

In conclusion, history tries to teach us a lesson
that we too often forget. Appeasement, silence and
neglect make a risky strategy in the face of danger.
Instead, let each one of us do all we can to confront
this threat. We should send a clear message through our
actions that the nations of the world are resolved to
eliminate terrorism.

