Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's meeting for joint briefings on the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities and the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004). That is a result ofimprovements
in our methods of work and in coordination between
United Nations institutions, which is so essential to
having an impact. That is why it is a pleasure to be able
to thank Ambassadors Aboulatta, Llorentty Soliz and
Umarov, the Chairs of those three Committees, whose
statements very much reflect the level and quality
of the cooperation they receive. In a global context
marked by increasingly violent and sophisticated
attacks by terrorist and extremist groups such as
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State and their affiliates,
it is encouraging to see these three vital Security
Council entities combining their efforts to implement
their mandates. Given these terrorist groups' ability
to adapt, especially to technological change, and their
increasingly clear willingness to create as many victims
as possible - civilian victims in particular - in their
attempts to achieve their aims, a well-coordinated
mobilization of international efforts is essential to
prevent them getting their hands on weapons of mass
destruction in particular.

In this global mobilization of efforts to combat the
threat of terrorism and violent extremism, it is crucial
to ensure that Africa does not become a weak link or
fertile ground for the spread of terrorist groups and
transnational criminal organizations, since besides
groups such as Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram and Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, there are indications that the
Islamic State is trying to move into other parts of the
world, including the Sahelo-Saharan zone of Africa,
using foreign terrorist fighters, among others, to
spearhead those efforts. In 2011 the United Nations
assessment mission on the impact of the Libyan
crisis on the Sahel region reported that all sorts of
sophisticated weapons were being circulated and
smuggled, threatening the stability and security of the
countries of the region. We can add to that situation the
problems of transnational organized crime and every
kind of trafficking, including trafficking in drugs and
in persons.

Based on that, and with a View to helping Member
States improve their implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the delegation of Senegal
would like to highlight the following points. First,
beyond their collaboration with one another, it is
important that the three Committees under discussion
work to establish and strengthen partnerships at the
national, regional and international level with all the
parties involved, both public and private, in the areas of
the sharing of information, experience and intelligence,
and in coordinating operations so as to disrupt terrorists'
supply chains and improve border controls all of this
in order to better understand Member States' priorities
and needs and improve the coordination of assistance
to them.

 

Secondly, while the Committees' mandates differ,
we encourage their continued collaboration in
complementary areas, such as joint participation in
country visits, in the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force and in drafting the Secretary-General's
reports on the threat posed by the Islamic State.

Thirdly, the political commitment of the African
Union is to be commended not only for its cooperation
with the 1540 Committee at conferences for countries
requesting assistance, but also for taking action in
subregions, through, for example, the Multinational
Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad basin and the
standby force being generated by the Group of Five for
the Sahel.

In conclusion, my delegation encourages this
tripartite collaboration and hopes that it can be
expanded, as far as possible, to other United Nations
entities whose remits cross the mandates of the three
Committees. All of this will have limited effect on
the fallacious propaganda of terrorist organizations
and violent extremists if the international community
in general, and the United Nations and the Security
Council in particular, cannot come up with doctrinal
responses and solutions to problems of inequality
and development.

