Mr. Bashir (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Permit me
at the outset to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for responding to our request for an
open meeting and for working with us over the past
two days to achieve a result that will put an end to the
human tragedy unfolding in the Gaza Strip. Jordan
feels deep pain and concern at the grave situation, the
escalation of violence and the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip as a result of
the irresponsible and horrendous military aggression
carried out by Israel, in addition to its effects on the
peace process and the stability of our region, which has
long suffered from the scourge of war.

In addition to condemning this aggression, which
has claimed the lives of hundreds of innocent civilians,

we call on the international community, led by the
Security Council, to shoulder its political, moral and
legal responsibilities by adopting a draft resolution that
will force Israel to end to its aggression and its policies
of collective punishment against Palestinian civilians
and will alleviate the human suffering caused by its
military operations, which are a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.

The people and the Government of Jordan are
fully committed to supporting the Palestinian people in
their humanitarian crisis. His Majesty King Abdullah
Bin Al Hussein has from the beginning of the
aggression intensified his contacts with various
political leaders throughout the world in order to
achieve an immediate cessation of hostilities through
the Security Council. His Majesty the King has ordered
that all Jordanian hospitals be opened, that all
Jordanian capacities be placed at the service of our
Palestinian brothers and that field hospitals be prepared
and sent to Gaza. Hashemite charitable associations are
doing their utmost, and all of Jordan is prepared to
work around the clock to ensure the delivery of
international humanitarian assistance through its
territory.

Peace and security cannot be achieved by
carrying out military operations against a population
whose men, women, children and the elderly have
already been weakened by the siege. Those operations
will not help Israel, but will only arouse feelings of
anger among Arabs and Muslims throughout the world.

What we are now witnessing is inhuman Israeli
exploitation of the situation aimed at achieving false
internal gains. What Israel is doing does not reflect a
genuine interest in peace. Peace cannot be achieved by
shedding the blood of Palestinian children; peace
cannot be achieved by ignoring the appeals of the
international community; peace cannot be achieved by
violating international law, in particular those
provisions that impose responsibilities on occupying
forces towards their occupied population. Israel cannot
achieve security by killing innocent unarmed civilians
in the Gaza Strip, by targeting schools, universities and
houses of worship and by creating a humanitarian
tragedy for the Palestinian people. Past experiences
have proved those truths, and this aggression will be no
exception.
The Arab States have submitted a draft resolution
to the Security Council calling for a ceasefire. We have
worked and will continue working with the Council to
draft balanced language resulting in a resolution that
will fulfil the Council's objective of maintaining
international peace and security. It would be senseless
should the Council fail, despite the urgency and
immediacy of the situation, to adopt a resolution that
would put an end to the sufferings of the Palestinians.
That would mean that our humanity had been defeated
by Israel's intransigence.

Has the international community reached the
point where it can turn a blind eye to the killing,
displacement, fear and hunger that have been imposed
on the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip? Does the work of
the Council now serve the interests of one party,
without taking international humanitarian
responsibilities into consideration? The international
community must recognize the rights of the people of
Gaza. The international community must not fail to
respond to their appeals and must stop justifying their
continued suffering with the Israeli excuse of self-
defence. The Security Council must recall that for
more than 40 years the Gaza Strip and all the
Palestinian territories have been subjected to an
aggression called military occupation.

The international community must shoulder its
responsibilities by providing the Palestinians with
protection and humanitarian assistance, by addressing
what is now occurring in Gaza and by dealing with the
conspiracy aimed at destroying the future of the
Palestinian people and their inalienable rights,
including the right to establish an independent
Palestinian State.

Today, the international community must impose
a ceasefire in order to stop the bloodshed. It must
establish arrangements that will prevent further
deterioration of the situation by alleviating the
humanitarian and economic distress of the Palestinian
people, putting an end to all military operations and
compelling Israel to withdraw to the positions it
occupied before 27 December 2008, to life the siege, to
open all border crossings under its control and to
permit medical and humanitarian assistance and the
evacuation of the wounded.
The international community must support and
facilitate the work of United Nations agencies and
organs create an international monitoring mechanism

to supervise the ceasefire, protect the Palestinian
people and ensure that all parties carry out their
obligations with a view to the emergence of Gaza from
the destruction it is suffering and the establishment of
an independent, contiguous and viable Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Israel must understand that peace can be achieved
only through dialogue and serious negotiations that
will provide the Palestinian Authority with legitimacy
in order to fulfil the aspirations of the Palestinian
people to establish an independent, viable and
contiguous State. Returning to the negotiating table is
the only way to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
in accordance with international legitimacy, including
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Road Map
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Israel's use of extensive military force not only
threatens the stability of the region, but also
undermines all efforts by the Security Council to
achieve peace in the Middle East in accordance with
resolution 1850 (2008). It also threatens the entire
peace process aimed at finding a solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict based on the two-State
formula, which is a sine qua non for peace and stability
in the region.

Jordan has great hopes for the sincere and
extensive efforts of the Security Council and
appreciates the Egyptian initiative, which should serve
as an incentive to make progress in ending this tragic
situation, by providing humanitarian assistance to the
brotherly Palestinian people, alleviating their suffering
and returning to serious negotiations in order to
achieve the two-State solution, which is the only way
to ensure security and stability in the region.

