Mrs. Robinson (High Commissioner for Human Rights): I warmly welcome this opportunity to address
members of the Security Council. I wish to express my
appreciation to the Council for having commissioned this
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
I thank the Secretary-General for an excellent, clear and
concise document.

I am pleased to be here today, as the report raises
issues close to my heart. The report accurately reflects the
innumerable challenges which the United Nations faces in
its work and so many of the human rights issues which
my staff and I address on a daily basis. My Office is
more than willing to play its part in implementing the
report's constructive recommendations on the effective
implementation of international human rights,
humanitarian and refugee law and on the prevention of
gross violations of human right so crucial to national and
regional stability and thus to international peace and
security.

As High Commissioner for Human Rights, I have
assumed a burden of listening: listening to the pain and
anguish of victims of violations; listening to the anxieties
and fears of human rights defenders. I am glad to share
this burden with the members of the Council today
because they have the power and possibilities to alleviate
the pain and to prevent some of the anxieties being
realized.

If I refer to East Timor first it is because the terrible
events of recent days are so fresh in my mind. The awful
abuses committed in East Timor have shocked the
world - and rightly so, since it would be hard to
conceive of a more blatant assault on the rights of
hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians. The murders,
maimings, rapes and countless other atrocities committed
by the militias, with the involvement of elements of the
security forces, were especially repugnant because they
came in the aftermath of the free expression of the wishes
of the East Timorese people about their political future.

I saw evidence of a well-planned and systematic
policy of killings, displacement, destruction of property
and intimidation. There must be accountability for the
grave violations committed in East Timor. My
recommendation is the establishment of an international
commission of inquiry to gather and analyze evidence of
the events in East Timor.

What happened in East Timor is a graphic example
of the plight of civilians in conflict situations. And East
Timor is just the latest example. In the former Yugoslavia
I met women and girls who had been sexually assaulted,
raped and forced into sexual slavery. In Sierra Leone I

 

met children whose arms or legs had been brutally cut off
during the civil war. I listened to accounts of children being
abducted by rebels and sent to training centres or directly
to the battlefront. Children were forced to attack their own
villages and families and commit the most horrendous
atrocities. Many of these child soldiers have been killed,
while others have been maimed and psychologically scarred
for life. In Colombia and Cambodia human rights defenders
vividly described the climate of violence in which they
were carrying on their activities at great personal risk.
Reports from Angola tell how rebels provoked a mass
movement of displaced persons desperate to reach the
relatively safe haven of provincial capitals.

It had been expected that the collapse of superpower
rivalry would lead to a reduction in conflict, but the decline
in inter-State fighting has been more than made up for in
the growth of vicious internal conflicts, often unpredictable
and volatile. These are conflicts that drag on for years
without settlement or that flare up afresh when peace
seemed to be at hand. The village has become the
battlefield and the civilian population the primary target.
Girls and women are routinely subjected to sexual abuse
and gender-based violence. Children are recruited and
kidnapped to become child soldiers, forced to give violent
expression to the hatreds of adults.

Both the Secretary-General's report and my own
experiences bring home the reality: civilians are no longer
just victims of war, today they are regarded as instruments
of war. The starving, terrorizing, murdering and raping of
civilians - all are seen as legitimate. Sex is no defence,
nor is age. Indeed, it is women, children and the elderly
who are often at greatest risk. That is a strange, terrible
state of affairs in the year after we commemorated the
fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. It is not sufficient that we be appalled by the
brutality of today's armed conflicts. We must learn from
the analysis of the plight of civilians in armed conflicts and
seek ways to address the problem effectively.

Conflicts almost always lead to massive human rights
violations, but also erupt because human rights are violated
due to oppression, inequality, discrimination and poverty.
These conditions are exacerbated when the State is too
weak or unable to address them efficiently. Human rights
violations are thus both a consequence of and a contributing
factor to instability and further conflict. And as a result of
globalization and increasing interdependence between
States, conflicts which are essentially internal often have
spillover effects beyond national borders.

As so clearly underscored by the Secretary-General
in his report, there is an intrinsic link between systematic
and widespread violations of the rights of civilians and
the erosion of international peace and security. For
example, in Iraq and the former Yugoslavia the Security
Council has recognized that the repression of the civilian
population has led to consequences that threatened peace
and security in the region. Human security has become
synonymous with international security. Human security
can be guaranteed only through the full respect of all
fundamental rights. This intrinsic link demands the
attention and action of the Security Council in the field of
human rights protection and the prevention of massive
and gross violations.

The first need today is not that we write new laws,
but that we implement what already exists in the field,
close to the victims and where it really matters. To this
end I wish to express my support for those
recommendations in the report which call on States to
ratify all of the international instruments in the areas of
human rights, humanitarian and refugee law, to withdraw
reservations and, most importantly, to comply fully with
their provisions. Could we not also take the concrete step
of raising the minimum age for participation in hostilities
to 18 years?

A serious issue which must be addressed is
accountability. We are increasingly being faced with the
dilemma of having to stop atrocities being committed and
seeking avenues for the peaceful settlement of conflicts
on the one hand, While needing to hold accountable and
punish the perpetrators of human rights violations, on the
other. To grant amnesty to the authors of the most
atrocious crimes for the sake of peace and reconciliation
may be tempting, but it contradicts the purpose and
principles of the United Nations Charter, as well as
internationally observed principles and standards. For
these reasons, the recommendations in the Secretary
General's report on enforcing accountability for war
crimes and on measures to deter and contain those guilty
of egregious human rights violations are especially
important.

I wish to commend the Security Council for having
established the two ad hoc Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. I warmly welcome the adoption
of the Statute of the International Criminal Court,
providing jurisdiction over three core crimes of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. We must move
forward now and ensure that our collective support for the
establishment of an effective International Criminal Court

 

will, through the speedy ratification of its Statute, be a
significant milestone in the struggle to strengthen respect
for human rights and humanitarian and refugee law.

The best protection for civilians in armed conflict is
prevention. By addressing the root causes of conflict and
seeking to defuse tensions, the atrocities and violations of
fundamental rights committed during armed conflict can be
prevented. The major building blocks for peace-building
and reconciliation are good governance, the rule of law,
respect for human rights, a strong civil society and
institutions which can guarantee an environment conducive
to stability and peace.

The Security Council has a vital role to play, both at
the prevention stage and, should that fail, in the deployment
of peacekeepers to minimize the impact of conflict on
civilians.

After reading the Secretary-General's report and
hearing his presentation of it today, nobody could any
longer complain that they did not realize how bad the
situation facing civilians in today's armed conflicts was. It
should be our collective goal to implement the
recommendations of the report and so develop enforceable
mechanisms for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. This is the only way we will deliver on our
promises to guarantee a life of respect, dignity and human
rights for all.

