Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French):
Welcome, again, to New York. My country would like
to hail the determination and the sense of political
responsibility of the leadership of Papua New Guinea
and also the peace efforts made, especially by
Australia, New Zealand, Fiji, the Solomon Islands and
Vanuatu, who are giving substantial assistance in the
implementation of the ceasefire agreement and are
helping to assure political stability in Bougainville.

Considerable progress has been achieved in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement signed on 30
August 2001, and this should be welcomed. The Peace
Agreement constitutes indisputable success for the
people of Bougainville, as well as for Papua New
Guinea, which has clearly shown its good will in
settling the conflict in a peaceful and democratic
manner.

Bulgaria also welcomes the adoption of the
legislative acts for the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, especially the amendments to the
constitution and basic law regarding peace talks in
Bougainville. While we note with satisfaction the
progress achieved for the implementation of the
weapons disposal plan, my delegation is still concerned
over information given us by Sir Kieran regarding
some difficulties in the process, which is, however,
essential for organizing elections in order to set up an
autonomous Bougainville government. These are
important safeguards for the holding of a referendum
on the future of Bougainville.

Bulgaria supports the joint efforts of the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) and
the Peace Monitoring Group, as well as the efforts of
the parties to find clear-cut criteria for implementing
stage II of the weapons disposal plan.

Finally, Bulgaria welcomes the intention of the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of the office
for a one-year period. This will enable us to ensure the
implementation of stage II of the weapons disposal
plan, organize elections for an autonomous
Bougainville government, and complete the peace
process.

