Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'Ivoire would like to thank Ms. Amina
Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General, for her
briefing. Our thanks also go to Mr. Mohammed Bila,
representative of the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
and Ms. Chitra Nagarajan, Senior Conflict Adviser of
Adelphi, for their information and suggestions.

In putting the issue of the Lake Chad basin on
the agenda for today's meeting, the presidency has
encouraged the international community to consider
this complex and multidimensional crisis with the
aim of investigating its underlying and interdependent
causes, for which we thank you, Sir. The fact is that
beyond the security crisis in the region, there are several
other interrelated factors, such as socioeconomic
and environmentally related poverty, affecting the
populations living in the Lake Chad basin. In this
case, the problem is one of increasingly scarce natural
and economic resources, a lack of jobs and sources
of income, especially for young people, and issues of
governance and administrative decentralization. In
considering these factors as the main causes of the
crisis, the Security Council addressed the situation
comprehensively in resolution 2349 (2017). While
welcoming the efforts of the Governments concerned,
the Council has also urgedthem to effectively implement
programmes aimed at building and sustaining peace, as
well as tackling the root causes of the crisis.

My country believes that the key priorities are
ensuring equitable access for the people of the region
to resources and services, together with sustainable
economic growth. We therefore commend the Security
Council's determination to work to restore an atmosphere
of peace in the region with a view to enabling those
priorities to be implemented. The Secretary-General's
report contained in document S/2017/764 has given us
some insight into the actions being taken to deal with
the threat posed to the region by the terrorist group
Boko Haram in particular.

My delegation is pleased with the success of the
Multinational Joint Task Force's operations, despite the
fact that Boko Haram is still active and dangerous. In that
regard, we welcome the recommendations made at the
second meeting of the Joint Steering Committee of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission and the African Union,
held from 18 to 20 December of last year, particularly
concerning the importance of speeding up the process
for making additional support available through the
use of funds from international partners in order to
meet the urgent Joint Task Force's operational needs.
The humanitarian aspect of the crisis in the region also
remains worrying and will require the Governments of
the region and the international community to synergize
their efforts to provide assistance to the populations
in distress.

Cote d'Ivoire appreciates the Secretary-General's
determination and commitment to support the countries
ofthe region in their efforts to end the ongoing violence
and mitigate the people's suffering. We continue to
believe that only greater cooperation at the regional
and international levels will enable lasting solutions
to the crisis to be found while taking into account the
specifics of the individual countries concerned. In that
regard, my delegation backs the Secretary-General's
willingness to commit the United Nations and its
partners to advancing the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel in order to
comprehensively address the relevant security and
development issues, including in the Lake Chad basin.
It is also important to continue and strengthen the
coordination of the United Nations and African Union
efforts, as well as the cooperation between the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, in
order to address the challenges in the region of the Lake
Chad basin.

One ofthe biggest challenges in the region continues
to be the collective commitment to initiating genuinely
dynamic development in the area of the Lake Chad
basin. While that certainly means a greater commitment
to combating the terrorist groups, it also depends on
devising a strategy for finding a solution to the shrinking
of Lake Chad, the epicenter of every socioeconomic
activity for the peoples of the area. Considering the
drastic drop in the lake's depth and area, it will be
crucial to speed up the quest for innovative ways to
restore it. In that regard, we welcome the conclusions
and recommendations of the international conference
held in Abuja from 25 to 28 February on the theme of
saving Lake Chad to revitalize the basin's ecosystem
for sustainable livelihood, security and development.

In conclusion, cote d'Ivoire would like to affirm
its commitment, together with the other members of
the Council, to contributing to resolving the current
crisis in the Lake Chad basin, once again emphasizing
the importance of strengthening the coordination
mechanisms for the relevant subregional and regional
organizations in order to ensure that their joint actions
are effective.

