Mr. Blanchard (Canada): Allow me to say a few
words to commemorate the 14,000 Canadians who
stormed Juno Beach on 6 June 1944. Theyjoined British,
American and French allies in the massive D-Day
amphibious assault on the beaches of Normandy. Some
5,000 Canadians died during the Battle of Normandy.
I would like to quote from remarks made by the
Prime Minister of Canada, Mr. Justin Trudeau, today,
speaking about the young people who disembarked on
Juno Beach:

"They served under different flags but fought for
one cause. They stood up to tyranny and stood for
freedom and laid down their lives in defence of
human rights and democracy."

(spoke in French)

I wish to thank Kuwait for holding this open debate
and for its leadership in improving the working methods
of the Council. I would also like to thank Ms. Landgren
and Mr. Cockayne for their informative briefings.

Today's debate is a welcome opportunity to
reflect on the functioning of an organ entrusted by
the membership of the United Nations to maintain
international peace and security. For this reason,
Canada welcomes the joint statement by the elected
10 members (E-lO) of the Security Council and aligns
itself with its content.

We often think of the Security Council as rigid. In
reality, the Charter of the United Nations affords it the
flexibility it needs to evolve and adapt as required. By
refining its working methods, we continue the work of
translating a paper document into a living institution.

Canada is firmly of the view that the Council
can and must evolve to be more responsive, effective
and transparent. Indeed, since the establishment of
the United Nations, the number of Member States
has grown by 278 per cent. Over the past 20 years,
the number of subsidiary bodies of the Council has
increased threefold. At the same time, new information
and communications technologies have increased
both the ability and the expectations of transparency
in international institutions. And as the countries
represented around this table are aware, geopolitical
realities have shifted significantly since the founding
of the United Nations, with a legitimate expectation
from elected members for meaningful involvement in
the work of the Council.

(spoke in English)

There is much left to be done to make the Security
Council more democratic, inclusive, representative
and efficient. Fundamentally, by improving the
working methods of the Security Council, we are also
strengthening the multilateral institutions that underpin
the rules-based international order.

As a starting point, the Council's working methods
should empower elected members to be fully involved
in collective decision-making. Elected members bestow
legitimacy on the Security Council while injecting a
diversity of ideas and perspectives. Over the years, they

have been motors of innovation in this Chamber. But in
order to reap the benefits of diversity, incoming elected
members need access to information and the ability to
act on such information. They should therefore be privy
to documents and consultations of the Security Council
as soon as possible after they are elected.

Canada salutes the efforts undertaken by the
current E-10 to work in a more integrated manner.
This is not about pitting the E-10 against the five
permanent members. It is about trying to make the
Security Council more effective for all. Fair and clear
procedures and respect for due process should therefore
guide the implementation of Security Council sanction
regimes, and we support the role of the Ombudsperson
in this regard.

Like most Member States, Canada believes that
prevention and peacebuilding are important pillars of
maintaining peace and security. To play its role and be
more effective, the Council needs to continue to open
itself to in-depth discussions around the root causes of
conflict. Such discussions will better inform mandates
authorized by the Council. The Council has started
to do just that with climate change. If Canada were
elected to the Security Council, it would enhance that
practice and include more in-depth consideration of
economic security to ensure that mission mandates are
more effective.

For example, it is just wrong that economic security
is not further considered in the current development
of the mandate for the special political mission to be
adopted for Haiti. Failure to do so may lead the Council
to adopt a mandate that does not address the root cause
of insecurity in Haiti. The Security Council could do
more with regard to conflict prevention, for example,
through regular horizon-scan briefings from the
Secretariat and more frequent briefings from the heads
of United Nations regional political offices or other
regional organizations, such as the African Union.

Furthermore, the Council could do more to
institutionalize linkages with the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). We welcome the practice of
holding informal interactive dialogues with the PBC
and the Council on countries and regions such as the
Sahel, where both bodies have important roles to play.
The Council could also consider inviting the Chair
of the PBC or the Chairs of country-specific PBC
configurations to join Council missions to countries
where both bodies are engaged.

Canada recognizes the need for a division oflabour,
but disagrees about silos, which make multilateralism
not as effective as it should be, to say the least. The
Council ought to build on the ongoing United Nations
reform and lead by example in breaking the silos.

In addition, Canada supports the calls of elected
members of the Council for more consultation,
transparency and burden-sharing in the distribution of
chairmanships of its subsidiary bodies. Similarly, the
Council should drop the informal penholder system,
by which certain members exercise an unspoken
monopoly in drafting resolutions, often with little or
no consultation or meaningful input from the elected
members or relevant committee chairs. That practice is
undemocratic and has no basis in the Charter.

We know that transparency generally improves
the quality of governance and decision-making. The
Council should consider a standing referral to the
PBC of countries undergoing United Nations mission
transitions so as to ensure that adequate attention is
paid to addressing root causes of conflict and longer-
term risks to peace in order to avoid relapses and the
need for a return of peacekeepers. Limitations on the
use and threat of use of the veto needs to be a crucial
element of the Security Council's evolution. Canada
calls on all that have yet to do so to join the French-
Mexican initiative and the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity or war crimes.

Above and beyond the incremental recommendations
contained in note 507 (S/2017/507), Canada believes
that far more needs to be done to make the Security
Council gender responsive. Through resolutions and
statements, members of the Security Council have
stressed the importance of women's equal participation
and full involvement in all efforts for the maintenance
and promotion of peace and security.

We commend efforts to increase the number of
women civil society briefers speaking to the Security
Council on both geographic and thematic agenda items.
Their perspectives need to be heard in the Chamber.
We also commend efforts led by Kuwait to increase the
use of gender-neutral pronouns and other such language
in United Nations documentation. The creation of a
Security Council informal experts group on women and
peace and security was a major step in the right direction.
It should be fully leveraged, with the participation of all
Council members, to enhance gender perspectives in
debates, resolutions and mission mandates.

When the Security Council undertakes field
visits, it should meet with local women's civil society
groups. Ideally, that should be included in the terms
of reference of the visits themselves. If elected to the
Security Council for 2021-2022, Canada will seek to
ensure that multilateralism works for everyone. It is
really important.

