Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me, at the outset,
extend my thanks to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his great
leadership at the helm of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for all his
efforts in support of the Afghan people, and to his team.

Germany will continue to support Afghanistan in
close partnership throughout the transformation decade.
At the Bonn and Tokyo Conferences, Afghanistan and
the international community set the framework for
cooperation and reaffirmed their mutual commitments.
We are therefore pleased to see that the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework has gained considerable
momentum, and we commit ourselves to further work
towards implementing it. Today, I would like to focus
on two issues that are key in that regard.

The first issue is elections. We welcome the
progress achieved by the Government of Afghanistan
in preparing for the presidential elections to be held in
April 2014. Yet challenges remain. We look forward to
the swift adoption of a legal framework for the elections,
as well as to the timely appointment of a new chairman
and commissioners for the Independent Election
Commission. We emphasize the need to establish a
credible complaints mechanism and to put in place
effective measures to prevent widespread electoral
fraud. Finally, and most important, we encourage
all Afghan stakeholders to engage in a constructive
dialogue on these issues so as to find the broadest
possible consensus.

UNAMA can assume a beneficial role in supporting
the Afghan-led and -owned process. We therefore
welcome the decision taken by the Afghan authorities to
request UNAMA's support for the 2014-2015 elections
and the subsequent United Nations electoral needs
assessment mission that was undertaken in December
and January. Germany stands ready to further support
that process alongside UNAMA and its international
partners. Our shared objective is to hold inclusive,
transparent and credible elections in Afghanistan that
will contribute to the sustainable development of the
country's political system and be firmly founded in the
Afghan Constitution.

Secondly, a stable security environment is of
paramount importance in achieving Afghanistan's
goal of further developing into a democratic and
economically thriving country. We therefore welcome
recent developments in the Afghan-led reconciliation
process. That includes efforts by Afghanistan and
the international community to establish conditions
conducive to substantive dialogue, such as preparations
for the opening of a Taliban office in Doha. In that
regard, we also appreciate the contribution of regional
actors. Their support is critical to fostering the peace
and reconciliation process. We encourage all sides to
strengthen their efforts.

I would like to conclude by underlining that the
United Nations will continue to play a crucial role,
both in the year to come and during the transformation
decade. We therefore welcome the Council's adoption
of resolution 2096 (2013), which renews UNAMA's
mandate for another 12 months. Germany will
continue to support UNAMA in fulfilling its mandate,
particularly in its support for the Afghan Government
and in preparing for the presidential elections, in
protecting and promoting human rights, particularly
women's rights, and in ensuring effective coordination
among donors and the Government of Afghanistan. In
order for UNAMA to live up to those expectations, we
strongly support providing adequate resources for the
Mission and its appropriate presence throughout the
country.

Finally, we look forward to engaging in constructive
dialogue during the next month on UNAMA's role after
2014.

