Mr. Insulza (spoke in Spanish): I am grateful for
this opportunity to address the Security Council on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations for the maintenance of peace and
security.

I should say first that the Organization of
American States (OAS) shares and fully supports the
Secretary-General's initiative for a regional and global
strategic partnership in this area. It cannot be any other
way, given that the OAS is an organization with
political purposes, composed of 35 States that are
Members of the United Nations. As a result, the ideas,
challenges and opportunities that often confront us are
similar, principally in the development and solution of
crisis situations and in governance and development.
Therefore, on the basis of Security Council
resolution 1631 (2005), which affirmed the need for
important steps to develop cooperation between our
organizations, we have been participating actively in
the standing committee as well as in other activities in
that area. We share the idea, mentioned here on several
occasions, regarding the need to move from a simple
policy of consultation to a much clearer regulation of
operational activities between us. We hope to be able to
contribute to that with our efforts and also with our
specific experiences, especially experience over the
last year with respect to our work in conjunction with
the United Nations.

The most relevant of those experiences certainly
has been our cooperation with the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), through
the special OAS mission in that country, in restoring
the democratic system. We jointly assumed the task of
cooperating with the provisional Government of Haiti
in carrying out democratic elections. We had a very
suitable distribution of work. With the Government, the
OAS developed an electoral register with 3.5 million
voters. With the logistical support of MINUSTAH and
the United Nations, we conducted the most democratic
and participatory elections that have ever taken place
in the history of that country.

With respect to cooperation between our regional
organization and the United Nations, I believe our
experience in Haiti makes it possible for us to confront
the challenges we still have in that country - which is
in the process of transition - to continue to support
together the Government of Rene' Preval in the full
democratization and national reconstruction and
peacemaking in the country, and to share experiences
to promote future cooperation with institutions. That
cooperation has made it possible for the forces of
several countries that are members of the OAS and of
the United Nations to participate in MINUSTAH. Latin
Americans have thus clearly begun a much greater
involvement in the resolution of their own conflicts. In
our opinion, that should be the new form of
cooperation among us in the future.

I believe our other experiences have also been
positive, such as the dialogue we have had in other
crises in the region - in Ecuador, and in Bolivia. We
have shown that we can dialogue and work together.
However, experience has also shown that we should
have had prior consultations, before a parallel
involvement in those countries, which are members of
our organization. We believe that it is much better that
we prevent crises together, that we dialogue together,
that we have common policies, and then we carry out,
as in Haiti, a proper division of functions and
competencies so that our action will be as effective as
possible.

I believe we have experience in this area. For
example, we have cooperated significantly with the
organizations of the system, such as with the
International Labour Organization in preparing the
most recent summit in the Argentine Republic, in Mar
del Plata. We worked together in electoral observations
missions; we have ongoing cooperation with the
Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean, which for all practical purposes is also part
of the inter-American system as well as of the United
Nations. The Human Development Reports of the
United Nations Development Programme have also
been a fundamental instrument, alongside policies of
our countries, which the OAS has also sponsored.

We have to be able to coordinate all this in future,
as we said here, pragmatically and flexibly but also in
a more stable fashion. We have to find ways to
institutionalize our cooperation - not through bodies,
not through establishing new institutions, but with
permanent norms that would show us, in the case of
each institution, in which areas we can carry out clear
and effective cooperation. We believe regional
organizations can provide better commitment and a
clearer vision, greater political and cultural knowledge,
in conflicts taking place within their geographic area.
That cooperation will enable United Nations action to
be more effective in defending peace and security.

