Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on convening this important debate. I thank
the Secretary-General for his remarks, and I am also
grateful to Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy and to
Mr. Anthony Lake for their presentations today and for
their invaluable work on this important issue.

Shielding children from the horrors of conflict is
an important dimension of the Council's efforts to
protect civilians, to break the cycle of conflict and to
establish sustainable peace. We welcome resolution
1998 (2011), adopted today, and its focus on
addressing attacks against schools and hospitals.
Education and health are basic human rights and
building blocks of peaceful societies. To attack them is
to attack the very notion of human dignity.

The Council has developed an important body of
norms on children and armed conflict that constitute
useful tools to protect civilians. They have led to
progress in curbing grave violations against children.
Nevertheless, much remains to be done to make our
work both more efficient and more effective. We
commend the German chairmanship of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and support a
continued reflection on how to better use the tools at
the Group's disposal to protect children.

When dealing with situations of armed conflict,
respect for international humanitarian law must be our
core concern. It is neither necessary nor desirable for
the Council to create a new set of norms to discipline
the actions of parties in conflict. In cases where
international humanitarian law is being violated, the
Council may decide that a more direct involvement is
necessary to protect the most vulnerable.

International humanitarian law is clear in regard
to attacks on schools and hospitals. Teachers, students,
patients and medical personnel are civilians and
therefore protected persons under international
humanitarian law. The Council has time and again
reiterated the responsibility of all parties to conflict to
protect civilians. We must avoid selectivity and be
consistent in our demands for strict observance of
international humanitarian law.

In cases outside the purview of the Council,
where there is no armed conflict, Member States
should support national and international mechanisms
to promote children's rights. Where, in turn, there is an
armed conflict, the Council's efforts to protect children
must be closely linked to its broader goal to maintain
international peace and security. The signing of action
plans and the release of child soldiers are very
important achievements, but our ultimate goal must be
to end the conflicts that have given rise to such
violations.

Sustainable peace is the best guarantee of lasting
protection. Brazil will continue to firmly support the
Council's efforts both to ensure the protection of
children in armed conflict and to help lay the
foundations of long-term peace.

