Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank you, Sir, for having organized this meeting on a
subject of extreme importance.

Allow me also to thank Mr. Kenzo Oshima for his
briefing, which once again has stressed the need to
protect civilians in armed conflict. At a time when he is
preparing to leave his post at the head of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, I should like
to express to him and to all his colleagues the deepest
appreciation of my delegation for their work.

In the report that he submitted to our Council at
the public meeting of 10 December 2002, the
Secretary-General outlined key measures to be
undertaken, including ensuring access of vulnerable
populations to humanitarian services, the separation of
civilians from armed elements, the restoration of the
rule of law and the promotion of national
reconciliation. He also emphasized the dangers posed
by sexual violence, the exploitation of conflicts for
commercial purposes and the rise of terrorism in armed
conflict.
In this regard, I am pleased to reiterate my
delegation's proposal regarding the establishment of a
multidisciplinary group to conduct a comprehensive
study of all the recommendations and proposals so as
to integrate them into a more functional and
homogeneous framework. It is clear, however, that this
can be accomplished only over time and in a
coordinated framework.

We welcome the initiatives taken by the United
Nations, together with a series of partners -
particularly those involved in the humanitarian field -
in order to prevent complex emergency situations
whose main victims are vulnerable persons. The
regional workshops organized by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs have contributed
to a broader dissemination of such initiatives. We
welcome the holding of the Accra workshop on 19, 20
and 21 May 2003. My delegation hopes that its
conclusions will make it possible to strengthen
provisions taken by the States of South-West Africa
that are facing chronic instability.

The efforts of the United Nations have made it
possible to establish a frame of reference for rules on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. My
delegation wishes to express its deep concern over the
many dangers, including murder, to which
humanitarian workers are exposed in conflict or post-
conflict situations and which jeopardize or hinder the
pursuit of their activities, to the detriment of millions
of human beings in urgent need of aid or assistance.
My delegation condemns such acts and wants to see
their perpetrators prosecuted and punished, along with
egregious violators of human rights.

In conclusion, the recommendations contained in
the various reports of the Secretary-General, the aide-
memoire and road map are valuable reference points
for the protection of civilians in armed conflict. It is
simply up to us to put them to good use with resolve
and in a constructive spirit.

