Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Omaar to the
Council and to thank him for his comments. My
Government congratulates him and other members of
the unity Government and assures them of our
cooperation and support. I would also like to welcome
Special Representative Ould Abdallah and to thank him
for his briefing today.

Recent events present an opportunity to make real
progress in Somalia. We welcome the election of
President Sharif and the unity Government's move to
Mogadishu. We must support the Somali people so that
they can take advantage of this opening.

We remain encouraged by the political progress
made under the Djibouti agreement. My Government
strongly supports President Sharif's efforts to
encourage parties that are still outside the Djibouti
process to join him in order to rebuild their troubled
country.

In that spirit, we urge all groups that have yet to
lay down their arms and join the peace and
reconciliation process to do so. Unfortunately, the
terrorist organization Al-Shabaab has failed to join that
process, vowing instead not only to target the new
Government but also to continue its campaign against
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
humanitarian non-governmental organizations.

At the same time, Eritrea continues to provide
financial, logistical and political backing to
Al-Shabaab and other extremists and has issued a
formal statement rejecting the new Somali
Government. We condemn those actions by Al-Shabaab
and Eritrea. They serve only to prolong the conflict in
Somalia and cannot be tolerated.

We highly commend the brave troops from
Burundi and Uganda serving in AMISOM, who
continue to operate under difficult conditions. They are
doing crucial work in securing key infrastructure and
allowing for the delivery of humanitarian aid, and they
deserve our support. The United States, for its part, has
provided logistical assistance to AMISOM. totalling
more than $100 million since 2007. We urge African
Union member States that have pledged to provide
troops to AMISOM. to arrange to deploy them soon,
and we strongly urge United Nations Member States to
support AMISOM. Of course, Somalia must begin to
provide for its own security, and we should consider
ways to assist in the development of a Somali security
sector.

The Council has made significant efforts to
address the problem of piracy off the Somali coast. The
United States is encouraged by the international
community's response. On any given day, ships from
15 to 20 different countries are now patrolling those
waters. My Government also believes that the Contact
Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia is proving to
be an effective coordinating mechanism, and we look
forward to the third meeting of that Group. We also
commend the Government of Kenya for offering to

prosecute suspected pirates captured by the
international community. We urge all States -
especially those directly harmed by piracy - to help
the Kenyan Government manage the logistical and
financial challenges of prosecuting suspected pirates.
That is a burden that should not fall upon the shoulders
of Kenya and its neighbours alone.

Finally, let me thank the staff of the United
Nations agencies and aid groups that have provided
needed assistance to the Somali people under very
difficult and dangerous circumstances. We strongly
condemn those who impede the delivery of needed
assistance through attacks against aid workers and
AMISOM. troops.

Progress in Somalia will not come easily. The
Secretary-General's upcoming donors conference
presents us with an opportunity to support the Somalis
during this critical period. Let us take advantage of it.

