Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First all, I
would like to welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Belgium, who we have just heard
and whose commitment to peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should be emphasized.

On behalf of my delegation, I would also like to
thank all the members of the Security Council for
having assisted us in the drafting of this resolution on
the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). I think it is vital for us to learn lessons
from the events of the past few months and for the
Security Council to send clear messages to everyone
involved.
3
First of all, the resolution sends a message to
MONUC. After resolution 1843 (2008), which allowed
for 3,000 extra personnel upon the request of the
Secretariat, this resolution shows once again our
unanimous support for MONUC. The correct
implementation by MONUC of the tasks assigned to it
and its upholding of the interests of all the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo should not meet
any opposition.

This resolution establishes an order of priority for
these missions, with the protection of civilians as the
first priority. It also gives MONUC the mandate to
support the Goma and Nairobi processes by undertaking
all necessary operations against the armed groups that
are trying to jeopardize the political process. We
wanted MONUC to have at their disposal every means
necessary to take action. We asked for a timely update
of its concept of operations and of its rules of
engagement - which we hope will be robust - and for
a strategic work plan to be drafted in line with the
concrete implementation, on the ground, of the
missions described in the mandate.

The resolution also sends a clear message to the
armed groups. It is very clear in condemning violence
by all armed groups, whether the Congres national
pour la defense du people (CNDP), the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) or the
Coalition of Congolese Patriotic Resistance. It also
highlights the pressing need for these parties to return
to the commitments they made in Goma and Nairobi,
commitments they have undertaken but are not
complying with.

That is why we support the efforts made by the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on the Great
Lakes region, President Obasanjo. We know that the
negotiations he has supervised Nairobi between the
CNDP and the Congolese Government are delicate.
Therefore we would like to pledge our support in
following up on this mission.

This resolution, like the draft resolution on
sanctions that we will adopt, I hope, in a few moments,
also sends a message to the armed groups that the
international community intends to fight the illicit
exploitation of natural resources, as we know that it
fuels and prolongs conflict.

The resolution also sends a message to the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and countries in the region. MONUC is in the
Democratic Republic to help the Congolese
Government to provide security in the Kivus, to disarm
rebel groups and to train the Congolese army, but also
to prepare for elections and to promote good
governance, respect for human rights and democracy.

I would like to ensure the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
whose presence we welcome, that he will have the full
support of France on this path. But MONUC, at the
same time, must not be considered as a substitute for
the Congolese authorities and army in the eastern part
of the country. The Congolese authorities were elected
through a democratic process. We support them and we
believe that maintaining order and security throughout
the country is first and foremost up to them, even if the
international community and MONUC must, of course,
help them to do so.

The resolution emphasizes the responsibility of
States in the region as well. They must cooperate with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in order to work for a return of lasting peace
and security throughout the country. We are also
pleased with the strengthening of bilateral dialogue
between Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We believe that that is one of the keys to peace
and stability in the region.

Finally, the resolution sends a message to the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
people in the Kivus have suffered a great deal already
and must know that they can count on MONUC to
protect them. But everyone must also be aware that
MONUC cannot do everything. MONUC can only be
part of larger efforts, which must include an effective
sanctions regime and must combat impunity. In this
regard, we hope in particular that the International
Criminal Court and the Congolese Government will
continue to cooperate closely, that those who
committed these crimes will be brought before the
appropriate court and, above all, that justice can be
carried out in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
by Congolese judges.

This resolution clearly reaffirms the Council's
condemnation of the atrocities committed in the past
few months. War crimes such as those committed in
Kiwanja, large-scale sexual violence, the recruitment
of children by armed groups, mutilations and the
displacement of hundreds of thousands of people are
great tragedies and must not occur again. The
perpetrators must know that they will be held
accountable. To ensure justice will help bring about
lasting peace. A few days ago the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court reminded us, with regard
to another country, that victims are not afraid of
justice. We will shoulder our responsibilities. We owe
as much to these victims.

