Mr. Owada (Japan): Let me begin this brief statement
of the delegation of Japan by associating myself with the
statement made earlier by the representative of Argentina.
In addition, I should like to offer some further observations
of my delegation on several points which are of particular
importance to Japan.

First of all, I wish to emphasize the significance of the
fact that the Security Council is now itself engaged in the
process of improving its own working methods. The
problem of improving the working methods of the Security
Council is a subject which the General Assembly has been
discussing for a number of years from the standpoint of
how to increase the transparency of the work of the
Security Council and thus enhance its legitimacy. My
delegation has participated actively in those discussions, as
we regard the subject to be one of legitimate concern to all
Members of the United Nations. Naturally, it should be
acknowledged that the Security Council, in the final
analysis, is the master of its own procedures. For this
reason, the fact that the Security Council itself has been
engaged in this exercise is all the more important in the
context of the overall process of Security Council reform
and the reform of the United Nations as a whole.

Japan has always maintained that, in the field of
peace-keeping operations, consultations are essential
between the Security Council and countries contributing to
these operations. This idea was finally put into practice
with the statement by the President of the Council of
4 November last year. While Japan welcomed this
development, it has continued to believe that greater
efforts should be made to further improve the process and
mechanism of these consultations in a number of ways.

First, the countries contributing to the actual
operations - whether their contributions are in terms of
military and other personnel, financial and logistical
support, or assistance in any other area - have a
legitimate interest in being part of the Security Council's
decision-making process on these matters, through such
consultations. The importance of such involvement of
these contributing countries in the decision-making
process becomes clear when one considers that some of
the United Nations peace-keeping activities since the end
of the cold war have been more successful than others
and that in each case the countries contributing to the
operations will have to accept part of the responsibility
for such success or failure.

Secondly, the more recent experiences of United
Nations peace-keeping activities in the post-cold-war era
have ranged from such comprehensive and multifaceted
operations as those in El Salvador and Cambodia to such
complex operations involving elements of peace
enforcement as those in Somalia and the former
Yugoslavia. And the crisis in Rwanda has further
underlined the need for an improved rapid-reaction
capability. If contributing countries are expected to meet
the needs of such different types of action, full
consultations will surely be in order so that contributing
countries can assess the situation and decide whether or
not to accept the responsibility for any particular type of
action.

Finally - but not least important - Japan believes
that such consultations between the Security Council and
the contributing countries are essential in order to give the
decisions of the Security Council the maximum degree of
credibility and acceptability and thus enhance the
effectiveness and viability of the Council's action.

While Japan does not insist on the creation of a
subsidiary organ for this purpose under Article 29 of the
Charter, it believes that a further institutionalization of the
consultation mechanism, along the lines described in the
statement made by the representative of Argentina, would
be highly desirable. Japan is in favour of such an
institutionalization of the elements and measures, as
proposed by the representative of Argentina in his
statement, in the form of a resolution of the Council. This
could include measures relating to adequate prior notice
and information, periodicity, and reports to the Council on

 

the views expressed by the contributing countries in the
course of such consultations.
Japan also attaches great importance to the current
practice whereby the concept of "troop-contributing
countries" includes countries making various contributions
of a substantive nature, including but not limited to the
contribution of troops. In this connection, Japan endorses
the present system by which the Security Council invites to
the consultation process those Member States which
contribute to peace-keeping operations through various
means other than troops, such as logistical support, supply
of equipment or specific financial contributions to the
relevant trust fund. In fact, Japan's own experience in the
field of peace-keeping operations in recent years has varied
so greatly, ranging from the contribution of troops to the
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia and to
the United Nations Operation in Mozambique, as well as
our recent decision to provide personnel to the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force, to voluntary
financial contributions for many other operations. In all
these cases, the participation of Japan in the consultation
process in diverse capacities has been most helpful in
enabling us to determine at first hand how our contributions
to these operations can be most useful. My delegation
hopes strongly that this practice will be included among the
points to be institutionalized in the form of a resolution.

My delegation also wishes to suggest that the countries
contributing to peace-keeping operations could, for their
part, improve the ways in which they participate in these
consultations. They could, for example, exchange ideas
among themselves beforehand, with a view to preparing
themselves for the consultations. This would be possible,
however, only if ample advance notice were given of the
forthcoming consultative meetings.

Japan is confident that the Security Council will
continue to make constructive efforts to meet the legitimate
interests of countries contributing to peace-keeping
operations, with a view to enhancing the effectiveness of its
decision-making and improving the process of
implementation of its decisions.

I should like to conclude my brief intervention by
expressing my gratitude to the delegation of Argentina for
taking the important initiative of having this meeting
convened. Japan looks forward to working closely with
like-minded countries and with the members of the Council
towards our common goal of creating a Security Council
that can be more effective.

