Mr. Cameron (United Kingdom): The conflict in
Iraq and Syria is shocking the world with its barbarity.
The cruelty that is being meted out - beheadings,
eyes being gouged out, rape - is horrific. It is literally
medieval in its character. The appalling murder of the
French citizen Herve Gourdel is the latest horror. The
French President and people have our fullest sympathy.
But one of the most disturbing aspects is how this
conflict is sucking in our own young people from
modern, prosperous societies, and the threat to our
security from foreign fighters is far greater today than
it has ever been in previous conflicts.

I pay tribute to President Obama for his personal
leadership on this critical issue. It is one that affects us
all. The overall figures have been given, but let me say
that from my own country, 500 of those fanatics have
gone to Syria and Iraq. The shocking murders of James
Foley, Stephen Sotloff and David Haines by a fighter
with an apparent British accent underlines the sinister
and direct nature of the threat. The British people are
sickened that a British citizen could be involved in
murdering people in this way, including a fellow British
citizen who had gone to Syria to help people. It is the
very opposite of what our peaceful and tolerant country
stands for. We therefore need a response that involves
every part of the Government and society and every
country involved in the broadest possible international
coalition.

There are no easy answers or quick fixes, and I
believe that we will be dealing with the effects of this
threat for years, because, as has been said, this is not
just about the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). It is about Al-Shabaab. It is about Boko Haram.
It is about Al-Qaida. Everywhere there is conflict and
everywhere there is poor governance, the poisonous
narrative of Islamist extremism has taken hold.

However, I believe there are three things we can do.
First, we must reinforce our counter-terrorist
efforts to prevent attacks and hunt down those who are
planning them. For our part, in the United Kingdom, we
are introducing new powers to strengthen our ability
to seize passports and stop suspects from travelling; to
allow us temporarily to prevent some British nationals
from getting back into the country; to ensure that
airlines comply with our no-fly lists and security
screening arrangements; and to enable our police
and security services to apply for stronger location
constraints on those remaining in the United Kingdom
but who pose a risk.

Secondly, and I believe crucially, we must defeat
the poisonous ideology of extremism that is the root
cause of this terrorist threat. Yes, there are the websites
and the preachers of violence and violent extremism,
and of course those must be taken down. However, as
the evidence emerges about the backgrounds of those
convicted of terrorist offences, it is clear that many of
them were initially influenced by preachers who claim
not to encourage violence, but whose world view can be
used as a justification for it.

We know what this world view is: the peddling
of lies that the attacks of 11 September were a Jewish
plot or the 7 July London attacks were staged; the idea
that Muslims are persecuted all over the world as a
deliberate act of Western policy; and the concept of an
inevitable clash of civilizations. We must be clear that
to defeat the ideology of extremism, we need to deal
with all forms of extremism, not just violent extremism.
That means banning preachers of hate from coming to
our countries. It means proscribing organizations that
incite terrorism against people at home and abroad.
It means stopping extremists, whether violent or
non-violent, from inciting hatred and intolerance in
our schools, in our universities and even sometimes
in our prisons. In other words, it means firm, decisive
action to protect and uphold the values of our free and
democratic societies.

As has been said, we need to provide an alternative
narrative, particularly for these young people. I was
particularly struck by what the Secretary-General
said: that missiles can kill terrorists but governance
can kill terrorism. We have to say again and again that
this has nothing to do with the religion of Islam, which
is a religion of peace. We need Muslim country after
Muslim country and Muslim leader after Muslim leader
to speak out, as the King of Jordan did so clearly today,
condemning the people who say they speak in the name
of Islam when they do no such thing.

Thirdly and finally, in addition to the action we
each take individually in our own countries, we must
do much more, working together, to defeat this threat.
The defeat of ISIL will only come about if we use all
of the weapons at our disposal. Yes, we should impose
sanctions against ISIL and Jabhat al-Nusra, and I
believe we should do more, but we must use our aid to
feed and help the afflicted. We must use our diplomacy
and political settlements to strengthen the countries of
the region. We need Governments that represent all of
their people and, yes, deal with their grievances.

The United Kingdom is committed to meeting this
challenge. Only a coherent, coordinated response can
tackle what is truly a global and indiscriminate threat.
It is one part of a comprehensive strategy we have to
dismantle and destroy ISIL. Our strategy must work
in tandem with Arab States, always in support of local
people, in line with our legal obligations and as part of
a plan that involves our aid, our diplomacy and, yes, our
military. We need to act, and we need to act now.

