Miss Durrant (Jamaica): First of all, let me join
previous speakers in thanking you for presiding over
today's open briefing on the situation in Rwanda. My
delegation wishes to commend Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for his historic initiative in setting up an
independent inquiry to investigate the actions of the
United Nations during the genocide in Rwanda in 1994.
We also wish to express appreciation to Prime Minister
Carlsson and the other members of the Commission for
the thoroughness with which they discharged their
mandate. Their analysis and conclusions in the report
presented today by Mr. Carlsson are even more sobering
as they point to one inescapable conclusion. The terrible
events which occurred in Rwanda in 1994 were almost
certainly preventable.

In this process of introspection, we are not seeking
to attribute blame, but to understand the confluence of
events and systemic deficiencies that allowed the
genocide to take place unchecked, as we seek solutions
which could prevent similar atrocities from occurring ever
again.

As this debate is taking place in the Security
Council, the focus must be on how this body can develop
preventive measures that may be employed in the
prevention of conflicts. The Security Council must assert
its political will to strengthen its conflict prevention
capabilities. We must become proactive and not wait until
a great number of persons has died before we take action.
Understandably, many of the causes of conflict -
social, economic, developmental and political - must be
addressed by the international community as a whole.
However, it remains the responsibility of this Council to
prevent breaches of the peace. We cannot abdicate this
responsibility. With crises such as those which occurred
in Rwanda and in the Balkans, and which are occurring
in many parts of Africa today, the credibility of the
Security Council is constantly being questioned. We
therefore support the recommendations of the Carlsson
commission and will work with members of the Security
Council as we seek to move beyond acceptance of
recommendations to action. To do otherwise would mean

 

that 800,000 Rwandan men, women and children would
certainly have died in vain.

The Carlsson report makes several facts clear. The
slaughter of some 800,000 persons over a period of about
100 days, without the use of weapons of mass destruction,
was certainly unprecedented in human history. The Tutsi
population of Rwanda was savagely and brutally subjected
to genocide. Many reasons have been proffered for the
failure of the international community, the United Nations
system and the Security Council in particular to act
decisively to prevent one of the major tragedies of the
twentieth century. This has been summarized as a persistent
lack of political will by Member States to act or to act with
enough assertiveness. Perhaps a major failure was the
inability to recognize or acknowledge the tell-tale signs of
impending catastrophe or to plan an effective response.

My delegation believes that extreme diligence must in
future be exercised during the critical planning stages of
peacekeeping missions. I therefore wish to address my
remarks to one of the recommendations in the report which
aims at improving the capacity of the United Nations to
conduct peacekeeping operations.

From its inception, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) was hindered by a poorly
conceived mandate, the lack of the necessary resources to
carry out that mandate and the lack of political will on the
part of the Security Council to take critical decisions at a
time when the forces on the ground could ill afford undue
delays. We wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute to
the peacekeepers and the humanitarian personnel who
sought to serve the cause of peace, even while the
international community turned a blind eye.

My delegation wishes to point out two critical factors
which must be built into future missions. First,
peacekeeping missions need to be designed with allowances
for rapidly changing circumstances. At the very minimum,
it must be possible to have reinforcements deployed quickly
to augment forces when it becomes clear that the situation
on the ground warrants a reassessment of the mission. The
practice of deploying the minimum number of troops on the
basis of either political or financial expediency takes no
account of the many variables that troops may be presented
with once in the field. We cannot continue to send troops
without the necessary room to manoeuvre when faced with
unforeseen circumstances.

Secondly, the mandates for peacekeeping operations
must reflect the realities on the ground and must be
matched by the political will and the material means to
implement those mandates. Mandates must also be
formulated in close collaboration with all the parties
involved in the conflict. While only the Security Council
can legitimately authorize troop deployment and
determine mandates, a mechanism must be designed to
allow force commanders the necessary flexibility to
determine their best course of action and be able to
rapidly communicate their decisions to the Security
Council. In this connection, we note the recommendations
of the commission on the protection of civilians. This
must be addressed in all future peacekeeping mandates.

Also, once troops are deployed, they must be under
the command of one central authority. States should not
unilaterally withdraw their contingents without reference
to that central authority.

My delegation also endorses the commission's
recommendation that the Secretary-General and the
Member States use the opportunity provided by the
Millennium Summit and Assembly to mobilize the
political will to clearly address challenges facing United
Nations peacekeeping. In this context, we look forward to
the report of the Brahimi committee.

The Security Council, after the fact, took action to
bring the perpetrators of the Rwanda genocide to justice
by establishing the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda. But we must not stop there. The Security
Council, the United Nations system and, indeed, the
international community as a whole have a moral
obligation to ensure that we do, in fact, have the will to
prevent another genocide from ever occurring. Perhaps
today marks the first step. Rwanda will continue to need
the assistance of the international community as it seeks
to rebuild the economic, social and political bases of its
society and to seek national reconciliation.

Let us not fail them a second time.

