The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Dieye for his briefing and for his review of the philosophical ideas of Lao Tzu. The Council has before it the text of a statement by the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of today's meeting. I thank the Council members for their valuable contributions to the statement. In accordance with the understanding reached among the members of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the Security Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as a document of the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2020/5. I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of China. China thanks the briefers, namely, Under- Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, speaking on behalf of Secretary-General Ant6nio Guterres; Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed, speaking on behalf of Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union Commission; and Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye, Assistant-Secretary-General and Special Adviser to the United Nations Development Programme Administrator, speaking on behalf of the Administrator. Terrorism is the common enemy of all peoples of the world. At present, the context of the international counter-terrorism effort is complex and challenging. The threat of terrorism is such that no country is immune or untouched by it. What affects one country affects all. As a continent blessed with the greatest development potential, Africa has been deeply troubled by terrorism and violent extremism in recent years. While old problems persist, new threats have been emerging. Africa is increasingly becoming the front line in the global response to terrorism. Terrorist organizations, taking advantage of the instabilities in some parts of Africa, have been infiltrating and spreading across the continent, disrupting regional stability and socioeconomic development and undermining world peace and security at large. It behoves the international community to take swift, effective and coordinated actions to help put African countries in a better position to address terrorist threats with greater capabilities, resources and means in order to eradicate the breeding grounds for terrorism once and for all and to combat terrorism and extremism in a comprehensive and integrated manner. In that vein, China takes note of presidential statement S/PRST/2020/5, just adopted, regarding capacity-building, training and sharing of best practices and lessons learned, as well as strengthening the internal coordination of United Nations agencies. The statement reflects the key points of consensus we have reached. China believes that it can provide critical guidance for our next steps. I would like to take this opportunity to underscore the following points. First, we must apply uniform standards across the board and forge consensus on counter-terrorism. Counter-terrorism in Africa is an important part of the global fight against terrorism. In helping Africa fight this scourge, the international community should uphold uniform counter-terrorism standards. All terrorist activities must be dealt with unflaggingly, regardless of the flags the perpetrators fly, the countries the perpetrators target or the tactics they employ. Linking terrorism with specific religions or ethnicities should be avoided. China supports the United Nations in playing a central coordinating role in helping African States build greater counter-terrorism capacity and in prioritizing counter-terrorism capacity-building in African countries. We support the international community in providing counter-terrorism assistance to African countries with no political strings attached. Secondly, we should take a holistic approach and tackle terrorism and extremism root and branch. Underdevelopment in the socioeconomic sphere is a major driver for the breeding and spread of terrorism and extremism in some parts of Africa. Many African countries are confronted with a whole raft of challenges in infrastructure, development, poverty eradication, employment, education, public health and social protection. It is incumbent upon the international community to help African countries continue to implement the Agenda 2063 of the African Union (AU) and the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to achieve lasting peace and stability through economic development, poverty eradication and improvement of peoples' livelihoods. In particular, attention should be focused on education and employment of African youth. The briefers today all referred to issues in this area. We should do everything we can to help African youth not fall prey to the pernicious influence of extremist ideologies. During the Beijing summit of the Forum on China-A frica Cooperation, China launched eight major initiatives, many of which are designed to provided African youth with assistance and training, so that they are better educated and more employable. Thirdly, we must respect Africa's leadership and ownership consistently. When helping Africa in its fight against terrorism, the international community should support African countries in finding African solutions to African problems. When providing counter-terrorism assistance, the international community should respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the countries concerned, take fully on board the views and ideas of African countries and regional organizations, support their priorities, feel compassion with them as they face their anxieties and concerns, and focus on solving those issues considered most urgent by the countries concerned. It is particularly important to help African countries acquire improved capabilities and means for, inter alia, fighting terrorism, enhancing information-sharing, combating foreign terrorist fighters, and putting an end to terrorist financing and the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes. We hope that the implementation on the ground of the relevant measures articulated in the presidential statement will be possible. Fourthly, we should give play to the role of regional organizations and create synergy for fighting terrorism. African countries cannot go it alone in combating terrorism and extremism in Africa. The African Union and other relevant regional and subregional organizations have a more comprehensive knowledge of the countries in the region and their counter-terrorism needs. They are uniquely positioned to help to solve the continent's issues. China supports African countries in coming together to empower themselves and tackle the threat of terrorism as one. We shall continue to support the AU Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative. It is our hope that the United Nations will scale up its coordination and cooperation with the African Union and other regional and subregional organizations, support African countries in actively implementing relevant Security Council resolutions and the United Nations global counter-terrorism strategy, step up the sharing of best practices and lessons learned, and work in synergy. China attaches great importance to the concerns of African countries and stands squarely behind African countries and regional organizations in their tireless efforts to combat terrorism and violent extremism.Through the China-United Nations Peace and Development Fund we provide financial support for the United Nations counter-terrorism training programmes in Africa. During the Beijing summit of the Forum on China-A frica Cooperation mentioned earlier, we decided to establish the China-Africa Peace and Security Forum and the China-Africa Peace and Security Cooperation Fund in support of cooperation in peace and security between my country and the African continent. We have provided, through the African Union, ¥300 million of assistance to counter-terrorism operations in the Sahel region and the development of the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force. We shall continue to provide materiel and capacity-building systems to African countries for the purposes of combating terrorism to the best of our capabilities. China is ready, along with the rest of the international community, to support and assist African countries in combating terrorism and extremism, and continue our constructive contributions to peace, stability and development in Africa. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I shall now give the floor to those members of the Council wishing to make statements.
