Mr. Doutriaux (France) (interpretation from French):
The French delegation supports the draft resolution on
which we are about to vote extending the mandate of the
United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
(MIPONUH) until 30 November 1999.

We firmly support this extension for the following
reasons.
MIPONUH, under the impetus of the Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harston - whose
competence and thoroughness we should like to hail here
once again - has achieved significant technical results in
the field. Unfortunately, however, they are today still
incomplete. Those results, as well as the investment that
has been made by the international community in Haiti for
several years, should be preserved.

The Haitian National Police is today one of the State
institutions that can shoulder its mission. The presence of
MIPONUH, together with actions for bilateral and
multilateral cooperation, represents, in a still-fragile political
context, a significant counterweight to the setbacks that
could still occur. Risks exist in relation to the expansion of
the drug trade, threats of human rights violations or
possible attempts at the recovery of the police forces by
one or another political faction.

France shares the concern expressed by a certain
number of countries that the Council should wind down the
activities of MIPONUH and transfer the management of
this Mission to another framework. It is, however, clear that
this transition must be organized and take place over time
in order not to damage the results obtained to date. We
should not jeopardize the efforts Haiti has made to
strengthen its institutions, and thus should stick to a
pragmatic approach.

We welcome the fact that the draft resolution before
us explicitly requests the Secretary-General to make
recommendations starting in mid-1999 for the
establishment of the mechanism that could replace
MIPONUH.

In order to allow MIPONUH to fulfil its mandate
next year and to put in place an assistance mechanism
supported by other United Nations institutions in Haiti,
we fully associate ourselves with the appeal made by the
Secretary-General to Government officials and Haitian
political leaders to put an end to their futile disputes and
to find a solution to the present political crisis. In this
regard, we can only deplore the fact that the obstruction
of the political process in Haiti continues to impede the
establishment of a genuine development policy, weakens
the Haitian administration, prevents the beginning of a
genuine process of decentralization and slows the
implementation of structural reforms, which remain
indispensable.

