Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset, on behalf of the people and
Government of Mexico, to express our condolences to
and solidarity with the people and Government of
China following the loss of human life and physical
damage in their country as a result of the recent
earthquake.

I wish to express my thanks for this opportunity
to address the issue of sanctions. Our appreciation goes
to the State Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Sweden,
Mr. Hans Dahlgren, for presenting the results of the
Stockholm Process on the implementation of targeted
sanctions. We congratulate Sweden on its leadership
role over the past year in the discussions that produced
the final report now before us.

Along with other countries, Mexico participated
in the Stockholm Process with a will to contribute to
deliberations on the implementation of sanctions
regimes imposed by the Security Council, as well as on
other issues related to that topic. We shared our
experience as Chairman of the sanctions Committee for
Sierra Leone with the working group of the Stockholm
Process responsible for considering measures to
strengthen the role of the United Nations in that field.

The exchange of views among representatives of
Governments, the United Nations Secretariat,
academics, non-governmental organizations and civil
society allowed for a candid and in-depth dialogue on
the progress, obstacles and challenges involved in
devising and applying targeted sanctions, taking as its
point of reference the contributions of the Interlaken
Process on financial sanctions and the Bonn-Berlin
Process on arms embargoes and travel bans.

The recommendations of the Stockholm Process
are the outgrowth of those discussions and their
substance is of particular relevance to the work of the
Security Council and its sanctions committees. That is
because the very dynamic of the meetings of the
committees requires participants to focus on getting
through the immediate agenda before them, but does
not make it easy to engage in a thinking process on
ways and means to enhance the effectiveness of the
implementation of sanctions and the appropriate
mechanisms to monitor them.

I wish to highlight the following points from the
set of recommendations submitted to the Security
Council.

The first concerns improving coordination among
sanctions committees. To date, the only attempt at
closer coordination has been the tripartite meetings of
the sanctions Committees on Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Angola, particularly in the areas of arms embargoes,
diamonds and travel bans. Despite the fact that
sanctions regimes apply to a specific country, in the
context of Sierra Leone and Liberia the need has
emerged to take a regional approach to implementing
and monitoring sanctions. Mexico accordingly supports
the idea that the chairmen of sanctions committees
should meet and convene joint meetings on questions
of common interest that would facilitate the
implementation of sanctions. This exercise should
include the Chairman of the Security Council's
Working Group on General Issues on Sanctions.

There is a need to consider the possibility of
including in United Nations peacekeeping operation
mandates the requirement of reporting violations of
sanctions regimes. The mandates of the panels of
experts require the submission of observations and
recommendations to the sanctions committees with a
view to taking the steps necessary when sanctions
regimes are violated. However, not all committees have
that possibility. We therefore support the idea of
considering the desirability of personnel of
peacekeeping operations in countries under sanction
reporting to the committees and to the Security Council
on the violations of sanctions that they have detected.
In the case of arms embargoes, it would be extremely
useful to be able to draw on information from
personnel working in the field.

There is the issue of improving coordination
between sanctions committees and other actors. In the
case of the sanctions Committee on Sierra Leone, we
encourage cooperation and coordination with
governmental agencies, the Economic Community of
West African States, the countries of the Mano River
Union, the International Criminal Police Organization,
the International Civil Aviation Organization and the
Wassenaar Arrangement so as to secure better
implementation and monitoring of sanctions imposed
on that country. Similarly, we feel that the Counter-
Terrorism Committee should strengthen its
coordination mechanisms with other actors in order to
ensure that its activities are effective.

It is also important to keep open the channels of
communication and dialogue with humanitarian
agencies, international and local non-governmental
organizations, civil society and public opinion and the
media. The exchange of information and coordination
of activities has a positive repercussion on the
implementation of targeted sanctions.

We need to consider developing guidelines on
best practices and lessons learned in the area of
sanctions. In the division of the Secretariat responsible
for sanctions, a structure should be established -
similar to that which already exists in other parts of the
Secretariat - responsible for preparing guidelines on
best practices and lessons learned from the various
sanctions committees, panels of experts and monitoring
mechanisms. The immediate task should be compiling
the experiences and lessons learned in the sanctions
Committee on Angola and the monitoring mechanism
on Angolan sanctions, which completed their work in
late 2002.

The capacity of the Secretariat should be
strengthened. Despite the fact that proposals have been
made to establish independent structures with a more
ambitious mandate, these have yet to secure consensus
among the members of the Security Council. Given
that situation, the Secretariat of the United Nations
should possess, in the short term, the budgetary and
human resources necessary to strengthen sanction
activities in order to give adequate support to the
sanction committees, the panels of experts, the
monitoring mechanisms and the Security Council's
Working Group on Sanctions.

Sanctions are an instrument employed by the
Security Council to facilitate the maintenance of
international peace and security. The effective
implementation of sanction regimes in force requires
the cooperation of the international community, as well
as assistance to those States that need to strengthen
their national capacity to implement those sanctions.

Mexico reiterates the need for the Security
Council to design and implement effective sanctions
regimes that constitute useful instruments to dissuade
any attempt to threaten international peace and
security, without their harming the civilian population
or third countries. In that context, we note with great
interest the seven principles suggested in the report on
the Stockholm Process for effective implementation of
targeted sanctions, as well as a consolidated model law
to assist countries lacking legislation in this area.

The opportunity you, Mr. President, have given
us today to be informed of the results of the Stockholm
Process should motivate us to continue our
consideration of questions relative to sanctions in the
relevant bodies. But we should find a format that
enables us to know the opinions of the membership of
the United Nations. We trust that future presidencies of
the Security Council will take this suggestion into
account.

