The Secretary-General: I thank the People's
Republic of China for organizing today's discussion
on reaffirming commitment to the Charter in this year,
in which the United Nations marks 70 years since its
founding. The seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations finds an Organization with major achievements
to its credit, multiple crises on its agenda, and
tremendous opportunities ahead. The United Nations
was founded to prevent another world war, and it has
succeeded in that. Despite the recurrence of genocide
and repeated outbreaks of armed conflict, the past
seven decades would surely have been even bloodier
without the United Nations.

Peoples' lives are better in other ways, too. In most
parts of the world, people are living longer, healthier
lives. The empowerment of women, the advancement
of international law and the spread of democratic
governance have helped to improve our collective well-
being. The world is starkly different than when the
Charter's drafters gathered in San Francisco in 1945.
The membership of the United Nations has nearly
quadrupled. New Powers have emerged. Globalization,
urbanization, migration, demographic shifts,
technological advances, climate change and other
seismic developments continue to remake our societies
and transform international relations.

Yet the aspirations of "we the peoples" enshrined
in the Charter remain just as valid, valuable and vital.
The Charter is a living document, not a detailed road
map. It is our compass, enshrining principles that have
stood the test of time. At the heart of the Charter is
a commitment to the prevention of armed conflict
through the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
protection of human rights. Collective security is the
core purpose of the Organization. Unlike in 1945,
however, we no longer have a full meeting of minds
on what that means. We need to reflect on what has
changed, and fortify our sense of unity. Decades of
preventive diplomacy, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding - gains and setbacks alike - have
helped us to sharpen our efforts to promote peace and
head off brewing crises before they become deadlier
and costlier for all concerned.

The primary responsibility for preventing conflict
lies with Member States. The Charter is very clear on
this point, yet in too many instances Member States are
still falling short. Our shared work is based on consent
and respect for the sovereign equality of all Members
of the United Nations, which the Charter recognizes as
a basic principle. Early action to prevent conflict and
protect human rights helps to strengthen sovereignty,
rather than challenge or restrict it. We must ask
whether, for example, earlier efforts to address human
rights violations and political grievances in Syria could
have kept the situation from escalating so horrendously.

A major obstacle to United Nations human rights
action has been a concern among Member States that
such action may harm national sovereignty. In reality,
it is serious violations of human rights that weaken
sovereignty. Such abuses kill and displace people,
divide communities, undermine economies and
destroy cultural heritage. They silence the Government
officials, parliamentarians, civil servants, judges and
others who lead national institutions that are essential
to sovereignty.

The primary goal of United Nations action on
human rights is to support all these actors. Doing so is,
most fundamentally, a support to national sovereignty.
A conceptual shift in how we understand United
Nations human rights action could have a positive
and, indeed, transformational effect on the role of the
Security Council in peace and security. We must be
willing to act before situations deteriorate. This is both
a moral responsibility and critical to the maintenance
of international peace and security. We cannot afford
to be indifferent.

Let us also recognize that the exercise ofsovereignty
brings with it important responsibilities. Governments
earn, sustain and strengthen their sovereignty by being
accountable to their people, upholding human rights,
ensuring the rule of law and practicing inclusive
governance. Moreover, governing responsibly is not
just a domestic challenge; it means recognizing our
interconnectedness and being a good regional and
global citizen.

On so many issues, from climate change to commerce
and communications, from environmental degradation
to public health, the distinctions between the national
and the international are falling away. Terrorism and
extremism have emerged as serious transnational
threats. At last Thursday's Washington, DC, meeting
on violent extremism, I highlighted the need to
respond decisively and to combat extremism without
multiplying the problem and with full respect for
human rights. Sovereignty remains part of the bedrock
of international order, but in today's world the less
sovereignty is viewed as a wall or a shield, the better
our prospects will be for protecting people and solving
our shared problems.

We should use this year's observance of the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations to
seriously reflect on our common enterprise - on peace
operations, peacebuilding, women's empowerment,
disaster risk reduction and much else. We should also
seize this year's opportunities to take transformative
action on sustainable development and climate change.
In all these efforts, we should bear in mind that the
three opening words of the Charter make clear who is
the driving force behind the United Nations - "We
the peoples". Let us reaffirm our duty to serve those
peoples with all our creativity and will. Let us reaffirm
our commitment to each other in the great cause of
living together in dignity and peace for all.

