I thank the Under-Secretary-General and the heads of the police components for their briefings today, which allow us to accurately assess the challenges faced by United Nations police (UNPOL) and gendarmes in the field. I pay tribute to these men and women, who are carrying out their missions in demanding conditions with particularly heavy health-related constraints. In this difficult context, I would also like to commend the Secretariat - in particular the Department of Peace Operations and its Police Division - for their unflagging investment in and optimization of the use of UNPOL. The mission of the United Nations police is at the heart of partnerships and operational cooperation between the United Nations and national authorities, making UNPOL an invaluable asset in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. I would also like to welcome the Secretariat's efforts to enable the police components of missions to reconcile security and performance. France continues to support the implementation of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and currently has 21 gendarmes of all ranks deployed in three missions: the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. France is and will continue to be a committed, constructive and reliable partner in enabling United Nations police to fully exercise their missions. As the year 2020 marks the sixtieth anniversary of UNPOL, I wish to highlight two priorities. First, it is essential that UNPOL support the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. At the heart of this objective, of course, are the populations served. Indeed, the establishment or re-establishment of a relationship of trust between the population, public authorities and institutions is an indispensable condition for the return to lasting peace. This implies the strengthening of the rule of law, the support of national internal security forces, the protection of all and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. In the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic, this trust is even more difficult to gain and maintain since every gendarme and police officer in contact with the population must abide by strict health-related rules in order not to be perceived as a vector for the spread of the virus. The second priority I would highlight is that the United Nations police must pursue their efforts to become more efficient. France is contributing to this by supporting training actions before and during deployment, as well as increased use of police experts, support for mastering the language of the host country and gender- balanced contingents. This aspect is also key to strengthening police effectiveness. France fully supports the objective of increasing the deployment of women in all positions, including those with responsibilities. The new system for monitoring the performance of peace operations, set up by the Secretariat, is also very useful for improving the effectiveness of UNPOL, wherever their units are deployed, to help scale up local police forces and the protection of populations. I too would like to end my statement with a few questions. I address the first to the Police Commissioner of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), Mr. Yacouba. Several tasks under the MINUSMA mandate are indeed based to a large extent on its police component, in particular in central Mali, where the priorities are support for the redeployment of Malian internal security forces and the protection of civilians. I therefore want to ask Mr. Yacouba if he could tell us about the progress made in integrating military operations with police operations within the Mission in order to fulfil these tasks, and what are his recommendations in this area? I also have a question for the Police Commissioner of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, Mr. Champion. What concrete actions are UNPOL implementing in the Central African Republic in support of the redeployment of internal security forces throughout the national territory? With respect to the elections of 27 December, which will clearly be a critical and capital moment in the consolidation of democracy in the Central African Republic, how are the United Nations police preparing for this deadline, in particular within the framework of the integrated security plan that was adopted in early October?
