Mr. Henze (Germany): First of all I would like to
take this opportunity to congratulate the Egyptian delegation
and the delegation of Guinea-Bissau, as coordinator of the
non-aligned countries, on their successful efforts in drafting
and submitting the draft resolution to be put to a vote
today. This draft resolution clearly reminds all United
Nations Member States of their obligation in fighting
terrorism. Recent events once again made it abundantly
clear how important it is that we all join in this fight.

Germany can accept the draft resolution. We agree
with other delegations that the purpose of sanctions should
not be punishment, but that they should serve to achieve the
implementation of measures decided upon by the Council.
We also agree that sanctions should be used only if the
issue is so serious that coercive measures are required. This
condition is being met here. The purpose is to put those
suspected of an attempt against the life of the President of
Egypt on trial, an attempt which was strongly condemned
by all the countries represented in this Council. At the same
time, we appreciate the efforts to target the sanctions in
such a way that they do not affect the population as such,
but are limited to those who are in a position to take the
required measures. Nobody wants to see harm being
inflicted on the Sudanese civilian population, which is
already living in poor conditions.

What this draft resolution intends is to ensure
compliance by the Sudanese Government with Security
Council resolution 1044 (1996). Most importantly, Sudan
must do all it can to ensure that the three suspects who are
sheltering or did take shelter in Sudan can be prosecuted in
Ethiopia. "To ensure extradition" encompasses more than
the extradition of the suspects when they are inside Sudan's
territory: Sudan cannot free itself from its obligations by
allowing the suspects to leave for other countries, and
Sudan, like other countries, also bears responsibility for
persons outside its borders whom it supports in one way or
another.

My delegation sees the draft resolution to be adopted
today as a clear signal to the Sudanese Government to
comply with Security Council resolution 1044 (1996). We
appeal to the Government of Sudan to use the 60-day
period ahead of us now and to take the necessary steps not
only to avoid even farther-reaching measures, but to allow
for an early lifting of the measures the Security Council is
imposing today.

We will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

