Mr. Mubarak (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I should like at the outset to thank you, Sir,
for convening and personally presiding over this open
debate on children and armed conflict. We would also
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; his
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy; the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Ann Veneman; and the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Edmond Mullet, for their excellent
presentations.

Despite the efforts made over the past six months
at the regional and international levels, with the
leading role played by the United Nations, we have yet
to see tangible progress regarding the situation of
children in armed conflict. Children continue to be
recruited and sometimes re-recruited as combatants,
and boys and girls continue to fall victim to acts of
violation, rape, murder, maiming and arbitrary
detention committed by parties to conflict in various
regions, despite the repeated appeals made to those
parties by the Security Council and the General
Assembly to abide by the rules established under
international law and the Geneva Conventions.

We are concerned by the persistent phenomenon
of the recruitment and re-recruitment of child soldiers
in situations of armed conflict. Despite the statements
made by many parties to conflict reaffirming their
commitment to establishing monitoring and reporting
mechanisms, cooperation to that end has been
insufficient. Therefore, we must urge all parties
concerned to prevent child recruitment, to release all
recruited children and to ensure their reintegration
through appropriate development programmes. We call
on the international financial institutions and donors to
fund such programmes in countries affected by or
emerging from conflict so that they can reintegrate
those children by providing them with regular incomes,
thus preventing their re-recruitment.

As a party to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocol, my country deplores
the fact that, in some countries affected by armed
conflict, all too many children are subjected to rape or
sexual harassment by parties to the conflicts and even
by personnel of peacekeeping operations. In that
connection, my country supports the zero-tolerance
policy of the United Nations regarding acts of sexual
violence. Once they have been found guilty of such
heinous acts, the perpetrators must be punished. My
delegation urges all countries to enforce their national
laws criminalizing such practices and to combat and
put an end to impunity.

Libya wishes to express its deep concern about
the children suffering in the occupied Palestinian
territories. In recent years, Israeli military operations
have claimed the lives of more than 800 Palestinian
children. Thousands have been displaced by the
destruction of their families' homes. Palestinian
children have also been affected by the racist
separation wall built in the occupied territory, which
has prevented thousands of them from attending
school. As for Gaza, which is in a state of siege, its
suffering is indescribable.

We must also recall the suffering of children in
Iraq and Afghanistan. In a number of press statements,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict has described the tragic
situation that continues to face the children in those
countries, including the fact that many have been killed
or maimed as a result of car bombs, explosive belts,
improvised explosive devices or bombings of schools
and hospitals in occupied areas. In addition, many
children are subject to arbitrary detention and deprived
of their most fundamental rights, including the right to
education and freedom of movement. Such acts are
illegal, and we call on the coalition forces to rectify
them and to release those children unconditionally.

In conclusion, we wish to thank the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict for all its
efforts to address issues related to children in situations
of armed conflict. We hope that the Working Group
will refrain from taking a selective approach and from
politicization in formulating its recommendations. We
would like to take this opportunity to draw the
Council's attention to the remarkable role played by

UNICEF in protecting children, not only in conflict
areas, but also in countries requiring food and
development assistance.

Finally, Sir, we would like to thank your country
once again. We shall support the draft presidential
statement to be issued at the close of this meeting.

