Mr. Idohou (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to pay tribute to the humanitarian aid
workers for their inestimable efforts to halt the
humanitarian crisis in Darfur and elsewhere in Africa.
In Darfur we must ensure the success of the Abuja
negotiations. We must also find ways to stabilize the
situation. The Security Council should re-evaluate the
situation and, in close cooperation with the African
Union, find ways to increase security and to ensure
effective protection for civilian populations.

The situation in the Great Lakes region is a silent
catastrophe that is taking place outside the View of the
world. Very often, our gaze is clouded by the military
and political aspects of the conflicts in the region.
Perhaps the world has even become accustomed to
reports of losses of human life and the unimaginable
scale of the disasters that have been afflicting our
planet since December 2004.

As astronomic as those figures are, they seem no
longer to move us. Otherwise, how can we understand
the passivity of the international community when
faced with such a critical situation as that in northern
Uganda, where about 2 million people are internally
displaced and where more than 1,000 people die each
week - a total far beyond the emergency threshold. It
is said those figures are twice the mortality rate in
Darfur.

The organizational policies of the camps, where
freedom of movement has been curbed, thus promoting
overcrowding, have lead to the spread of diseases such
as malaria and HIV/AIDS, not to mention the
enormous stress that has also resulted. If the
emergency level has been passed, we must immediately
sound the alarm to mobilize the international
community to save human lives.

We would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Jan Egeland, for
his efforts to draw the attention of the international
community to the everyday or forgotten hardships,
which constitute violations of human dignity. We must
deplore the fact that in a number of countries of the
Great Lakes region, returning refugees are becoming
displaced persons in their countries of origin, due to
the lack of adequate reintegration policies and, above
all, because there is no possibility for those people to
recover their property in order to rebuild their lives.
Those are all issues that deserve the active
commitment of the international community.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
internal displacement of populations continues,
especially in Katanga, where an offensive attack by the
Government army is under way to dislodge the Mai-
Mai from certain areas. That is taking place in a
country where the United Nations is present and is
maintaining one of the largest missions ever deployed.
That presence should guarantee respect for
international humanitarian law and for the effective
protection of humanitarian workers and of population
affected by the military operations.

The critical situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons requires that we develop a
comprehensive approach to their problems and that
humanitarian assistance encompass not only the
provision of survival resources but also the restoration
of basic social services. For that reason, we welcome
the new approach adopted in preparing for the
consolidated humanitarian appeal that has just been
launched for Burundi, which envisions involving
humanitarian assistance in conjunction with longer-
term goals.

In addition, we should give special attention to
the increased risks for humanitarian workers in the
region, who are more and more often mistaken, at
worst, for combatants or, in the best of cases, for Blue
Helmets. We must find ways to ensure more effective
protection for humanitarian aid workers.

Furthermore, the negative impact of the cross-
border flow of displaced persons and refugees on the
social situation in the countries receiving them
constitutes a very harmful factor for destabilization,
which can lead to insecurity and the proliferation of
armed bands, because mass cross-border movements
are difficult to control and foment the circulation of
arms and cross-border crime. We need a coordinated,
consistent response to those concerns.

Special attention should be given to the problem
of the reintegration of child soldiers. We should
increase resources for the social reintegration of child
soldiers, because, as is the case in numerous countries
of the Great Lakes region, the lack of assistance
programmes results in child soldiers becoming
involved in organized crime. We must break that
vicious circle and establish a virtuous circle that
ensures a more promising future for the affected
countries.

Finally, we welcome the General Assembly's
establishment of the Central Emergency Response
Fund to respond to disasters and humanitarian
emergencies.

