The President: I congratulate the representative of
Poland, Mr. Mielus, and wish him well in discharging
his future duties.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of South Africa.

We would also like to add our voice to express
our appreciation to our briefers, Mr. Lacroix and
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, for their insightful observations.
We also appreciate the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/817) and the continued support for the work
being undertaken by United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA). South Africa notes and
welcomes the positive political developments that have
taken place in both the Sudan and South Sudan, including
those highlighted in the report ofthe Secretary-General.
I will speak to only two issues - the political situation

and the developments concerning UNISFA.

With regard to the political situation, South Africa
is encouraged by the positive strides being made by the
Sudan and South Sudan in improving their relations. The
support provided reciprocally to one another's peace
processes is indicative of the trajectory that the two
countries have taken. It is our hope that these countries
can maintain the momentum towards the achievement
of peace, stability and economic development.

We welcome the efforts undertaken by South Sudan
last week in hosting peace talks for the Sudan and
armed groups. This continued rapprochement by the
two countries is fundamental in rebuilding mutual trust
and addressing all outstanding issues. We urge both
countries to redouble their efforts in mustering resolve
and to implement all the provisions of the Agreement
of 20 June 2011, particularly concerning the final status
of Abyei.

Turning to the developments pertaining to UNISFA,
South Africa welcomes the Security Council's decision
to renew the support provided by UNISFA to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism of the
Sudan and South Sudan under resolution 2492 (2019).

My delegation appreciates and welcomes the
importance of the stabilizing role that UNISFA and the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism in
particular continue to play along the borders between the
Sudan and South Sudan. We recognize the critical and
strategic importance of Abyei Area for both countries
as well as its potential for being a destabilizing point if
not closely monitored.

We therefore encourage the Sudan and South Sudan
to resume talks to implement their agreements on border
issues and work towards meeting the benchmarks
previously set by the Security Council. South Africa
further supports the convening of the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism meeting in October 2019, through
the coordination of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel.

In conclusion, South Africa takes note of the
recommendation made by the Secretary-General in his
report of 15 October 2019 to the Security Council.

As the Council returns from Juba, we hope that
both parties remain steadfast in their commitment to
peace and stability. Similarly, the Council's continued
support for UNISFA remains paramount.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

