Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to congratulate the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Zahir Tanin,
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), on his excellent briefing
and to assure him once again of the full support of the
Senegalese delegation as he carries out his duties

Secondly, I would like to pay tribute to Ms. Nela
Kuburovic', Minister of Justice of the Republic of Serbia,
and to Ms. Vlora Citaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the
United States.

My delegation remains concerned about the
continuing tensions that somewhat hamper the
substantial progress noted since the end of the conflict.
In that regard, and with a view to restarting the process
of building and preserving lasting stability that extends
beyond Kosovo to all entire region of the Balkans,
first, we strongly encourage Kosovar political actors to
work towards maintaining a peaceful political climate
on which the quality of the dialogue with Belgrade
greatly depends; and secondly, we encourage Serbian
authorities to maintain and strengthen their commitment
to participating in a constructive and peaceful dialogue
with Pristina.

That said, Senegal welcomes the progress made
thus far by both parties in the dialogue conducted under
the auspices of the European Union and encourages
countries and partners with influence to continue to
use that influence to revive and support the talks. In
order to build on the results achieved in that context, we
believe that it is essential that the agreements reached
thus far be implemented and that political leaders
on both sides be fully committed to pursuing, in a
constructive spirit, the dialogue as it is the only viable
way to normalize relations.

Recent developments outlined in the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (S/2017/387),
including the proposal by the President of Kosovo to
transform the Kosovo Security Force into an armed
force, through legislation and not via referendum, have
sparked controversy. Fortunately, that draft law was
withdrawn on 7 March, with a statement from President
Thaci promising that no unilateral action would be
taken on that issue and that the transformation process
would be transparent and inclusive and carried out in
cooperation with the country's international partners.

On another note, the adoption by the Assembly
of Kosovo of the resolution calling for the suspension
of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, which is
facilitated by the European Union, in protest at the
detention of Mr. Ramush Haradinaj, became another
source of tension, which we hope has abated now that
he has been released. Senegal also hopes that fears
arising from the decision of the Government of Kosovo
to transfer to Kosovo the ownership of all property
previously registered to predecessors or administrative,
military, social or political organizations, have subsided.
On a positive note, my delegation commends the
unhindered participation of Kosovo Serbs in Serbia's
presidential election at polling stations throughout
Kosovo, as well as the smooth running of the elections,
which received support from the Organization for
SecurityandCooperationinEuropeandtheKosovoForce.
We also welcome the high-level meetings organized
by Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, on 24 January and 6 February in Brussels. The
Presidents and Prime Ministers of Serbia and Kosovo
participated in the meetings. They have all committed
to resuming dialogue at the highest level, under the
auspices of the European Union, and to refraining from
making provocative or belligerent statements.

We share the view of the Secretary- General that the
issue of missing persons, which should remain a top
priority, requires that leaders on both sides have a firm
and genuine political will in order to provide families
with the answers they have been awaiting for so long.

On another note, my delegation would like to
commend the efforts of the Kosovo Security Force in the
fight against violent extremism in Kosovo. In addition,
the activities carried out under the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, whose mandate was
extended until 14 June 2018, appear to be advantageous
in that they help to build on the achievements made in
the areas of defence and the promotion of the rule of
law, human rights and the fight against terrorism and
organized crime. In addition, we welcome the activities
of UNMIK in promoting reconciliation, transitional
justice, human rights and in providing support for
the normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina.

Senegal would like to express its appreciation
regarding the important milestones reached in the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina and encourages
the strengthening of the dynamics to normalize
relations between the two parties, as well as enhanced
cooperation, which is in the interest of their people and
fosters peace in the subregion.

