Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to associate myself with the tribute
that all of my colleagues here have paid to Ambassador
Jorge Navarrete. We will greatly miss his competence,
experience and warm personality.
As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria subscribes fully to the statement just made on
behalf of the Union by Mr. Inocencio Arias, the
Permanent Representative of Spain. I should like to add
just a few brief comments in my national capacity.

The period since the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001) has, in our view, been but used to prepare for its
implementation. My country welcomes the spirit of
understanding, seriousness and cooperation that
prevails in the Counter-Terrorism Committee as well as
the transparent way in which it accounts for its work
through almost weekly briefings. Bulgaria commends
the effective work of the Bureau of the Committee and
pays tribute to Sir Jeremy Greenstock, not only for his
impeccable professionalism and the impressive
competence with which he guides the Committee's
work, but also for his admirable personal commitment
to the struggle against terrorism.

I believe it is now clear to all Member States of
the United Nations that the Committee on Counter-
Terrorism is an instrument of the Security Council
whose task is to clarify, inform, coordinate and, where
necessary, assist, rather than to punish. This unusual
characteristic of the Committee derives from the nature
of resolution 1373 (2001), but also from that of other
resolutions of the Council and the General Assembly
that constitute the categorical and universal rejection of
terrorism on the part of all Member States of the
Organization, in particular since the tragedy of 11
September.

On 24 December last, Bulgaria submitted its
national report on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). Detailed and comprehensive, the report is
available to everyone and reflects accurately Bulgaria's
targeted and coordinated efforts to fight terrorism. I
shall not dwell on it in detail.

Bulgaria would like to strongly emphasize on of
the main lessons we learned from our own experience
in the struggle against terrorism: the need for
strengthened coordination at the regional and
subregional levels. At present, we have quite an
impressive accumulation of national reports. Without a
doubt, the Governments of most countries are making
commendable efforts in the fight against terrorism. Yet
all of these efforts will be meaningful and, above all,
effective only when they are taken in the context of
action in the various regions and subregions of the
world. In this connection, I would join Ambassador
Ryan in asking Sir Jeremy Greenstock what his views
are concerning the work of the Committee to encourage
such coordination at the regional and subregional
levels.

As far as Europe is concerned, we must
emphasize that European coordination in the fight
against terrorism is proceeding consistently. The
Action Plan on counter-terrorism measures of the
European Union - a very important document - also
includes the countries associated with the Union, as
well as to others. I would also like to mention the
European Conference, which met recently with invited
countries that included the Republic of Moldova, the
Russian Federation and Ukraine. Also noteworthy is
the Action Plan on counter-terrorism measures of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
adopted last year in Bucharest.

At the subregional level, two documents stand out
to which Bulgaria is a signatory: the Declaration of the
Warsaw Conference of Central, Eastern and South-
Eastern European countries on combating terrorism and
the Declaration of the Ministers for Defence of the
member countries of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and the 10 countries associated with the
North Atlantic Alliance. I would also like to emphasize
the work done of the Stability Pact, which at one of its
recent round tables focused particular attention on
counter-terrorism.

A second lesson we have learned concerns the
ties between organized crime and terrorism, a
relationship that is often symbiotic. This is a
phenomenon that we must take into account in the fight
against terrorism.

At the end of his briefing, the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee referred to the problem
of possible human rights abuses by certain
Governments in connection with their fight against
terrorism. Bulgaria is very alert to human rights issues
and believes this is a serious problem. However, we
agree with the Chairman that the Committee is not
mandated by the Council to take into account the
human rights dimensions of the fight against terrorism.
That is neither its task nor its function, which consists
rather of implementing resolution 1373 (2001).

However, nothing prevents national reports in the
public domain from being studied by specialized
human rights organizations in the United Nations
system and other organizations, in particular non-
governmental organizations. This would allow an
adequate approach to addressing a serious problem.

