Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania):
The United Republic of Tanzania welcomes this open
debate of the Security Council on peace and justice in
relation to the role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). It is encouraging that this debate is taking place
following the High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law at
the National and International Levels.

We congratulate you, Sir, and the Government
and the people of Guatemala on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council and for having convened
this open debate on a subject that my country deems
important.

The United Republic of Tanzania is a State party to
the Rome Statute. We applaud its values and support its
universality. We believe that its universality would be a
great milestone in eliminating impunity and in denying
safe haven to the perpetrators of the most heinous
crimes. At this stage, nothing would be more gratifying
than to see the members ofthe Council that have not yet
done so accede to the Rome Statute.

The pursuit ofpeace andjustice is the main concern
of both the Security Council and the ICC. It is often
said that there cannot be peace without justice. Indeed,
peace andjustice are two sides ofthe same coin because
one cannot flourish without the other. However, in some
instances, the international community and the Council
have had to grapple with the challenge of balancing
between the two, especially when one seemed to take
precedence over the other.

Not surprisingly, that balancing act has been an area
of great tension. For some, it would be inconceivable
for the Court to pursuejustice at the expense ofa peace
process, even ifit meant that the perpetrators of heinous
crimes would get temporary relief from prosecution.
The facilitation of peace should by no means be
equated to an acceptance of impunity. However, the
Court should be one of last resort, as has often been
said today. It should complement and should not disrupt
or subvert the efforts of the international community,
through the Security Council, or even ofregions to seek
peace and security.
Similarly, the Security Council should support
the work of the Court in securing justice for victims
of atrocities by holding accountable the perpetrators
of such crimes. Cooperation between the Council and
the Court, as with States, is pivotal. The Council would
also assist the work of the Court by calling on Member
States to fully cooperate with the Court and by taking
appropriate actions to ensure the implementation of
arrest warrants issued by the Court. In addition, for
the Court to fulfil its mandate, it is imperative that
it be provided with the necessary financial support,
especially for referrals by the Council, which have
proven burdensome to States parties.

My delegation cannot fail to identify some
commonalities between the Security Council and the
ICC. The most obvious is that both bodies have a global
mandate but are preoccupied with activities in Africa.
The Court's activities in Africa have faced significant
difficulties, even when the issues that the Court seeks
to address are matters of legitimate concern regarding
justice and peace. As a result, the Court's work has
regrettably been a cause of concern among many
Governments on the continent. Such concerns are a
source of great discomfort to many that are among the
Court's great champions.

Impunity should be fought whenever and wherever
it occurs. However, the adage "not only must justice
be done; it must also be seen to be done" is true for
any judicial body, as it must be for the ICC. The Court
must be insulated from any form of political influence,
including from this body. Therefore, the Security
Council should assist the Court in that regard, as should
Member States.

However, fortunately, not only the Council and
the Court are preoccupied with Africa. Other United
Nations organs and bodies are also concerned about
the continent, mostly over its development. Their
work reaffirms our belief that there cannot be peace,
security and justice without sustainable and inclusive
development in Africa and elsewhere.

Article 16 of the Rome Statute gives the Security
Council the ability to defer ICC proceedings. There have
been several attempts to invoke the Security Council
to defer situations. We urge the Council to be more
transparent by providing clear explanations to States
that request deferrals. That would enhance cooperation
and help offset some of the negative discourse against
the ICC.

Justice for victims of heinous crimes is not the sole
prerogative of the ICC. The principle of complementarity
enshrined in the Rome Statute must be upheld. Member
States have the primary responsibility to prosecute such
crimes within their national jurisdictions. International
assistance and cooperation are vital in building the
capacity of national jurisdictions, especially in post-
conflict countries, to enable them to discharge their
obligation.

My delegation believes that there should be
a reasonable mix between formal and traditional
justice, whereby the latter provides for forgiveness,
reconciliation and reintegration rather than trial and
punishment, as stressed by the former. Traditional
justice processes conducted in communities where
crimes were perpetrated, as was the case in the
gacaca courts in Rwanda after the genocide, are a true
illustration of justice not only being done but being
seen to be done.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Tanzania's firm
belief in the International Criminal Court. We see the
Court as an important instrument in the search for
peace andjustice. It is not a perfect instrument. It faces
significant challenges. However, the advantages of the
Court outweigh the challenges that it faces. It is still
the best model for addressing international justice. It
deserves our support.

