The Secretary-General: Let me also begin by
wishing a happy and successful new year to all. This
year promises to be a tough one, but I trust that we
shall be up to the challenge.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the
other members of the Council for holding this meeting
to discuss my report on children and armed conflict
(8/2002/1299). This is an issue that goes to the heart of
our common aim of protecting the most vulnerable of
our world.

I am pleased to say that we have made steady
progress in embedding the protection, rights and well-
being of children affected by armed conflict into the
United Nations peace and security agenda. The three
resolutions adopted by the Security Council, the
integration of child protection in peacekeeping
mandates, the deployment of child protection advisers
in selected peace missions and the development of
child protection training in mission areas all attest to
that fact.

I am also pleased to note the progressive
development of a body of international norms and
standards for the protection of children affected by
armed conflict. I am referring in particular to the entry
into force over the past year of two landmark
international instruments: the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict - which
sets the age limit for compulsory recruitment and direct
participation in hostilities at 18 - and the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, which
classifies as war crimes the conscription, enlistment or
use in hostilities of children under the age of 15. Those
two legal instruments, along with other norms and
standards, have strengthened the international
framework for the protection of children in situations
of armed conflict.

Regrettably, there is far more to be done in this
area. Despite the progress made in creating and
strengthening the normative framework, the tragic fact
is that children continue to be victimized in the most
cynical and cruel manner in conflicts around the world.
In addition to being forcibly conscripted by
Government and rebel armies, children in conflict
zones are at risk from landmines and unexploded
ordnance, from abduction, from displacement and
deprivation of education and basic health care, from
use as forced labour in the extraction of natural
resources and from sexual exploitation and abuse.
These outrages continue to be perpetrated against
children in far too many places, in defiance of the will
of the international community. The time has come to
ensure that the hard-won gains in crafting a protection
regime for children are applied and put into practice on
the ground.

The Security Council, in calling for a list of
parties to armed conflict that use or recruit children in
violation of international obligations, has taken the first
important step in that regard. My report contains a list
of 23 parties, including both Governments and
insurgents, in five conflict situations on the Council's
agenda that use or recruit children. It also highlights
other conflicts not on the Council agenda where
children are recruited or used.

By naming the parties that continue to recruit or
use child soldiers, the international community has
demonstrated its willingness to match words with
deeds. Those who violate standards for the protection
of children can no longer do so with impunity. The list
represents an important step forward in our efforts to
induce compliance with international child protection
obligations by parties to conflicts. It is also the
beginning of a new era of monitoring and reporting on
how parties treat children during conflict. It is essential
that the publication of the list be followed by
systematic monitoring and reporting on compliance by
listed parties, as well as the consideration of targeted
measures against those who continue to flout their
international obligations.

By exposing those who violate standards for the
protection of children to the light of public scrutiny we
are serving notice that the international community is
finally willing to back expressions of concern with
action. I congratulate the members of the Council on
this important step and urge them to maintain their
resolve in seeing this challenge through.

