Mr. Skinner Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): As this is the last day of January, we would
like to congratulate the Russian Federation on its
assumption of presidency for this month and on having
convened this very important meeting on the
Peacebuilding Commission. We are certain that it will
contribute to our collective effort to strengthen
international peace and security, making it possible to
secure sustainable development for States immersed in
post-conflict situations.

In August of last year, under the presidency of
Ghana, we had an opportunity to discuss this item in an
open debate (see S/PV.5509) on peace consolidation in
West Africa, a region that is in one of the world's most
vulnerable continents. It must be said that half of the
countries concluding peace agreements after
experiencing conflict situations relapse into conflict
even after such agreements are signed.

In the light of our own experience, which taught
us valuable lessons and places us in a special position
to comment on this issue, we would underscore all the
elements of our history that led to our multifaceted
peace process. In point of fact, despite the fact that we
have achieved significant progress, Guatemalan
society, 10 years after signing the Peace Agreements, is
not fully reconciled. We still need to set the foundation
for a more equitable and participatory society, rebuild
our social fabric and create opportunities for
development without exclusion.

Allow me to refer to the role to be played by the
Peacebuilding Commission. After its initial
organizational and informational meetings, it is now to
contribute effectively to creating a favourable
environment to strengthen institutional capacities, as
well as to articulate strategies that will help to achieve
sustainable peace and development in post-conflict
societies.

We believe that this Commission has filled a
large gap in the United Nations system. For the first
time in history the Organization now has a
pre-established system with an adequate mandate to
deal with and eradicate all stages of conflict, that is, to
prevent conflict and maintain and build international
peace and security. Never before have we had such
complex tools for assisting countries where peace has
been violated and where there are serious violations of
human rights, countries which lack human security and
good governance, where people do not enjoy
democracy and rule of law and are victims of food
insecurity and extreme poverty, to mention just a few
of the challenges facing people when they emerge from
prolonged conflict.

We must now ensure that all of these mechanisms
will be effective and long-standing as well as flexible.
We must ensure that they are always based on the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.

We must bear in mind that building peace is not
achieved only by preventing outbreaks of violence, nor
by physical rebuilding, nor by establishing a legal basis
for a State. The Peacebuilding Commission must go far
beyond that and support comprehensive changes that
will eliminate practices of social, economic and
political exclusion and transform State institutions so
that citizens not only have renewed faith in those
institutions but also can participate in them. Those
institutions must meet the greatest needs of the
population, beginning with demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration following with
reconciliation, compensation and due process.

Bearing in mind the experience gained in the ad
hoc advisory groups of the Economic and Social
Council on African countries emerging from conflict,
we believe that it is important for the Commission to
collaborate proactively, not just in the important work
of mobilizing international cooperation, but also in
aiding national authorities to establish their own
priorities and design realistic strategies and consistent
policies appropriate to the circumstances and
environment of each country.

With regard to the cooperation that the
Commission can provide to the Security Council, it
must be, first, of an advisory capacity, to propose
integrated peacebuilding and recovery strategies
following conflicts, and it must provide information to
ensure predictable financing for initial recovery
activities.

Secondly, it must serve as a real link between the
activities carried out immediately after a conflict, on
the one hand, and recovery and development activities
in the long term, on the other hand, in which all actors
are involved in an organized process of transition and
recovery. They must be able to interact openly and
transparently in this process.
Thirdly, such cooperation must also provide a
follow-up mechanism to ensure that due attention is
paid at the international level to countries emerging
from conflicts, even when the peacekeeping forces
have stopped playing an active role. Consolidation of
peace must be seen as part of the process. We must not
forget the role of the Economic and Social Council in
its own area, contributing to greater interaction,
coordination and harmony, not just between both
Councils, but also throughout the United Nations
system.

International cooperation and coordination are
essential, and the role of the United Nations worldwide
is irreplaceable. Therefore, building peace does not just
depend on the daily work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, nor the work of the Economic and Social
Council, nor that of the Security Council or of
peacekeeping missions, nor on the support provided by
agencies, funds and programmes. It depends also on
establishing and strengthening the context in which
dialogue, tolerance and understanding can flourish.
Peacebuilding must be the result of an internal effort,
complemented significantly by the United Nations and
the international community, which must always work
in solidarity, but never as a replacement.

