Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of
Uganda, the Special Envoy of the President of Rwanda
and the Minister of Finance of Burundi. We welcome
their presence at this open meeting of the Security
Council.

The Chinese delegation appreciates the efforts
undertaken by the Panel of Experts and Ms. Ba-N'Daw
in submitting the final report on the illegal exploitation
of natural resources and other forms of wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We support the
President of the Council in convening this meeting to
listen to the views of the parties concerned. This will
help put an end to the looting and illegal exploitation
of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Judging from the relevant information provided
by the Panel report, the illegal exploitation and looting
of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have become rampant and are closely linked
to the continuation of the conflict. On this question,
like other countries, we believe that the Security
Council should take appropriate measures to put an end
to this looting and illegal exploitation and should pave
the way for the proper resolution of the conflict.
Therefore, we endorse the extension of the mandate of
the Panel for an appropriate period of time.

From what we have heard today at this meeting,
we understand that the report of the Panel has had
various strong repercussions. While fully affirming the
efforts of the Panel, we also believe that the report has
room for improvement. In some of the information
provided in the report, there is no clear distinction
between cases with conclusive evidence and those with
evidence that is either inadequate or merely hearsay.
We hope that, in the next phase of its work, the Panel
of Experts will apply stricter standards. It should, in
particular, focus its work on the looting and illegal
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, address the principal questions
of significance and base its conclusions on hard
evidence.

For the sake of its domestic development and an
expeditious resolution of the conflict, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as a sovereign State, must
exploit its own natural resources. To link all
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with the continuation of the
conflict would contradict the facts and be inimical to
solving the problem of illegal exploitation. The conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is an intricate
and complicated one, involving such issues as the
withdrawal of foreign troops, the internal political
dialogue, the disarmament of armed groups, national
reconciliation and the security concerns of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours.
To a great extent, these issues are interconnected and
affect one another.

The international community, especially the
countries of the Great Lakes region, must work
together. The signatories to the Lusaka Agreement
need to implement it in earnest and expeditiously
translate into action the commitments made under it. In
order to solve the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, it will be necessary in the long run to
achieve reconciliation among all nationalities and all
political forces within the country.

With respect to the external environment, all
countries in the Great Lakes region must enjoy peace
and stability on the basis of such norms of international
relations as mutual respect for state sovereign,
territorial integrity and non-interference in internal
affairs; they must also coexist peacefully and develop
normal inter-State relationships. We have noted that the
situation in the Great Lakes region has recently
undergone some positive changes. The countries of the
region have had increasing contact and have made
positive efforts to improve inter-State relations. We
hope that the parties to the conflict will treasure the
hard-won momentum towards peace, take positive
measures in a proactive and determined way and with
statesmanlike vision and courage, and make effective
efforts to end the conflict as soon as possible and to
establish a peaceful and friendly environment
conducive to the continued existence and development
of the Great Lakes region.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has long
been mired in an intractable conflict. The country and
its people have experienced formidable hardships and
are faced with daunting challenges to put an end to the
conflict and achieve peace. Their post-conflict tasks
rapidly to eradicate poverty, achieve national
reconciliation and consolidate peace will be most
arduous. We appeal to the international community to
resort to all possible ways and means to support and
assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Chinese Government and people will, as
always, work with the international community and
continue to make tireless efforts in this regard.

