Mr. Ajawin (South Sudan): At the outset, my
delegation would like to express its profound thanks
and appreciation to Pakistan and the members of
the Security Council for convening this important
debate on the theme "United Nations peacekeeping:
a multidimensional approach". Equally, I would like
personally to extend my Government's appreciation
and gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
continuous support to my Government in ensuring that
peace, stability and development are realized in our
nascent State.

Since the independence of the Republic of South
Sudan from the Sudan, on 9 July 2011, our nascent
State has confronted enormous nation-building and
development tasks. In addressing issues pertaining
to nation-building and developmental challenges
facing the country, the Government of South Sudan
and the United Nations embarked immediately on
a peacebuilding support plan. The plan emanated
from resolution 1996 (2011), which mandated the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to
elaborate a peacebuilding support plan. Subsequently,
the Secretary-General produced a report with the idea
of putting in operation paragraph 18 of the resolution,
in which the Secretary-General requested his Special
Representative to work with the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan, the United Nations country
team and bilateral and multilateral partners, including
the World Bank, to produce a plan for United Nations
system support for specific peacebuilding tasks.

The underlying objective of the plan was to
undertake security sector reform, police institutional
development, the rule of law, justice sector support,
human rights, capacity-building, early recovery, the
formulation of national policies related to key issues
of State-building, development and establishing a
conducive environment for economic development that
would be consistent with national priorities, with a view
to contributing to producing a common framework for
monitoring progress in those areas. Some measurable
progress has been achieved one year after UNMISS
began operations in South Sudan. Nevertheless, much
remains to be done, especially in the following areas.

First, with regard to the protection of civilians, in
the past year my country witnessed an unwarranted and
unprovoked attack by the Government of the Republic
of the Sudan, in particular aerial bombardment and
other border incursions. Those aggressions led to many
civilian casualties, especially among innocent women
and children. Although the duty of civilian protection
is one of the Government's priorities, my Government
would like to see a more robust mechanism put in place
by UNMISS to protect vulnerable civilians from aerial
bombardment.

Secondly, with regard to communication and
coordination with the Government, my Government
understands that communication and coordination
with UNMISS is of critical importance, especially in
achieving the objectives set out in the mandate. The
issue of the movement of UNMISS personnel across
the country is critical. The lack of such communication
with the Government and security organs sometimes
results in potentially dangerous situations.

Allow my delegation to take this opportunity to
express our condolences to the Government of the
Russian Federation and to the families of the crew
involved in the helicopter incident that took place in
Jonglei on 21 December 2012. We assure them that the
Government of South Sudan is carrying out a fair and
credible investigation into the incident. We await its
findings.

Thirdly, concerning the issue of infrastructure,
UNMISS has managed to achieved some progress
in infrastructure development. Nevertheless, my
Government believes that it is equally important that
the Mission achieve more in the area of infrastructure
development, especially with regard to quick-impact
projects, with UNMISS operational sites at the country
level, such as police facilities and community centres.
Given the impassibility of roads in South Sudan, we
encourage UNMISS to construct more accessible roads
at the national, state, and local Government levels.

Fourthly, with regard to the rule of law, the
Government of the Republic of South Sudan appreciates
the work of UNMISS, especially in the areas pertaining
to the rule of law. However, to achieve greater success
and measurable progress in that area, UNMISS should
consider, first, the need for greater support and capacity-
building for judges and legal advisers and, secondly,
the fact that our police forces need to be certified for
international recognition so as to be able to participate
in regional coordination events.

In conclusion, the experience of UNMISS in South
Sudan has been an enriching one and will continue to
be so. It has enormously helped our Government to
overcome many of the teething problems associated
with a country's emergence from the post-conflict
stage. To improve the effectiveness of UNMISS under
its Chapter VII mandate, it would be prudent for the
Security Council and the Government of South Sudan
to continue building on what has been achieved so
far, while working on the gaps and challenges that the
Government has identified with regard to the operation
of the Mission.

