Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting. I welcome the
participation of the Secretary-General and of the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council in today's discussion, and I thank
them for their important statements.

Post-conflict situations involve more than
national reconciliation, humanitarian assistance, the
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants and
national reconstruction. They also involve relations
with neighbouring countries and the stabilization of the
situation in the regions concerned. Whether the United
Nations can play its role in post-conflict situations will
depend mainly on the political will of the parties to the
conflict and on their firm commitment to peace
agreements. Those are the conditions required for the
United Nations to play its role. The international
community's steadfast support, both politically and in
terms of resources, is an important guarantee of the
maintenance of stability and the promotion of
economic development after conflicts. That is
especially true for economically underdeveloped
regions, Africa in particular.

Furthermore, the United Nations should promptly
formulate a comprehensive strategy to strengthen its
coordination and cooperation with relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations;
only thus can we achieve the desired results. It must
also be pointed out that conflict situations around the
world vary. One-size-fits-all approaches can hardly be
effective; rather, the United Nations should take a
tailored approach by taking into full consideration the
particularities of the issues involved and devoting
attention to the views of the countries concerned and of
the parties to conflicts.

At present, the international community is
watching closely the post-conflict arrangements for and
rebuilding of Iraq, particularly the way in which the
United Nations will play its role. Like many other
countries, we believe that, because the Security
Council adopted a series of resolutions on weapons
inspections, sanctions and the oil-for-food programme
with regard to Iraq, the management of those issues in
post-conflict Iraq will require the Council's
participation and decisions. The participation of the
United Nations in the post-conflict management and
rebuilding of Iraq will enable us to mobilize the
international community to provide the various forms
of support and cooperation so essential for Iraq, which
requires rebuilding in every area.

China welcomes any programme that is in the
Iraqi people's interests and promotes the restoration of
peace and stability in Iraq and the region as a whole.
We are confident that, with flexibility, realism and a
constructive approach, we shall be able to find
common ground and to realize that the United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, not only should but
also can play their roles.

