Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): It is
truly an honour to welcome Mr. Kouchner back to the
Security Council, which has become his home away
from Pristina. I congratulate him on his extraordinarily
moving, important and comprehensive presentation,
and, on behalf of my Government, on his extraordinary
accomplishments in Kosovo over the past year and a
half. I join him in remembering the brave United
Nations peacekeepers who have died in Kosovo, and
elsewhere, in the service of peace.

About three weeks ago, when I visited Mr.
Kouchner in Kosovo, I saw first-hand the progress
which he has described today. Who could have
imagined a little more than a year ago that Kosovo
would have reached the point it has today? The
achievements are due to Mr. Kouchner's dynamism and
his leadership, and to the entire international effort.
The success of the 28 October municipal elections is
one testimony to that effort. Mr. Kouchner's inspired
and dynamic leadership has helped begin the rebuilding
of a devastated and demoralized society.

Before we talk about the future-and we
must-let us remember how many things warned
about and predicted in this Chamber have not
happened, how many criticisms were unjustified in the
light of what has happened. Let us recognize that, as
difficult as it has been, the effort that the United
Nations has made in Kosovo has prevented a
continuation of violence and, with the change of
political leadership in Belgrade, which was not
anticipated at the time, has created new opportunities.

Contrary to the predictions of many, and of some
in this Chamber, the elections were not plagued by
violence, as Mr. Kouchner has pointed out. Turnout
was high and the balloting was peaceful. The vote was
primarily for moderate civilian leaders. I would note
that the leaders of the two parties with the largest
number of votes, Ibrahim Rugova and Hashim Thaci,
are both headed, as we speak, for Dayton, Ohio, to
participate in marking the fifth anniversary of the
Dayton Peace Agreement on Bosnia. That in itself is
also symbolic and significant, because, as all members
know, one of the complaints of the Albanians was that
Kosovo was not discussed at Dayton. That is not true;
in fact, Kosovo was repeatedly discussed at Dayton.
But an agreement on Kosovo was not possible because
the three leaders there-Milosevic, Izetbegovic and
Tudjman-refused to discuss it, and we had other
business to deal with. But the fact that they are now
travelling to Dayton to celebrate the fifth anniversary
of the Bosnian agreements reinforces Mr. Kouchner's
point that peace in Kosovo is essential to regional
stability; it illustrates the centrality of implementing
the Dayton Peace Agreement to everything we are
doing; and it is a highly symbolic act in many other
ways. I know others of you in this Chamber and
elsewhere will be going to Dayton, and I look forward
to seeing you there. I myself will be leaving for Dayton
shortly.

Mr. Kouchner has also pointed to the problems
that remain in the region, and especially in Kosovo. We
should not be oblivious to them. The basic problem is
that the two communities really do not like each other.
The bitterness and enmity between them are far deeper
than in Bosnia. I agree with Mr. Kouchner that it will
take time to sort this out. We are five years past Dayton
and we are still far short of where we want to be,
although the progress has been dramatic. If that
progress is sustained; if we do not lose heart in Bosnia;
if we stick to it, we will achieve our goals.

Kosovo is at an earlier stage of development,
barely a year after the end of the bombing and the
introduction of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR). I am encouraged
by much of what I have seen, but I do not think that we
should fool ourselves. The bitterness is deep. The Serb
boycott of the election on 28 October and their desire
to participate in elections for the Republic of Serbia's
own leaders bespeaks the deep, unresolved question of
status that, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999),
must be addressed at a future date. I made this point to
the principal Albanian and Serb leaders when I was in
Kosovo. I am delighted that Mr. Kouchner continues to
follow an aggressive strategy of pressing for
reconciliation.

These serious problems are the result of centuries
of ethnic dispute in Kosovo. Again I stress that that
was not true in Bosnia. The ethnic dispute in Bosnia
was superficial and manageable. This one is much
deeper. The ethnic dispute in Kosovo was particularly
exacerbated by years of repression and mistrust by the
Milosevic regime.

We now have a democratically chosen President
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is now a member of the United
Nations and of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I am pleased to state
today that the United States and Yugoslavia will
establish diplomatic relations over the next few days. It
gives me great pleasure to welcome the Yugoslav
Charge d'affaires to the Security Council today. I look
forward to him speaking later this morning on behalf of
Yugoslavia. That will be the second appearance by a
Yugoslav representative in the Security Council in the
three short weeks since Yugoslavia joined the United
Nations, another symbol of the speed and effectiveness
with which President Kostunica and Foreign Minister
Svilanovic and his colleagues are moving. When I met
with them in Skopje and New York, I was deeply
impressed by their commitment to democracy and the
rule of law, regional cooperation and the full
implementation of both the Dayton Agreement and
resolution 1244 (1999).

President Kostunica referred to his three
"constitutions": the Yugoslav Constitution, resolution
1244 (1999) and the Dayton Agreement. He also said
that he accepted the Dayton Agreement and resolution
1244 (1999) as having the effect of international
treaties. We welcome that commitment to the rule of
law, which makes the possibilities for reconciliation in
Kosovo very great. As I have said before, and I wish to
repeat again today, the region has not yet absorbed the
full implications ofthe "earthquake" that took place in
Belgrade in September. The opportunities are only
beginning to become clear. I will address this at greater
length at Dayton tomorrow night, when I speak in more
detail to these issues.

I am encouraged to hear from Mr. Kouchner that
the process of implementing resolution 1244 (1999) is
well launched. The municipal councils have been set
up. The self-governance that resolution 1244 (1999)
calls for is beginning to be launched. Serbs and other
minorities are being appointed to the councils, and I
hope they will participate. I understand from the
briefing we have just heard that they will, but we all
know that things can change. I look forward to
following this with great attention.

These trends must continue. Kosovo must have
the opportunity to develop full, democratic self-
governance, as called for in resolution 1244 (1999). In
that regard I strongly support Mr. Kouchner's call for
Kosovo-wide elections as soon as possible, elections
that should include the participation of all groups in
Kosovo. I will say what he did not say, that when I was
in Pristina there was a dispute in the international
community over when those elections should be held.
Many members of the OSCE thought that they could
not be held for at least a year.

I want to associate myself with Mr. Kouchner's
preference for early elections. I think a one-year delay
would be a tremendous mistake. I think the idea that
one needs a year to prepare them is ridiculous. I want
to be as clear as I can on this point. We will continue to
press for early elections. The longer we wait, the more
difficult it will be to conduct them and the more likely
that they will turn on the wrong sets of issues. So I
strongly support my friend's call for an early election. I
will continue to oppose this continual foot-dragging
that comes from some OSCE members for what they
call technical reasons that are actually bureaucratic
reasons.

With regard to the 23 December elections for the
Government in Serbia, I also wish to state my strong
support for what Mr. Kouchner has just said. But I
want to underscore another point that was implicit but
not explicit in his statement. That point is that the 23
December elections in Serbia are of immense
importance to the future of the region. Nothing that he
has said, and nothing that I am about to say, should be
misunderstood as in any way vitiating our strong
support for those elections. Those elections are
historically important. The Serbian people need to
express themselves clearly about whom they wish to
run Serbia.

I am not going to argue today the legalities of the
Serb election as opposed to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia election, or the complexities that resolution
1244 (1999) raises with regard to that. These are very
difficult calls. I will simply say that the elections are
eight weeks away. If Mr. Kouchner says that UNMIK
cannot do what it would have to do to make the
elections possible on technical grounds - and let me
add to that the fact that commanders of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) have told me and
others that if UNMIK conducted these elections it
would require a significant number of additional
combat battalions to go in and keep security - those
are to my Government dispositive. Therefore the
United States supports Mr. Kouchner's view that
UNMIK, and by extension, KFOR, cannot run the
elections in Kosovo on technical grounds, independent
of the complicated legal issues - which we are not
going to be able to resolve here today. Again I want to
state my view that this is in the context of the strongest
possible support for the Republic of Serbia, in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, to conduct these
elections in a free and democratic way, and to express
the will ofthe people of the Republic of Serbia.

Let me finally turn to the problem of detainees
and missing persons. The enormous importance of that
issue and the repetition with which it comes up require
us to address it. We are encouraged by President
Kostunica's support for an amnesty law and by the
release of Ms. Brovina. The expeditious release of the
rest of the prisoners would ease the crisis in Kosovo
enormously. I look forward to movement in that
direction.

I want to end on a personal note about the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, my friend and
colleague, Bernard Kouchner, with whom I have been
associated now over eight long years in the search for
peace in the Balkans, and whose prior career in other
parts of the world, with Medecins sans Frontieres and
other groups, needs no reiteration here. Not only does
the United States support him strongly, but we admire
him at the highest level and are grateful for his
remarkable efforts in the most difficult of
circumstances. Without his leadership, his strength and
his efforts, the progress of the past year and a half
would almost certainly not have been possible.

I note that Mr. Kouchner referred several times
indirectly to the possibility that he may not be
reporting again to the Security Council in his present
capacity. That is very subtle, but I am a trained
diplomatic observer, and I heard the references,
Bernard. I hope that this is not true, and I frankly doubt
it. I think we will see you here in this Chamber again
before you leave, and I personally would want to see
you here. We need your leadership. We need your
guidance, as long as you are prepared to make the
personal sacrifices - and they are very substantial-
that this extraordinarily difficultjob entails.

Mr. President, if and when Bernard Kouchner
does leave-and in the end all people leave jobs,
particularly ones this trying and demanding, and with
this much personal sacrifice-I hope that the
Secretary-General will be able to find a successor as
extraordinarily talented as the man we have heard from
today.

