Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): The draft resolution before
us demands that Iraq rescind immediately and
unconditionally the decisions taken to suspend cooperation
with the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM)
and to maintain restrictions on the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA).

 

We are among those who believe that the situation in
Iraq will see notable improvement with the commencement
of the comprehensive review and are therefore disappointed
at the latest turn of events. We expect the Government of
Iraq to fulfil its obligations under all relevant Security
Council resolutions and to cooperate fully with the IAEA
and UNSCOM. on the basis of the Memorandum of
Understanding of 23 February 1998. It is on the basis of the
understanding reached therein that a way forward must be
forged to facilitate the conclusion of the outstanding issues
and de-escalate the tension caused by recent developments.

We are grateful that our concerns regarding the
content of the draft resolution were taken on board,
including the demand that Iraq rescind its decisions of 31
October and 5 August this year; the reaffirmation of the
Council's readiness to take up the comprehensive review;
the intention of the Council, as spelt out in operative
paragraph 5, to act in accordance with the relevant
provisions of resolution 687 (1991) on the duration of the
prohibitions; full support for the efforts of the Secretary-
General and our confidence in his ability to carry this
process forward on the basis of the Memorandum of
Understanding; and our understanding that the present draft
resolution contains nothing that could open the door in any
eventuality for any kind of action without the clear and
precise authority of the Security Council. In that respect,
we are happy to note that the Security Council, in operative
paragraph 6 of the draft resolution,

"Decides, in accordance with its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security, to remain actively
seized of the matter."

It is, inter alia, on the basis of that understanding that my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

In conclusion, we would once again like to see a
resumption of full cooperation between Iraq and the United
Nations, and urge Iraq to act quickly and decisively in
addressing the current situation.

