The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, Without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members have before them document
S/2010/407, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Japan, Turkey, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2010/406, containing the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 1883 (2009). I also wish to draw the
attention of members to document S/2010/404,
containing a note verbale dated 28 July 2010 from the
Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.


The President (spoke in Russian): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1936 (2010).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.10 a.m.
10-475 71

