Mrs. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset,
let me thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and
Ambassador Kairat Umarov, for their briefings today.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General and
the recommendations contained therein (S/2018/1092).

We are emphasizing today the central and
impartial role of the United Nations in promoting
peace and stability in Afghanistan, expressing our
appreciation and strong support for all of the efforts of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
for Afghanistan. The Kyrgyz Republic welcomes
the adoption of the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework, as reflected in the communique adopted
at the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan
held on 27 and 28 November 2018.

We reiterate our serious concern about the security
situation in Afghanistan. We wish to stress the need
to continue addressing the threat to the security and
stability of Afghanistan caused by region-based
terrorist groups and other illegal armed groups and
criminals. We call upon all States to strengthen their
international and regional cooperation in enhancing
information-sharing, border control, law enforcement
and criminal justice.

The Kyrgyz Republic welcomes the steps taken by
the Government of Afghanistan to promote an Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned peace through the Kabul Process
for Peace and Security Cooperation, including through
the offer of unconditional talks, a temporary ceasefire
and a request to the Taliban to respond to the call for
peace from the Afghan people and their Government.

We welcome the achievements of the National Unity
Government in political, economic, governance and
social reforms and in the management of the transition.
We further welcome the holding of parliamentary
elections in October 2018, which marked another
important step towards the consolidation of democracy
in the country.

Kyrgyzstan considers Afghanistan to be a
significant regional partner and attaches great
importance to cooperation with Afghanistan in the
implementation of regional projects, including the
CASA-1000 energy project. That will contribute to
the economic development of the country, as well as
resolving a number of socioeconomic problems.

The Kyrgyz Republic is promoting an initiative
to establish a trilateral agro-industrial consortium
among Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Afghanistan.
We also note that the education sector plays an
important role in the process of restoring a peaceful
Afghanistan. In that regard, we express our readiness
to consider the possibility of teaching Afghan students
in our educational institutions, with financial support
from foreign donors - countries and international
organizations. Currently, the Government of the Kyrgyz
Republic and its Afghan partners are implementing
a pilot project to teach children from ethnic Kyrgyz
families living in the Big and Little Pamir mountains of
Afghanistan in educational institutions of Kyrgyzstan.

On 11 and 12 July, at the initiative of Kyrgyzstan,
representatives of the countries of Central Asia,
Afghanistan, UNAMA and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the issue of
deepening cooperation between the Central Asian
countries and Afghanistan was discussed. That included
the establishment in Bishkek of an international
centre for Afghan research and a regional cooperation
platform for politicians, experts and scientists to discuss
topical issues regarding Afghanistan's development
and to prepare relevant recommendations, including
on strengthening cooperation among the countries of
Central Asia and Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I would like to note that we support
the commitment of all Central Asian countries to joint
long-term cooperation with Afghanistan. Together
with our international partners, we are ready to fully
cooperate in order to resolve the issues before us.

