Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): On 3 April 1991, in resolution 687 (1991) the
Security Council decided to establish a Special
Commission which

"shall carry out immediate on-site inspection of
Iraq's biological, chemical and missile capabilities,
based on Iraq's declarations and the designation of
any additional locations by the Special Commission
itself" [resolution 687 (1991), para. 9 (b) (i)]

That resolution is the legal and political framework which
both defines and guides all the activities of the Special
Commission, by clearly laying down its mandate and the
obligations of the Iraqi authorities in the carrying out of
this mission, decided upon by the Security Council on
behalf of the international community.
Relations between the representatives of the
Government of Iraq and the Special Commission have not
always been in line with the spirit and the letter of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. This is why the
Security Council has always studied the successive reports
of the Special Commission on the progress of its work
with particular attention and has noted with concern the
existence and persistence of certain difficulties, and even
impediments to the execution of its mandate.

Many presidential statements and Security Council
resolutions have recognized this state of affairs and
expressed unambiguously the disapproval of the members
of the Council with regard to the attitude and conduct of
certain representatives of the Iraqi authorities, because in
the Council's opinion they had departed from prior
commitments and amounted to a serious failure to fulfil
obligations. The Security Council has several times had
to remind the Iraqi authorities how vital it was, as it still
is, to cooperate fully with the Executive Chairman of the
Special Commission and all the members of his team so
as to facilitate their work and ensure that the purpose of
the mission entrusted to them by the Security Council is

 

achieved in a satisfactory manner, because this is a
precondition for the operation of the mechanisms provided
for in resolution 687 (1991).

On 21 June 1997 the Security Council renewed its
appeal and reiterated the principles underlying its action by
adopting resolution 1115 (1997). Unfortunately, this did not
have the desired results; it certainly did not lead to any
change of attitude by the Iraqi authorities. Given the
persistence of serious incidents, and faced with the need to
shoulder its responsibilities with regard to not only the
Special Commission, but all its personnel and the
international community in general, the Security Council
concluded after lengthy deliberations that further measures
needed to be considered, measures which, by their coercive
nature, could persuade the Iraqi authorities to respect their
obligation to comply scrupulously with Security Council
decisions by removing all the obstacles hampering the
Special Commission or preventing it from carrying out its
mandate. This was the thinking and purpose of resolution
1134 (1997).

The Security Council regarded as unacceptable the
decision of the Iraqi authorities of 29 October, which
challenges the operational capacity of the Special
Commission and certain cardinal principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, particularly Article 100. For several
days, considerable efforts have been made to convince the
Iraqi authorities of the need to rescind that decision, a
decision which does not respect the established rules and,
moreover, does nothing to further the interests of the Iraqi
people. It is a decision whose possible consequences must
be clear to all.

The Special Commission was set up by the Security
Council and acts in its name. Therefore, the Council cannot
tolerate disregard for its decisions or allow the Special
Commission to be prevented from continuing its work to
carry out its mandate.

In the view of my delegation, it should be possible to
resolve the current crisis through dialogue without
abandoning certain fundamental principles. The members of
the Council have tried hard, and continue to try, to ensure
that reason prevails, by favouring direct contact with the
Iraqi authorities to reach a solution. The highly
commendable initiative of the Secretary-General in sending
three personal representatives to Baghdad and the bilateral
approaches by many countries to Iraq are eloquent
testimony to, and further evidence of, our desire to see the
role accorded diplomacy further strengthened.

The aim of the Security Council is not and could not
be to inflict further suffering on the Iraqi people, who
have already been put through so much by so many years
of hardship. But we are not responsible for this hardship.
We are certainly very well aware of all the suffering of
the Iraqi people. That is why the Security Council
adopted resolution 986 (1995), in order to attest to its
sensitivity to their sufferings and demonstrate its
awareness of its responsibility to seek appropriate
solutions.

But the international community cannot forget the
reasons that compelled the Security Council to impose
sanctions on Iraq in its name. All States have the
obligation to comply with and respect the principles set
out in the United Nations Charter, in particular that of
non-aggression and non-occupation by force. What
happened in Kuwait must never happen again. And I
would add that it is our duty to persist in seeking to
determine the fate of prisoners of war and persons who
disappeared during the occupation of Kuwait, without
forgetting the vital need to restore to Kuwait all its
records and other illegally seized assets.

My delegation desires to see the creation of all the
necessary conditions for the Special Commission to
continue its work without difficulty or hindrance, with a
team that should continue to be distinguished by its
ability, impartiality and diversity of national origin, which
are the basic, essential and inviolable criteria for any
action carried out in the name of and on behalf of the
United Nations. This is the goal of the draft resolution.
Guinea-Bissau will support its adoption and assist in its
implementation.

