Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank Assistant Secretaries-
General Mueller and J enca and Mr. Apakan and
Mr. Sajdik, representing the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, for their enlightening and
informative briefings.

Four years since the conclusion of the Minsk
agreements, we note that large-scale violent clashes
have subsided. However, we also note that ceasefire
violations continue almost every day, resulting in
deaths and injuries not only among combatants, but
also within the civilian population. The implementation
of the agreements' key provisions remains a dead letter,
even though it represents the only means to achieve a
lasting political solution to the conflict. We therefore
call on both sides to fully and swiftly implement the
Minsk agreements, pursuant to resolution 2202 (2015),
and to honour their commitments. We support the
efforts of the Trilateral Contact Group, as well as those
under the Normandy format, to that end.

We call on Russia to immediately stop fuelling the
conflict by providing financial and military support to
armed groups. We call on Russia to use its influence
on those armed formations to encourage them to
fully respect their commitments under the Minsk
agreements. We regret that obstacles have prevented the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine from properly
carrying out its monitoring and reporting tasks there.
The Mission plays a crucial role in de-escalating
tensions. We strongly encourage the parties to the
conflict to respect the Mission's mandate and allow it
safe and unhindered access to all Ukrainian territory,
including along the border between Ukraine and Russia
and in the Crimea.

The lack of progress in the implementation of the
Minsk agreements is being felt on the ground. We remain
deeply concerned about reports of Russian military
equipment and personnel present in areas controlled by
armed formations. The presence of heavy weapons, in
contravention of the Minsk agreements, continues to
pose a threat to the civilian population on both sides of
the line of contact. We call for the complete withdrawal
of those weapons and the disengagement of troops from
those areas. We commend the Ukrainian authorities
for extending the special status law for the Donbas
region, which is one of the cornerstones of the Minsk
agreements. On the other hand, Belgium condemns
the November 2018 holding of elections in the rebel
Donetsk and Luhansk regions. Those elections violate
both the letter and the spirit of the Minsk agreements.
Belgium remains deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine. We urge
all parties to allow full, continuous and unhindered
access in accordance with humanitarian principles.
We are particularly concerned about the fact that
critical civilian infrastructure, such as that associated
with water supply, is being targeted. As the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs mentioned
earlier, 3.5 million people are in need of assistance
and protection owing to the widespread presence of
mines, increasing psychological trauma and the lack of
access to basic services. We share a deep concern about
their suffering and underscore the importance of the
multi-year humanitarian response plan for 2019-2020.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. We therefore do not
recognize the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia,
which we consider to be contrary to international law.
Recent tensions in the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait
due to Russian actions have only widened the gap
between the two sides. The only way to bridge that gap is
through dialogue, which we wholeheartedly encourage.

