Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, and your friendly country, Germany, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I should also like to
congratulate the Permanent Representative of France
for the able manner in which he presided over the
Council's work last month.

At this meeting, I shall read out my statement in
English.

(spoke in English)

We return to the Security Council, less than one
month since this body last met to address the crisis in
the occupied Palestinian territory, because Israel, the
occupying Power, continues its reign of terror against
the Palestinian people. To be more precise, Israel has
never ceased its campaign of death and destruction in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, as the Israeli occupying forces have
relentlessly, continuously and daily been committing
war crimes, State terrorism and systematic human
rights violations against the Palestinian people. As the
majority of the international community watches in
shock and disbelief, the occupying Power continues to
carry out extrajudicial executions of Palestinian leaders
and to kill, wound and maim defenceless Palestinian
civilians - including women and children - in grave
breach of international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

Two days ago, on Saturday, 17 April, less than
four weeks after the extrajudicial execution of Sheikh
Ahmed Yassin in Gaza City, the Israeli occupying
forces committed yet another extrajudicial execution
when they killed Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi, a political
leader of Hamas. The occupying forces fired missiles at
the vehicle in which he was riding, killing
Mr. Al-Rantisi and two other Palestinian men who
were with him. This was, in fact, the second time that
the occupying forces had targeted Mr. Al-Rantisi for
assassination; the first attempt was in June of 2003,
when seven missiles were fired at his car on a crowded
street in Gaza City. Although he survived that attack,
two Palestinians - including a woman - were killed
and 25 other people were wounded.

While it has become common practice for the
occupying Power to launch such military attacks
against targets in densely populated civilian areas in
the occupied Palestinian territory, endangering the
safety and lives of thousands of civilians, it is by no
means a legitimate or justified practice. The deliberate,
excessive, disproportionate and indiscriminate use of
force - including extrajudicial executions - being
carried out by Israel against the Palestinian civilian
population constitutes a grave breach of international
law and of Israel's obligations as an occupying Power,
as enshrined in international humanitarian law,
particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention.

This latest in a long series of war crimes
committed by the occupying Power was carried out in
fulfilment of the repeated threats of Israeli Prime
Minister Sharon and of other Israeli Government and
military officials to continue targeting Palestinian
leaders for assassination, in flagrant violation of
international law and in complete and total disregard
for the international community's condemnation of
such an illegal and barbaric policy and for its pleas and
demands for the cessation of that policy. Indeed,
following the attack on Saturday, Mr. Sharon and other
high-ranking Israeli officials publicly boasted and
congratulated themselves on the success of the
operation and proceeded to declare more threats against
Palestinian leaders.

It is without a doubt that the recent failure of the
Security Council to condemn the extrajudicial
execution of Sheikh Yassin and to take urgent measures

to address the deterioration of the situation - due to
the veto cast by one of the Council's permanent
members - has further emboldened the Israeli

Government to continue carrying out such illegal
actions with impunity. Without concern for reproach or
punishment or for the consequences of its actions,
Israel continues to behave as a State that is above the
law. Unable to uphold its duties for the maintenance of
international peace and security when it comes to the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, the
Security Council has allowed Israel to continue acting
beyond the parameters of international law, permitting
it to use the most oppressive measures and practices to
impose more death and destruction and loss on the
Palestinian people under its occupation.

All of the atrocities being committed by Israel,
the occupying Power, have been committed against an
unarmed and defenceless civilian population that,
according to the provisions of international
humanitarian law governing military occupation,
should be considered protected persons. The occupying
Power is obligated to ensure the safety and well-being
of those persons. Failing that, those persons are entitled
to, and should be accorded, international protection.
Yet, time and again, the Security Council has failed to
take the necessary measures to ensure the protection of
the Palestinian civilian population in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, leaving
them at the mercy of the brute force and illegal policies
and practices of the occupying Power.

Parallel to, and in conjunction with, its illegal
actions against the Palestinian people, the Government
of Israel has intensified its attempts to carry out
unilateral actions intended to further entrench the
illegitimate measures already taken by Israel on the
ground in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. The meeting last week of Prime
Minister Sharon and United States President Bush and
their exchange of letters and assurances took these
attempts to impose a unilateral "disengagement" one
step further. The content of those letters violates
relevant provisions of international law, as reaffirmed
in numerous Security Council resolutions, and violates
the rights of the Palestinian people. It is an attempt to
confer legitimacy on some of Israel's illegal
settlements, to negate the rights of the Palestine
refugees and to dilute international opposition to the
catastrophic expansionist wall. The content is also a
complete departure from the road map, its substance
and the principle of achieving a peaceful settlement
through negotiations between the two parties and
without prejudgement or pre-emption of final status
issues. As such, the content makes the work of the
Quartet extremely difficult, if not impossible, to carry
out.

Even with regard to Gaza, the proposal falls far
short of any real withdrawal, keeping control of
international borders, airspace and water in the hands
of the occupier and maintaining the so-called "right" to
military attacks against Gaza. This is an extremely
negative and dangerous development, which the
international community must confront. We should
reaffirm the rule of international law, reaffirm the
principle of the two-State solution based on the 1967
borders and reaffirm the right of all States and peoples
to live in peace and security, free from attacks, terror
and destruction. Indeed, it has often been reaffirmed in
this very Council that there can be no military solution
to this conflict and that there can be no alternative to
adherence to international law and a negotiated, just
and comprehensive political solution.

Before I conclude, I wish to say a word on
fighting terror - the repeated pretext used by Israel to
justify all its actions, particularly the extrajudicial
executions, against the Palestinian people. We reiterate
in this Chamber that this is not what the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is about. Terrorism and violence
constitute one of the dynamics of this conflict. It is a
dynamic that has taken on more prominence only in
recent years, but it does not constitute the conflict
itself. Any parallels drawn between Israel's actions
against the Palestinian people and the war being waged
against global terrorism are inappropriate and
completely erroneous, and Israel's constant attempts to
draw such parallels and to exploit the international
fight against terrorism must be rejected.

What this conflict is about is the belligerent
military occupation of another people and their land by
a foreign Power for nearly four decades. It is about the
unrelenting aggression and transgressions against the
land and the people of Palestine by Israel, the
occupying Power. It is about Israel's refusal to end that
occupation, seeking all the while to acquire more land
by force and to eliminate more of the indigenous
population by wreaking widespread wanton death,
destruction and misery in the attempt to fulfil its
expansionist designs. And all the while, Israel has been
unconstrained in carrying out its unlawful and unjust
policies and practices before the eyes of the
international community.

The time is way overdue for the international
community to take urgent measures to address this
ongoing tragedy. The Security Council must take the
lead in this regard. The United Nations has a
permanent responsibility towards the question of
Palestine until it is resolved in all its aspects. The
Council must take bold and courageous actions to
ensure compliance with its own resolutions and
adherence to international law and to bring an end to
the cycle of violence and bloodshed that has prevented
the two peoples and the entire region from the
realization of genuine peace, freedom and security for
so many decades.

We are looking forward to seeing concrete action
in the form of a resolution taken very soon by the
Council.

