Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost, I would like to thank the
briefers, Mr. David Shearer, Mr. Andrew Gilmour and
Ms. Lydia Minagano, for their informative briefings. It
is also always a pleasure to see my brother Mr. Akuei
Malwal, Permanent Representative of South Sudan, in
the Chamber.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea deplores
the delays in the implementation of the political and
security tasks set out in the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic
of South Sudan, signed on 12 September 2018. In
that regard, we support the decision to extend by six
months the pre-transition period for completing the
immediate political and security tasks, since that will
be a significant step forward in restoring peace to
South Sudan.

We would like to remind the parties that the six
months should not be wasted. On the contrary, it is the
moment when they must assume their responsibilities
and demonstrate the political will necessary for the full
and timely implementation of the peace agreement, in
letter and spirit, considering that it has already become
clear that an inclusive political solution is the only way
to achieve peace in South Sudan. My country hopes
that the parties will work to make solid and rapid
progress in resolving the transitional arrangements.
The parties must also honour their commitments and
refrain from acts that could cause an already fragile
situation to deteriorate.

As a gesture emphasizing the determination and
commitment of the Government of South Sudan to the
peace process, we welcome its promise to contribute
$100 million to complete the outstanding activities ofthe
pre-transition period, and we encourage it to disburse
that funding in a timely and transparent manner. We
also encourage donors to continue to provide support to
the Government so that the Revitalized Agreement can
be fully implemented. While we commend the general
respect for the ceasefire, we deplore the persistent
sporadic fighting between Government forces and the
opposition, as well as among the opposition groups.
We also firmly condemn the continuing prevalence
of sexual violence and brutality against civilians, and
we urge the parties to spare no effort to bring those
responsible for those atrocities to justice. We are
equally concerned about the humanitarian situation and
the attacks on humanitarian workers and the personnel
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, which
are totally unacceptable. We therefore urge the parties,
particularly the Government, to ensure a more secure
and supportive environment for the humanitarian
workers who are working tirelessly to provide assistance
to South Sudan's most vulnerable civilians.

In conclusion, my Government appreciates the
mediation and commitment of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, as well as the staff of
the United Nations team and non-governmental
organizations for their work in providing humanitarian
assistance to the population. We would also like
to express our sincere thanks to the African Union
Commission for its active involvement in the collective
efforts for peace in South Sudan. We want to reiterate
our support for the people of South Sudan and its
authorities in the peace process. My country maintains
special ties with our brother country of South Sudan,
and we continue to hope that it can overcome its current
adversities and that its people can find a definitive
solution to their problems.

