Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for, as always,
a very comprehensive and insightful briefing. I would
like also to thank the speakers, the Ambassadors of
Palestine and of Israel.

I would like to align myself with the statement to
be delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Poland strongly supports all initiatives aimed at the
stabilization and strengthening of peace and security
in the Middle East. Unfortunately, since our previous
quarterly debate (S/PV.8167), there has not been any
significant progress towards the achievement of peace.
On the contrary, the situation on the ground continues
to deteriorate. That is why we should keep the Middle
East peace process high on our agenda. Today more than
ever before, our main goal should be the resumption
of a meaningful peace process. Our commitment to
resolving one of the longest-standing conflicts on
our agenda needs to be reinforced. Only a return to
meaningful bilateral negotiations, based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions and international law, can
make a positive impact on the process. That is the only
path leading towards a two-State solution and resolving
all final-status issues.

The creation of a political horizon, as well as an
appropriate framework for political progress, will be
possible only working together with our regional and
international partners, beginning with the Middle East
Quartet. The participation and peace proposals of the
United States would especially be helpful in renewing
the Middle East peace process. The constructive
development of solutions for achieving peace will
also require more active involvement on the part of
some countries of the region. Unfortunately, recent
developments in the Gaza Strip are extremely alarming.
The situation on the ground is very volatile. We share
the Special Coordinator's opinion that we run the risk
of a regional spillover of the conflict, especially as the
region is already facing many other challenges. We
should do our utmost to avoid any further escalation
and loss of life. In that context, Poland underlines the
crucial role that the United Nations can play to that
end, including the particular role played by Special
Coordinator Mladenov.

We urge Israel to respect the fundamental right
to peaceful protest. We also call on Israel to respect
the principle of proportionality with regard to the use
of force, especially when directed against unarmed
protesters, while it seeks to defend its legitimate security
interest. At the same time, leaders and organizers of
protests have to avoid incitement to violence and refrain
from exploiting protesters for other purposes. We call
for an independent and objective investigation of the
incidents that have taken place on the Israeli-Gaza
border since 30 March. In that context, we take note of
the fact-finding assessment mechanism established by
the Israel Defence Forces to review their actions and
specific incidents that have taken place on the Israeli-
Gaza border.

Overall, we attach extreme importance to the
prevention of any further escalation and loss of life.
We call on all sides to act with the utmost restraint and
responsibility. In that regard, we call for the respect
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, including the protection of civilians.
As has already been mentioned, the current situation
in Gaza can have significant consequences for regional
and international peace and security. It is the Security
Council's responsibility to address the situation in an
effective way. The Security Council should, therefore,
contribute to de-escalation efforts, including by publicly
articulating its position in an appropriate manner.

In line with the long-standing European Union
position, we reiterate our position on Jerusalem. We
firmly believe that the status of the city should enjoy
the mutual recognition of both parties' historical
relation and national claim to the city. We continue
to respect the international consensus on Jerusalem
embodied in, inter alia, resolution 478 (1980), including
on the location of diplomatic representations, until
the final status of Jerusalem is resolved. We support
the two-State solution, under which the national
aspirations of both parties to the conflict would be met,
including the Palestinian right to self-determination
and independence, as well as Israel's right to ensure
its security and the normalization of relations with
Arab States.

We are closely following developments in the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, and hope that that
process will be successful. However, we are aware that
reconciliation efforts have suffered severe setbacks
following the assassination attempt against Prime
Minister Hamdallah on 13 March. We therefore urge
all Palestinian factions to work together to ensure
the sustainable development of that process, thereby
allowing the Palestinian Authority to assume once
again its full responsibilities in Gaza. One single and
legitimate Palestinian Authority could be an important
step towards achieving the unity of a future Palestinian
State and the basis for a sustainable peace agreement.

We are deeply concerned about the deteriorating
financial situation of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). The effects of reducing support could
include grave security and humanitarian consequences
not only in the Palestinian territories, but also in other
countries hosting refugees. The Agency is already facing
the great challenge of fulfilling its mandate to maintain
the key services that it provides, such as education and
health care for Palestinian refugees. In the absence ofa
lasting political solution, the international community
cannot abdicate its responsibility and duty vis-a-vis
Palestinian refugees and must ensure the continuation
of the Agency's work on a sound financial foundation.
For its part, Poland will continue to support UNRWA
through its financial contributions.

In conclusion, allow me to briefly mention Lebanon
and reaffirm our strong support for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence
of that country. We underline the significance of the
upcoming parliamentary elections - the first of their
kind since 2009 - to be held in May. We support all
efforts to strengthen Lebanon's long-standing tradition
of democracy, freedom and diversity, which stands as a
model for the whole region.

