Mr. Greenblatt (United States ofAmerica): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing and for his redoubled
efforts to restore safety and security both to the people
of Israel, who came under sustained attack from Gaza,
and to the Palestinian civilians, among whom Hamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad members hid as they
launched wave after wave of rockets.

All of those innocent victims deserve better. The
families of the four Israelis who died and the 200
Israelis injured, and the Palestinian civilians killed
and injured by Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad
attacks all deserve better. It is simply unacceptable
that Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad continue to
target Israeli communities, including hospitals and
schools, in a cynical attempt to extract concessions
from Israel. It is simply unacceptable that Hamas and
Palestinian Islamic Jihad continue to use civilians in
Gaza, including children, as human shields. It is simply
unacceptable that Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad
continue to siphon the scarce resources of the people
of Gaza to build their terror arsenal while preventing
donor aid from reaching the people.

There will be no end to the suffering until all of
us together say in public what I believe many here
are thinking - Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad
are to blame for the suffering of the people of Gaza.
Nothing can be meaningfully fixed until they renounce
terror and cease their acts of violence and their vow to
destroy Israel. When will the Security Council say this
out loud? When Will we clearly reject this terrorism?
As President Trump has said, the United States will
always stand with Israel and we will always support
its right to self-defence. But we should not stand alone.
We must all speak loudly and clearly and say that these
attacks upon Israel, which are perpetrated by Hamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad - whether by rockets,
incendiary balloons or otherwise - must end. I was
just informed moments ago that Israeli firefighters are
working to extinguish six blazes caused by incendiary
balloons. Also, the terrible suffering that those attacks
cause Israelis and Palestinians must end.
Every Government has a responsibility to ensure
the safety and security of its citizens. Since its birth,
the State of Israel has faced threats from enemies
that call for its destruction and the death of the Israeli
people. The State of Israel has no margin for error. The
Palestinians are also entitled to safety and security. A
first step towards that goal is for us sitting here today to
admit that Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad are the
primary barrier to the dreams of the residents of Gaza
who want to live in peace, raise their families and find
meaningful work.

Mr. Mladenov's efforts on behalf of the United
Nations, together with Egypt, have created a fragile
peace in recent days. Qatar has sent funds, which has
eased some suffering. Keeping that fragile peace intact
will require intense international pressure on Hamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad. If that calm holds, I
look forward to working closely with all gathered here,
Mr. Mladenov and others to determine how we can best
help the people of Gaza move past 12 years of suffering
and deprivation into a world in which they can imagine
a real future.

On a separate but closely related topic, nothing
stops us now from undertaking the hard work of
ensuring that the Palestinians who receive services
from the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) have
access to more reliable and sustainable health and
education services. I thank UNRWA Commissioner-
General Krahenbiihl for his briefing today and for his
work over the years. But I am afraid that it is time for
him and everyone here today to face the reality that the
UNRWA model has failed the Palestinian people.

UNRWA's business model, which is inherently
tied to an endlessly and exponentially community of
beneficiaries, is in permanent crisis mode. That is why
the United States decided that it will no longer commit
to funding this irredeemably flawed operation. The
UNRWA model cannot provide to Palestinians what
they deserve - a life where they can plan for their
future and the future of their children, and one where
they know whether schools and health clinics will
remain open.

We did not come to that conclusion lightly. Since
UNRWA's founding, the United States has donated
$6 billion to it, vastly more than any other country.
And yet, year after year, UNRWA funding fell short.
Year after year, budget shortfalls threatened essential
services to Palestinian mothers and children. Year
after year, UNRWA and other donors turned to the
United States to make up the shortfall. And year after
year, Palestinian in refugee camps were not given the
opportunity to build any future. They were misled and
used as political pawns and commodities, instead of
treated as human beings.

UNRWA is currently running on fumes, surviving
on a surge in foreign donations in 2018 that is unlikely
to be sustained this year, or in future. What happens
when the Agency's bank account is empty again? We
need to be honest about the situation. UNRWA is a
band-aid, and the Palestinians who use its services
deserve better, much better. We do not have to a wait
until a comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is in place to address that fact.

For too long, we have dismissed the dismal situation
of Palestinians in refugee camps as an unavoidable
by-product of the lack of a negotiated peace between
Israel and the Palestinians. But nothing stops the
international community from choosing to reach out its
hand to Palestinians living in refugee camps today to
address their very real, everyday needs in a sustainable
way While we all continue to work towards a lasting
comprehensive peace.

We need to engage with host Governments to
start a conversation about planning the transition of
UNRWA services to host Governments or to other
international or local non-governmental organizations,
as appropriate. The United States is ready to participate
in that conversation. We tried to begin that conversation
before we cut our aid to UNRWA. No one wanted to
engage in that conversation back then. We remain ready
to begin that conversation now. It is time to start.

We do not advance a comprehensive and enduring
peace by ignoring the reality that UNRWA is unable to
fulfil the mandate given to it by the General Assembly.
We advance a comprehensive and enduring peace
by making it clear that the international community
is fully committed to providing a brighter future for
today's Palestinians and their children.

Palestinians have been held hostage for too long
to United Nations resolutions, regional politics,
donor fatigue and weak leadership. It has been 70
years - three generations of Palestinians who have
suffered tremendously. A similar number of Jewish
refugees expelled from Arab lands shortly after the
creation of the State of Israel also suffered tremendously.
But there is a difference. Those Jewish refugees' needs
for basic services and their desire to build a brighter
future for their children were not held hostage to
politics. It is time for the needs of Palestinians for basic
services and their desire to build a brighter future for
their children to stop being held hostage to politics. Do
we not have an obligation to the Palestinians to make
that transition?

Next month, in Bahrain, we and many others will
participate in an economic workshop on an alternative
path, with the potential to unlock a prosperous future
for Palestinians. That is the first stage ofa process that
we want to begin to showcase what could be - how,
if we can achieve a political solution to the conflict,
we can also transform the lives of the Palestinians. It
would be a mistake for the Palestinians not to join us.
They have nothing to lose and much to gain if they join
us, but it is, of course, their choice.

I cannot help but point out the irony that at the time
of our conference in Bahrain, which can pave the way
to prosperity for Palestinians, UNRWA is hosting a
pledging conference for a broken system. The United
States is committed to talking with others about how best
to address the fearful uncertainty of UNRWA's service
recipients, who are not sure whether schools or clinics
will be open, and how we might help them actually
build new lives - with or without a peace agreement.
But we are also committed to resolutely standing by
Israel as it address the urgent challenges presented by
Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad - attacks from
Gaza or elsewhere.

I approach this issue with humility. I acknowledge
that I have not brought with me today a solution - either
to the acute crisis of the violent and illegitimate rule of
Hamas over Gaza, or to the prolonged crisis caused by
UNRWA's inability to fulfil its original mandate, or to
any of the other challenges posed by this extraordinary
conflict. What we do know is that what we have today
is not the answer. We do know that Palestinians and
Israelis both deserve better. We do know that it is time
to move past band-aid solutions and political assertions
into the adult world of hard choices.

The hopes and dreams of Palestinians living in
refugee camps have been suspended for too long.
So have the hopes and dreams of Palestinians living
under the punishing rule of Hamas in Gaza. And so
too have the hopes of Israelis, who have lived under
constant threats for decades and who yearn for peace.
This conflict is sad and tragic and complex, on so many
levels. But we must stop pretending that UNRWA and
United Nations resolutions will somehow solve the
conflict. They simply will not. Let us work together to
find a real cure.
