Mr. Cheng Jingye (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to express appreciation to Ambassador Mufioz for
his comprehensive briefing. We note with satisfaction
the important efforts made by the 1267 Committee in
implementing resolution 1526 (2004). The
Committee's programme of work for 2004 is detailed
and practical, and the recent visits undertaken by
Ambassador Mufioz to concerned countries proved to
be productive. All of this has made a useful
contribution to the implementation of the resolution.

I also welcome the presence of members of the
Monitoring Team who, in a relatively short period of
time, have established a wide range of contacts with
many countries to sound out their views. Based on its
analysis of the country reports, the Team presented to
the Committee a written assessment of compliance
with the sanctions measures. We are confident that the
Monitoring Team will keep up the good work in
fulfilment of its mandate.

Instrumental in the enforcement of the sanctions
against Al Qaeda and the Taliban and associate entities
and individuals, the work of the 1267 Committee has
become an indispensable link in the counter-terrorist
endeavour of the international community. We believe
that the Committee should formulate measures and
policies in response to the constantly changing
circumstances and should improve the sanctions as
appropriate, with a view to playing a more effective
role in fighting terrorism. We also call on Member
States to continue their support of and cooperation with
the work of the Committee and to submit country
reports to it as required by the resolution. For their
part, the Committee and the Monitoring Team should
undertake wide contacts and consultations with
Member States to further identify the challenges they
face in implementing the sanctions and to make
practical recommendations on ways to help them
overcome those difficulties. We also encourage the
Committee to constantly enhance its coordination with
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and to maintain
close contact with relevant international and regional
organizations, to enable their respective advantages
and expertise to work in synergy, thus making a greater
contribution to the fight against terrorism.

China resolutely opposes terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. The international community
should adopt a consistent stand on the fight against
terrorism and should eschew double standards. The
fight waged by the Chinese Government and the
Chinese people against the East Turkestan terrorist
organization is an important part of the international
community's efforts to fight terrorism and its
crackdown on the Al Qaeda network. China will
continue its scrupulous implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. The 1267
Committee can be assured of China's support and
active participation in its work. In concert with all
other countries, China stands ready to make its
contribution to the common fight against the Al Qaeda
network.

