Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to join others in thanking Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe for his introductory remarks. We
welcome the opportunity for a briefing by Ambassador
Khalilzad on behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq.
I would also like to avail myself of this opportunity to
pay tribute to Mr. Ashraf Qazi and to thank him for his
distinguished contribution to the people of Iraq during
his three-year tenure as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq.

Although the situation in Iraq has improved to
some extent, the country still faces formidable
challenges in the political, security, reconstruction and
humanitarian spheres. The number of Iraqi refugees
and internally displaced persons has been increasing
monthly. The humanitarian situation in Iraq has
become the most serious humanitarian crisis
confronting the world today. How to further stabilize
the situation so that the process of Iraq's peaceful
reconstruction and reconciliation can embark upon a
smooth path is an issue meriting serious consideration
by the Iraqi Government and the international
community. We subscribe to the views expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2007/608).

Political compromise and genuine attempts to
work across ethnic, sectarian and political lines are
needed now more than ever. In the final analysis, the
future of Iraq should be decided by the Iraqi
themselves. It is our hope that all political leaders in
Iraq will demonstrate courage, take resolute measures,
positively respond to the aspirations of the Iraqi people
and the international community and seek unity and
cooperation. Of course, achieving the proper solution
of the Iraqi situation and its issues also poses a test for
the international community. The United Nations
should continue to stand by the Iraqi people and should
be prepared to provide all useful assistance and help, as
required.

Resolution 1770 (2007) is very important. It
authorizes the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) to play a more active role in assisting
Iraq in national reconciliation, regional dialogue,
economic reconstruction and humanitarian relief. In
that connection, we are looking forward to full
engagement by the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, once he is
in Iraq. We hope that he will implement the mandate of
the resolution and take full advantage of the
impartiality, expertise and authority of the United
Nations, and that he will make a fully committed effort
to change the Iraqi situation for the better. It is our
hope, too, that the parties inside and outside Iraq will
provide energetic support to the Special
Representative, to provide him with the conditions and
space he needs to play for his designated role.

Ensuring the safety and security of the facilities
and personnel of UNAMI is an important prerequisite
for the effective operation of the Mission. The security
risks in Iraq continue to constrain UNAMI's daily
operations. We express our serious concern about that.
It is our belief that the Iraqi Government and the
Multinational Force should shoulder the critical
responsibility in that regard. No effort should be spared
to provide UNAMI with all the necessary security
guarantees so that it can carry out the operations
mandated by the Security Council.

A stable, united, prosperous Iraq will not only
live up to the aspirations and expectations of all of the
Iraqi people, but also be conducive to the peace and
tranquillity of Iraq's neighbours and of the Middle East
region as a whole. The Sharm el-Sheikh process
initiated last May shows the resolve of countries of the
region to strengthen regional cooperation and maintain
the stability of Iraq. The international community
should pay heightened attention to the views and

suggestions of those regional countries on the issue of
Iraq. We are happy to see that Iraq has improved its
relations with neighbouring and other regional
countries. It is our hope that all parties concerned will
maintain this momentum of cooperation and will work
harder to make substantial progress at the second
expanded meeting of Iraq's neighbouring countries, to
be held in Istanbul in November.

