Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under- Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings. The United Nations is committed to promoting the Yemeni peace process and improving the humanitarian situation on the ground. China commends such efforts. Over the past two years, the situation in Yemen has experienced twists and turns. All parties have suffered great losses, and the country's people are also suffering unspeakable misery. Facts have proved time and again that military means will not solve the country's problems; wars lead only to tragedy. The international community has never given up its efforts to solve the Yemeni issue politically. Thanks to the mediation of the United Nations and other countries in the region, the parties to the conflict in Yemen conducted talks and negotiations and achieved the Stockholm Agreement and, subsequently, the Riyadh agreement. The Security Council has adopted relevant resolutions and deployed the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement to monitor the ceasefire on the ground. Special Envoy Griffiths has proposed a new peace initiative and is actively conducting good offices. At the same time, we need to recognize that the implementation of the existing agreements is not yet satisfactory. The Stockholm Agreement is at a stalemate, and the implementation of the Riyadh agreement has been erratic. The parties to the conflict have complicated, intertwined differences and often move back and forth between the battlefield and the negotiating table. Mutual trust is seriously lacking, and the comprehensive political process stalls time and again. China believes that no matter what difficulties and setbacks there are, the overall direction of solving the Yemeni issue politically should remain unchanged, and the sovereignty, unity and independence and territorial integrity of the country should be respected and maintained. To achieve a breakthrough in the political process, all parties should make joint efforts. First, all parties to the conflict in Yemen should embrace a ceasefire and refrain from violence. At present, several areas in the north and south of Yemen have seen escalation in military actions. We urge the parties to heed the ceasefire initiative of the Secretary- General and his Special Envoy and stop the use of force so as to create conditions for the political process. Secondly, the United Nations should hold in-depth consultations with the parties and showcase the benefits of negotiations and a truce through a detailed agreement so as to encourage all the parties to sit down and have a true negotiation. All the parties should consider the interests of the Yemeni people as their priorities and coordinate with the Special Envoy, while being flexible and making the right choices. Thirdly, the parties to the conflict should honour their commitment and build mutual trust. China hopes that the Special Envoy and the International Committee for the Red Cross will accelerate the consultations with the Yemeni Government and the Houthis on the exchange of prisoners in order to realize a large-scale prisoner exchange. Fourthly, countries of the region and regional organizations should play a constructive role, out of the realization that peace, stability, development and prosperity in Yemen are in the overall interests of the countries of the region. We would like to encourage these countries to exert positive influences on all the parties to the conflict and promote negotiation and peace. With regard to the humanitarian situation in the country, every briefing by Under-Secretary-General Lowcock leaves us with a heavy heart. People in Yemen are faced with a violent conflict, economic crisis, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), floods, locusts, plague and many other challenges, and are quite mired in a major humanitarian disaster. The international community must help the country to make great efforts to improve its humanitarian situation, with a special focus on vulnerable groups, including women, children and the disabled. Donor countries should honour their commitments as soon as possible. The parties to the conflict should facilitate the humanitarian actions undertaken by United Nations agencies and ensure access so as to save lives. The United Nations should also facilitate forward-looking measures by parties that have active control of the country's regions to fight against the pandemic. China has provided several batches of supplies to Yemen to help the country with its COVID-19 response and is willing to continue to support and assist the Government and the people of Yemen.With regard to access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we have not seen any real progress yet, which is disheartening. The engine room was flooded again recently. The Council should urge all the relevant parties to take concrete actions to ensure that the United Nations technical team can carry outa safety assessment and the repair of the tanker as soon as possible.
