Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to welcome you here today amongst us,
Madam President, and extend to you our sincere
congratulations for the sure way in which the United
Kingdom is presiding over the work of the Security
Council this month. Peru would also like to welcome
the United Kingdom initiative to invite the Security
Council to consider the implications that the current
patterns of climate change may have on international
peace and security.

In the last weeks, the results of two Working
Groups of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change have confirmed the known trends with regard
to the increase in the average temperature of the planet
as well as the increase in sea levels because of climate
change. These projected climate changes will definitely
have significant effects on the world environment and
on economic activities, human health, food security
and, in general, human society. Therefore, we have to
ask ourselves how these effects will affect international
peace and security.

The High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change pointed out that the greatest threats to security
that we face today and will be facing in future decades
will include, amongst other things, poverty, infectious
diseases and the degradation of the environment. And
the degradation of the environment, in turn, has also
increased the destructive potential of disasters and in
some cases has actually set them off. Of even greater
concern, as pointed out by the same High-level Panel,
is that, if climate change leads to greater flooding, heat
waves, drought and serious storms, this trend could
accelerate.

So, climate change could exacerbate the
economic and social conditions today that could have
an explosive effect on security, such as poverty,
marginalization and exclusion. Peru in this very
Security Council has called attention to the importance
of taking into account this situation and we have
referred to some of the aspects that are part of the
agenda. Thus, with respect to Haiti, we have reiterated
that recovery from the environmental disaster resulting
from years of marginalization and extreme poverty will
be made even more difficult if the effects of the current
climate changes intensify.

However, climate change is not a fate to which
we must simply resign ourselves. It is the result of the
actions of man, and it is up to all of us to act
responsibly to reverse this trend. Unfortunately, we all
have to be aware at the same time that any efforts we
make to change course will not have immediate effects
because the current effects of climate change are the
result of past emissions that have built up today in the
atmosphere. Therefore, the climate will continue to
change over a long period of time, even if we do
drastically reduce the greenhouse gas emissions in the
short-term. Therefore, we have to act quickly and in a
decisive fashion.

We are convinced, therefore, that attention to
these potentially damaging trends should be based on
prevention of rather than reaction to their possible
effects on international peace and security. This is
Peru's approach at the national level, and we are
promoting regional actions on an Andean, or Pacific, or
South American scale.

We are seriously concerned about the
consequences of climate change with regard to the
stability, development and well-being that we all seek.
The population of Peru lives in a high diversity of eco-
systems. In our case, the greater intensity and higher
frequency of the El Nifio phenomenon gives rise to
severe flooding along the coast and to droughts in the
Andes, and this has grave social and economic effects.
Also, our glaciers, which represent more than half of
the tropical glaciers in the world, are being affected by
rapid thawing. This leads to shortages of water for
human consumption, agriculture and energy
generation. The Peruvian Amazonian forest, which is
the second-largest in Latin America, and which is a
biodiversity reserve of incalculable value, will also be
affected. Although the phenomenon of climate change
will affect each region differently and to a different
extent, it is a problem of a global scale, one that can be
tackled only by means of multilateral and concerted
action on the part of the entire international
community, within the agreed legal framework and the
principles underlying it, in particular that of common
but differentiated responsibilities. We reaffirm here
that it is urgent to adopt specific measures that will
limit the emission of greenhouse gases; and, therefore,

it is a matter of priority to strengthen the multilateral
Kyoto regime and to fulfil the commitments made
thereunder.

In conclusion, we feel that what is required is a
firm will for political cooperation within a framework
comprising legal instruments and competent bodies to
avoid the worst scenarios that the scientific community
is prophesying. The greatest challenge that this
situation offers us is that of facing up to it collectively.
Our responsibility to future generations requires this as
a matter of urgency.

