Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights Ivan Simonovie for his briefing on
the human rights situation in Ukraine.

The ongoing deterioration of the security and
human rights situation in eastern Ukraine continues
to be of great concern. The actions of armed groups,
the increased number of armed men and weapons,
including heavy weapons, unilateral acts, the intensified
fighting and the human rights violations, which seem
to be growing, continue to fuel the spiral of violence,
threatening to further exacerbate the humanitarian
situation. The toll in human lives increases with each
violent confrontation, and the situation of the civilians
still in the areas of fighting is extremely worrisome.
The death of 298 people as a result of the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 on 17 July could
constitute a war crime, as the Assistant Secretary-
General Simonovie has just said. We recall that in
resolution 2166 (2014) the Security Council demanded
that those responsible be held accountable for their acts.
The human rights violations described in the report
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights during the reporting period are very
worrying. The cases of kidnapping, illegal detention,
torture, murder, execution, extortion and destruction
of property are unjustifiable. Despite the repeated calls
of the international community for all the necessary
measures to be taken for the effective prevention
and protection of human rights, including economic,
social and political rights, and for the guarantee of
their full enjoyment by all Ukrainians, irrespective of
their ethnicity, language, cultural group, religion and
location in the country, the human rights violations
seem to have become unremitting. There must be an
in-depth investigation of such violations and their
perpetrators must be brought to justice.

The risks involved are very high and the possibility
of finding a peaceful way out ofthe crisis is increasingly
subject to conditions. The more time passes, the deeper
the wounds and the more difficult the reconciliation
needed for a lasting peace will become.

Having talked about the humanitarian situation at
the most recent meeting of the Council (see S/PV.7234),
I will not repeat what we said then about Ukraine but
will limit myselfto reiterating the urgent call to strictly
respect obligations with regard to the protection of
civilians in the areas affected by the violence. As noted
in the report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, all those involved in
the hostilities must act in accordance with the principles
of distinction, proportionality and precaution. We
also underscore the need to ensure the conditions for
civilians to leave the areas affected by the fighting
between the Ukrainian forces and armed groups, to
take all appropriate measures for the urgent needs of
the displaced to be met and to ensure that assistance

reaches those who need it, including in areas not under
the Government's control.

In conclusion, since the Council began to deal with
the situation in Ukraine, we have seen almost only its
continuous and significant deterioration. The Council,
marked by deep divisions on the issue, has not been able
to make a decisive contribution to achieving a political
and diplomatic solution to the crisis. Furthermore, the
efforts of the Secretary-General, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and other actors
have not yielded the expected results.

Argentina believes that the Security Council
must assume its responsibilities under the Charter
and facilitate a political and diplomatic solution to the
very worrisome situation facing Ukraine. However,
only through the constructive diplomacy of the most
influential actors, avoiding belligerent rhetoric, all
unilateral acts and any interference in the internal
affairs of States, whether military, political or
economic, and by working to calm the situation, while
exercising maximum self-restraint, can the conditions
be established for the urgent process of dialogue to
begin.

We emphasize the need to step up efforts in
that regard. To that end, it is essential that all actors
demonstrate political will and the conviction that the
only acceptable way is dialogue and that resorting
to violence is not an option. The Geneva and Berlin
declarations continue to serve as a road map to advance
a process ofnational dialogue that promotes trust among
the various communities and reassures all Ukrainians
throughout Ukraine that their main concerns will be
addressed.

