Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Mr. President, we are
honoured by your presence today. It is also an honour
to welcome Ministers from Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Afghanistan, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste, as well as
the Managing Director of the World Bank.

I would like to thank the Japanese presidency for
having organized this thematic debate and for having
prepared the draft presidential statement that we will
adopt later today. We fully support it.

This debate comes at a very timely moment, as
we engage in the review of the Peacebuilding
Commission and move forward in the implementation
of the recommendations of the Secretary-General's
report on peacebuilding and early recovery
(S/2009/304).

The peacebuilding architecture of the United
Nations aims at integrating political stability, security
and socio-economic development. That integrated
approach is a solid foundation for our work. However,
while this premise is well established in our discourse,
it still needs to be made fully operational in our
practice.

We are learning by doing. In the work of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which I have the honour to chair, the
need for an integrated approach to simultaneously
tackle those three dimensions of peacebuilding is
evident. In order to surmount the recurrent political
instability in that country, security sector reform stands
as a matter of utmost priority, alongside the
strengthening of State institutions. At the same time,
efforts to revitalize the economy are indispensable: at
the end of the day, they will ensure the much needed
jobs to allow for stability to take hold and the fiscal
revenues that will enable the State to function in an
autonomous manner and provide basic services to the
population.

We welcome Foreign Minister Okada's proposal
that, in peacebuilding strategies, high priority be
attached to the creation of youth employment.

Another sine qua non condition for effective
peacebuilding is the notion of national ownership. In a
country emerging from conflict, however, ensuring
national ownership can be particularly challenging. On
the one hand, it is essential for the State to take the
lead in the peacebuilding process; on the other,
capacity constraints usually get in the way, making it
necessary to build institutional capacity as the process
moves forward. In that regard, we welcome ongoing
efforts aimed at establishing pools of civilian capacity
to be expeditiously deployed on the ground. Needless
to say, such pools should not replace existing local
capacity, ought to resort to experts from developing
countries as much as possible, especially from the
region of the country concerned, and must help to
develop national capacity in post-conflict countries.

Our collective experience in peacebuilding
suggests that such efforts must not only be undertaken
simultaneously in different domains, but must also start
very early in the post-conflict process. There is an
emerging consensus that peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are not sequential forms of engagement,
but rather a continuum. In this regard, we welcome the
potential contribution of the Peacebuilding
Commission to countries in early recovery and
encourage greater coordination between the Security

Council and the Commission. The potential role the
Commission can play in early post-conflict situations
should be explored more actively, especially with
regard to the linkages between security and socio-
economic development.

Peacebuilding is a collective and
multidimensional effort. Adequate coordination is
therefore central to effective peacebuilding, but it
remains a formidable challenge. The first task is to
share information among actors on the ground
concerning the activities that are being undertaken.
Such information-sharing should lead to a distribution
of labour to ensure coherence in plans and actions,
both in the field and at Headquarters. This is, of
course, easier said than done. The challenge is to
persuade donors and partners to participate in a
coordinating exercise under the leadership of the
country concerned and to align their assistance to
national priorities. Overcoming this challenge will
greatly enhance the effectiveness of our individual and
joint endeavours in peacebuilding, to the benefit of
post-conflict countries.

Another important aspect of peacebuilding efforts
has to do with developing strategic partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations, in the light of
the inherent regional nature of many situations that
need to be addressed. Engagement with international
financial institutions is also very important, given the
mutually reinforcing role of the activities of those
institutions and of those related to peacebuilding.
Greater involvement of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund in peacebuilding and their
growing partnership with the United Nations system
are most welcome.

Peacebuilding efforts will not bear fruit if they
are not supported by effective financing mechanisms. It
is imperative to envision funding arrangements capable
of channelling substantial resources in a timely
manner. We welcome the role played by the
Peacebuilding Fund in providing catalytic support to
post-conflict countries, which must be complemented
by other sources of longer-term financing. In this
regard, we believe the activities of the Fund can benefit
from greater synergy with the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

We look forward to the results of the ongoing
review of the Commission. The review process has
been an excellent opportunity to take stock of the
progress achieved thus far and discuss ways to improve
the Commission's work. We hope it can lead to a
Commission that is placed at the centre of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, endowed with a
strong secretariat, capable of garnering all the available
expertise within and outside the United Nations
system, able to foster coordination among various
actors and flexible enough to deal with the manifold
challenges related to peacebuilding processes.

To some extent, peacebuilding is a new frontier
for the multilateral system, as we still have to set up or
improve institutional arrangements, establish adequate
procedures and create political constituencies around
the globe. Formative periods can be challenging, but
they are also promising. We are at this precise moment
in peacebuilding. The single most important factor to
determine our success will be our ability to effectively
integrate stability, security and development into
coherent actions adjusted to the concrete needs of each
situation. This is no small challenge, but it is one that
is worth embarking on.

