Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
at the outset to express a special and warm welcome on
behalf of the delegation of Chile to you, Madam
President, at having you preside over these
deliberations. We also wish to acknowledge
Colombia's important statement made in this debate
and to express gratitude for the relevant remarks by the
Secretary-General, the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.

For Chile, the item on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict is one of the most important on the
Security Council's agenda because of its content and
humanitarian impact, as well as its importance to
international peace and security.

Armed conflicts generate death and the
displacement of civilians, including vulnerable groups
that are forced into situations of extreme need, with
consequences that impede development and
reconciliation and both cause and fuel conflicts. At the
same time, those adverse humanitarian consequences
are themselves a threat to the international peace and
security that the Security Council is called upon to
preserve, as one of its main purposes under the Charter.

Today we reaffirm our political and humanitarian
commitment to defending civilian populations affected
by conflicts from the point of view of both the
prevention and resolution of humanitarian crises and
the prevention and resolution of the suffering endured
by the populations of States subject to sanctions
imposed by the Council, when such sanctions are not
sufficiently targeted at authorities. Chile will continue
to promote that humanitarian work when Chile takes its
place as an elected member of the Security Council in
the near future.

Since the second half of the nineteenth century,
the period during which the modern norms of
humanitarian law were formulated, to the present time,
the world has witnessed, through successive wars and
armed conflicts, both international and internal, the
growing seriousness of such conflicts, their devastating
impact on civilian populations and the increasingly
critical and urgent need to find a remedy to this great
evil and the pain and injustice produced by it.

At the end of the cold war, in the discharge of its
fundamental work of guaranteeing international peace
and security, the Security Council, jointly with the
Secretariat of the United Nations, embarked upon the
important task of dealing specifically with that issue.
The combined efforts of the various humanitarian
institutions, both multilateral and non-governmental,
and in particular the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, allow us today to have
substantive documents that facilitate review and
decision-making on issues related to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Of particular note in that
regard this year are the Aide-Memoire annexed to the
statement by the President of the Security Council,
dated 15 March 2002, and the report of the Secretary-
General to the Security Council on this matter, of 26
November 2002, both of which we welcome with
appreciation.

As the last mentioned of those two documents
indicates, it is civilians, more than combatants, who are
the principal victims of conflicts today, with women
and children comprising a high percentage of the
victims. Some 2.5 million persons have died as a direct
result of conflicts over the past decade, while 31
million were displaced during the same period. The
report adds that that situation has been compounded by
the upsurge in global terrorism as a new threat to
civilian populations. That new threat can increase
considerably the scale of suffering in the future and
seriously affect the efforts of the international
community to protect civilians, particularly to separate
the civilian population from combatants.

On the subject of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, just as on other matters that are within
the purview of the Security Council, Chile reaffirms as
a matter of principle its strict adherence to the Charter,
as a superior norm that governs the conduct of States.
Chile promotes strengthening multilateralism to
confront the crises that threaten international peace and
security, as well as the strengthening of the system of
collective security provided for in the Charter. In that
regard, in order for the Council to be effective in its
actions, it must maintain an active role in the
prevention of armed conflicts and, in order to maintain
its unity and promote strengthening of the Security
Council, we believe that the solutions that the Council
adopts should be decided upon by consensus, through
transparent procedures and with the due participation
of all of its members.

We believe that notions of peace and security
transcend the State, because they are worth very little if
they do not also take into account the conditions of
security and dignity of individuals who live within the
State, ensuring that they are free from fear, that their
basic needs are met and that they enjoy equality of
opportunity to develop their human potential. In that
connection, Chile shares and supports the ideas and
aims to be expressed during this debate by the
representative of Austria, in his capacity as Chairman
of the interregional group of countries known as the
Human Security Network, of which we are a member.

Chile is particularly concerned about the civilian
victims of armed conflicts. It, therefore, supports the
humanitarian organizations that provide assistance to
civilian populations in zones of conflict. They must be
protected and supported by Governments. Chile also
favours restricting recourse to sanctions, the use of
which should be reserved for strictly necessary
situations; their impact must be targeted at those who
are directly responsible, ensuring that the civilian
population is not affected. Chile also supports taking
into consideration the social dimension of crises, since
it believes that the Security Council has a role to play
in addressing social threats that could affect
international peace and security.

The third report of the Secretary-General, which
serves as a core document for this debate, contains
important information, some of which is specific in
nature and concerns specific conflicts, while other
elements are of a more general and abstract nature. It
offers new, updated and structured background
information on the complex variety of elements that
must be taken into account in addressing the problems
of civilian victims of conflicts and on the practical
usefulness of its application in concrete situations, as
well as with regard to situations and problems that will
have to be resolved in the future on such issues as
access to vulnerable populations, the separation of
civilians from armed elements and respect for the rule
of law, justice and reconciliation. The report concludes
with an annex providing a "roadmap for the protection
of civilians", which is comprised of a series of
recommendations taken from earlier documents on the
subject. For that considerable effort, we wish to
express to the Secretariat our deep appreciation and
support, with a view to intensifying our efforts in the
fundamental task of ensuring progress in the effective
protection of civilians in armed conflicts.

