The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today's meeting. I thank the Council members for
their valuable contributions to this statement, which
recognizes the contribution of the aide-memoire
attached to the statement and looks forward to the
next report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. In accordance with the
understanding reached among the members of the
Council, I shall take it that the members of the Security
Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2015/23.

Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the
last scheduled meeting of the Council for the month
of November, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to all the members of the Council, their
respective teams and, in particular, the secretariat
of the Council for all the support they have given us
throughout this month. It has been a really busy month,
during which we have unanimously adopted five
very important resolutions, including that brought to
us by France last Friday. We have also adopted four
presidential statements, and I hope that we might be
able to adopt a fifth before the end of our presidency.
This month is one in which we have rallied to consensus
on a lot of issues, and we simply could not have done it
without the hard work and support of every delegation
around this table and behind it.

I also want to particularly thank the interpreters.
I know that it is sometimes tough for them when we
enforce time limits, because that sometimes means that
we speed up our delivery rather than cut back on what
we were going to say. I therefore apologize to them
for the extra work that we have given them, but I also
want to thank members of the Council for observing
those time limits and for conducting business in such a
positive and interactive way.

As we end our presidency, I know that I speak on
behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation of the
United States good luck in the month of December.
The meeting rose at11.45 a.m.
