Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): As the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica indicated this morning, I
am speaking today on behalf of the Human Security
Network, which comprises Austria, Chile, Costa Rica
as Chair, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway,
Switzerland, Thailand and Slovenia, and South Africa
as an observer.

Let me also extend my sincere appreciation to
you, Madame President, for convening this open debate
of the Council. Security, development and human
rights are the three interdependent pillars of the United
Nations system. The Human Security Network feels
strongly that the Council should consider this
interdependence when formulating peacekeeping
mandates. This would enhance the effectiveness of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts in promoting
sustainable peace and development.

The Network is a group of developed and
developing countries united by our belief in using a
people-centred approach to address interrelated
challenges. Every individual should be guaranteed
freedom from fear and freedom from want, with equal
opportunities to develop their human potential.
Achieving and balancing these two pillars of human
security will help to build a lasting foundation for
effective transition from conflict, sustainable peace and
meaningful, people-centred development.

That said, we are equally convinced that no
attempt to establish security today can ignore the
essential role of human rights. Security, development
and human rights all depend on one another. It is
difficult to achieve one without the other. In particular,
respect for human rights in each and every country is
an essential contribution to peace and security on the
national, regional and international levels. We believe
that it is essential to recognize this.

Over the years, the experience of the United
Nations in peacekeeping operations and subsequent
post-conflict peacebuilding and development has
2

shown that security, development and human rights are
inextricably linked. This has revealed that sustainable
development and promoting human rights help to
address the root causes of conflict, as acknowledged in
the report of the Secretary-General entitled "Promoting
development through the reduction and prevention of
armed violence" (A/64/228).

Therefore, a comprehensive approach to security
means that post-conflict peacebuilding must be closely
linked to the primary responsibilities of the Council.
There is a broad understanding today that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are not a linear
process but should go hand in hand. The various actors
in these fields are obliged to cooperate and coordinate
closely. In this regard, we welcome the current efforts
of the Secretariat to develop an early peacebuilding
strategy for peacekeepers, which would also help to
facilitate a smooth transition from peacekeeping
missions to other forms of United Nations engagement.
We must also explore further how the Council can also
consider future development priorities early on.

The Network recognizes that the mandates of the
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council are clearly separate. At the same time,
that does not mean we should refrain from pursuing
coordination and system-wide coherence within the
entire United Nations system. Overall coordination
with financial institutions is also key.

National ownership must also be a core element
in all peacekeeping and peacebuilding mandates and
missions. Peacekeepers come and go, but only national
participation, involvement and ownership from all
segments of society, particularly disadvantaged groups
such as women and children, can create the sort of
organic development that will sustain long-term peace.
Better integration of all these dimensions of security
can also result in the greater inclusion of women and
those groups previously excluded from decision-
making processes. The promotion of human rights and
the strengthening of the rule of law are essential in this
context.

The Brazilian presidency of the Council has
drafted a very concise concept paper for today's open
debate (S/2011/50). It has framed our discussions well
while pointing the way forward in a clear manner. The
Network wishes to share its view on a key action
identified in the concept paper.
11-23198

We believe that the Council must increasingly
make a habit of considering the root causes and socio-
economic dynamics of all conflict situations on its
agenda. It should be encouraged to interact more
through informal dialogue with relevant stakeholders
during the whole cycle of peacekeeping missions. This
means, in particular, interaction with the affected
countries, the troop- and police-contributing countries,
and key financial institutions, as well as drawing on the
advice of the Peacebuilding Commission.

This interaction and coordination need to be
enhanced. We should explore what formal linkages can
be established to ensure that the Council can more
actively and systematically take into account a
comprehensive picture of the causes of conflict and
sustainable ways to address those causes.

Members of the Network have the common
objective to promote the full development of human
potential and the ability of people to live in dignity,
free from fear and free from want. Both security and
development are therefore integral components of our
common vision and objective. We fully support taking
this agenda forward in the Council.

Lastly, in my national capacity, let me state that
Thailand sees development as key to promoting human
security, potential and dignity. Our policies reflect this
recognition. As a police- and troop-contributing
country, Thailand is actively engaged with the recent
deployment of more than 600 infantry soldiers in
Darfur who, as I speak today, are being joined by a
further 200 troops to meet the full complement of 800.
Our naval vessels are also currently involved in patrols
off the coast of Somalia. We look forward to doing our
part to strengthen the effectiveness of the Council-
mandated role and to promote a more integrated and
comprehensive assessment of conflict situations.

