Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers in
commending your delegation, Sir, for convening this
important debate. The Sri Lanka delegation associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM).

The United Nations, since its inception, has
pursued the lofty goal of bringing about a peaceful
settlement to the Palestinian issue. Over the years,
despite many laudable efforts, we have witnessed little
tangible progress, while the ongoing conflict has had
wide ramifications for regional and international peace
and security. It is our hope that this year, against the
backdrop of the transformation sweeping through the
region, will bring a renewal of hope, trust and
constructive thinking among the parties that will lead
to much needed progress on this issue.
In this context, my delegation is pleased to note
that, in recent months, there have been certain
developments that bode well for the future. The two
sides, since December 2011, have continued their
discussions with the Quartet. Hopefully, this will
contribute to de-escalating tension. The Israeli
Government has resumed the transfer of tax and
customs revenues to the Palestinian Authority and has
gone ahead with the second phase of prisoner
exchanges.

The blockade of the Gaza Strip has been lifted to
some extent. The Palestinian security forces have made
progress with the security situation in the West Bank,
including the seizure of unexploded ordnance. There
have been no recent incidents of rockets being fired
into Israel. The implementation of United Nations
projects in Gaza, especially schools, is proceeding with
the construction materials entering through the Kerem
Shalom crossing. We hope that these positive
developments will continue to enhance confidence-
building and to further consolidation of the peace
process.

Along with such positive developments, there are
also some issues of concern, including incidents of
violence in Gaza, the demolition of Palestinian
structures in the West Bank and in Jerusalem, Israel's
continuing settlement activity in the West Bank and
Jerusalem, the ongoing blockade of Gaza and the
impact the closure has had on economic activity, and
particularly on children in that area, as highlighted by
the Department of Political Affairs in its briefing on
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory.

These will not help in building confidence and
will take the two parties away from establishing a
climate conducive to finding a way forward towards
the much-cherished two-State solution. We must not
forget the need for Israel to withdraw from the
occupied Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon. Its
failure to do so will add to the mistrust, tension,
frustration and instability in the region. All sides have
an obligation to desist from acts that generate
uncertainty, suspicion and intolerance.

We appreciate the ongoing efforts by
international donors, regional organizations and the
United Nations agencies in alleviating the sufferings of
innocent civilians, especially children, and in providing
protection for them. I would also like to commend the
work that has been carried out by the United Nations
Agency for Relief and Works for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East in assisting millions of Palestinian
people in need, especially in the Gaza Strip.

The Member States of the United Nations also
have a critical role to play in upholding the relevant
international laws and United Nations resolutions. We
align with the NAM. view that efforts by the high
contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to
ensure respect for the Convention in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, would
be a vital contribution.

Sri Lanka's position with regard to the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian People has been
unswerving. We have always supported a peaceful
negotiated settlement to the Palestinian issue and have
called for the implementation of General Assembly
resolutions regarding the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to statehood and the attainment of a
two-State solution. We hope that Palestine's application
for admission to full membership in the United Nations
will receive sympathetic consideration this year.

We remain convinced that the two-State solution
is the only sustainable solution for this issue for Israel,
Palestine and their neighbours to coexist in peace and
harmony. The political unity and economic
advancement of the Palestinian people will contribute
to the viability of the two-State solution. In that regard,
we welcome the holding of the forthcoming Palestinian
legislative and presidential elections. The Government
and people of Sri Lanka would like to reassure them of
our continued support and solidarity.

