Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank Ms. Sandra Honore, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for her
comprehensive briefing.

Over the past several decades, the international
community has exerted great efforts to provide
assistance to Haiti and support it in overcoming the
humanitarian, political and security challenges facing
it. The international presence in Haiti has involved
great sacrifices on the part of the countries that have
participated in peacekeeping in Haiti, as well as those
that have contributed substantially to relief efforts and
efforts to alleviate the humanitarian suffering of the
Haitian people, which on many occasions has resulted
from sudden natural catastrophes.

Today, we are pleased to see that those international
efforts have resulted in new and recent progress in
the main aspects of life in Haiti. The country is now
relative stable in terms of security and a there has
been a noticeable improvement in the performance of
the national police. There has also been progress on
the humanitarian front and economic indicators have
improved. The international community must continue
its support for Haiti on its path towards stability.
However, the primary responsibility for maintaining the
gains that have already been achieved and accelerating
their achievement falls to the Government of Haiti and
its political leaders.

Foremost among those responsibilities is the need
to improve the overall political climate and address
popular tensions, which are primarily a result of the
continued delays in holding local, municipal and partial
senate elections. In that context, Jordan welcomes the
launch of the national dialogue process and its focus
on the most urgent issues in Haiti's political life. We
call on all principal stakeholders to cooperate and to
be involved in that dialogue. Jordan calls upon the
Government of Haiti to continue the preparations for
the holding of free, fair, transparent and inclusive
elections without delay, given the importance of that
democratic task and of easing tensions throughout the
country. In that context, we look forward to having the
United Nations provide the necessary support for the
forthcoming electoral process.
The Government of Haiti must also deal seriously
with social and economic grievances and the gaps
in basic services, which lead to escalating popular
frustrations and thus threaten the entire political
process. It is important to continue providing assistance
to Haiti to achieve progress in other important areas,
in particular the rule of law and the development of
the judicial and security sectors. It is also important
to promote and enhance the international response to
urgent humanitarian needs in Haiti, including severe
shortages in foodstuffs and the need to combat cholera.

I would like to address the following points
concerning the future presence of the United Nations
in Haiti.

First, the reduction of the military component by
15 per cent during the reporting period is cause for
concern for us, because this is a very delicate stage,
in the light of the upcoming elections. By the end of
June, the total number of troops that will have been
withdrawn is 1,249 infantrymen and engineers. Also,
there will not be a maritime capacity to transport
a rapid intervention force, should the need arise, to
support local and international police in areas outside
Port-au-Prince.

Secondly, we emphasize the need to launch a
comprehensive planning process for the post-2016
United Nations presence in Haiti. We look forward
to identifying the most suitable format for the United
Nations presence to enable it to provide assistance to
the Government and people of Haiti following that date,
in particular support for the development of the Haitian
National Police and consolidation of the gains made in
political stability, the ongoing promotion of the rule of
law and the protection of human rights.

The five options proposed by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2014/ 162) for the achievement of such
tasks were discussed very generally and not in sufficient
detail to enable us to identify all the relevant facts. They
therefore require a comprehensive strategic assessment
by the United Nations system. We hope that the next
report of the Secretary-General will include further
details on the options and will present an in-depth
assessment of the conditions on the ground and their
impact on each option, as well as recommendations for
the most suitable option.

Thirdly, any fundamental change in the current
United Nations presence in Haiti must be made only
following the full implementation of the main mandate
and verification of the achievement of its original and
primary objective, namely, to help the people of Haiti
to build a stable, secure and politically active State,
Government institutions and a system that promotes the
rule of law and protects human rights.

In conclusion, I would like to mention that at the end
of the month the last Jordanian troops participating in
MINUSTAH will return home after broad participation
in Haiti for an entire decade, during which time 14
Jordanian personnel gave their lives. We would like
to emphasize that Jordan stands ready to continue to
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security wherever there is or will be an international
presence in future.

