Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the two
Under-Secretaries-General for their helpful briefings. I
would like to structure my remarks under six headings,
namely, the United Kingdom's position on the Golan;
Security Council resolutions; what this means for
the international order; Israel's right to security; the
Middle East peace process; and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF).

On the first point, the United Kingdom's position
has not changed: the Golan Heights is territory occupied
by Israel. The turbulent history ofthe region is of course
well known. Following the 1967 Six Day War, Israel
took control of the Golan, including the disputed Shaba'a
farmlands, deciding to annex the territory in 1981. The
United Kingdom did not recognize that annexation
then. We do not recognize it today. The annexation
of territory by force is prohibited under international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations. In
addition, under the law of State responsibility, States
are obliged not to recognize the annexation of territory
as a result of the use of force.

Turning to Security Council resolutions, it is
important that we uphold the relevant resolutions.
Resolution 242 (1967), which the British delegation
at the time had the honour to pen, was adopted
unanimously by the Council on 22 November 1967.
British sponsored, it called on all parties to end territorial
claims, acknowledge the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of every State in
the area, and, in paragraph 1, called for "withdrawal
of Israel armed forces from territories occupied in the
recent conflict". We recall that resolution 497 (1981),
adopted unanimously on 17 December 1981, decided,
in paragraph 1, that the Israeli Golan Heights Law,
which effectively annexed the Golan Heights, is "null
and void and without international legal effect". It
further demanded that Israel rescind its action. The
decision by the United States to recognize Israeli
sovereignty over the Golan heights is in contravention
of resolution 497 (1981).

In terms of the international order, the United
Kingdom firmly believes that the rules-based
international system has increased States' ability to
resolve their differences peacefully and provided a
framework for the greatest sustained rise in prosperity
that humankind has seen. That is why the United
Kingdom thinks we should work hard with our
international partners to nurture and protect those rules.

The right to self-defence is inherent. Israel has a
right to defend itself. It has a right to security. And its
people have a right to live in safety. We do not wish
to diminish Israel's genuine security concerns. We
fully support its right to defend itself. We urge the
Al-Assad regime, Iran and Hizbullah to refrain from
actions that will only lead to increased instability in
the region, as well as put civilians at risk. As the United
States representative noted, Syria has allowed the use
of its territory to launch missiles at Israel and Israeli
civilians. That is not acceptable. But, at the same time,
we emphasize the importance of adhering to the rules-
based international system and abiding by Security
Council resolutions that are designed to protect that
system. That is true irrespective of the importance of
the Golan to Israel's security, or the lack of progress in
peace talks.

Turning to the peace talks, resolution 242 (1967)
enshrined the concept of land for peace. That has proved
successful in ending the conflict between Israel, Jordan
and Egypt. We believe it remains a basic principle for
achieving peace between Israel, the Palestinians and
other neighbours. I want to emphasize that we strongly
welcome the United States efforts on the Middle
East peace process. We encourage the United States
Administration to put forward detailed proposals for
a Viable Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement that
addresses the legitimate concerns of both parties. We
continue to believe that the best way to achieve that
is through substantive peace talks between the parties,
leading to a two-State solution.

Finally, turning to UNDOF, the United Kingdom
strongly supports that mission. It should be the only
armed force active in the area of separation. The
presence and activity of any other armed forces, armed
personnel or military equipment of any kind in the
area of separation contravenes the Disengagement
of Forces Agreement of resolution 2394 (2017). The
United Kingdom remains committed to supporting
UNDOF's mandate, and we look forward to engaging
in discussions regarding its renewal in June.

