The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

That means I will have to discuss Mr. O'Brien's
statement. My colleagues on the Council may have
noticed that Russia tries not to criticize the leadership
of the United Nations. We take great pains in our efforts
to work with the United Nations humanitarian staff,
especially those on the ground. We understand how
hard and dangerous their work is and what difficult
conditions they often have to operate in Syria, where
they are in constant contact with our embassy, which
does everything it can to help them to obtain practical
results in their humanitarian efforts on Syrian territory.
But Mr. O'Brien's statement today compels me to make
some critical comments, particularly his supercilious
smile when he suggested that United Nations staff are
infallible. I do not think there is anything to smile about.

If we needed to be preached to, we would go to
church. If we wanted to hear poetry, we would go to a
theatre. When we invite United Nations staff, especially
senior Secretariat officials, to the Security Council,
we expect objective analysis of what has happened,
which is clearly not what we got from Mr. O'Brien. I
have various things to say that were not covered in his
somewhat verbose statement.

Thanks to the active work of Russian experts,
the number of Syrian settlements now included in the
ceasefire has increased to 847. Almost 70 opposition
groups have said that they will accede to the cessation
of hostilities. Negotiations are continuing with the
commanders of armed groups in the governorates of
Homs, Hama, Aleppo and Quneitra. Russia is providing
Syrians with humanitarian assistance in alignment with
the Government and social organizations. Our foreign
partners have joined our efforts. Many tons of food and
medical equipment have been supplied, including with
the participation of the Russian reconciliation centre in
Hmeymim.

Russia continues to do everything in its power to
relieve the situation of the residents of Aleppo, whose
eastern districts have been held hostage by armed
groups led by the terrorist group Jabhat Al-Nusra. Last
week, in response to a United Nations appeal and as a
gesture of good will, a decision was made to halt all
Russian and Syrian air force flights in the region of
Aleppo starting on 18 October at 10 am. local time.
Planes have been flying no closer to the city than 10
kilometres, and the moratorium on flights is now in its
eighth day.

Mr. O'Brien did not have a word to say about the
moratorium. His statement implied that the air strikes
had not stopped for a single day and might even be
continuing as we speak. If he has evidence that any air
strikes occurred, let him by all means produce it. In
other words, if he disagrees that there have been no air
strikes for the past eight days, I ask him to produce
it. If he has no such evidence contradicting the fact
that there have been no air strikes for eight days, that
renders his entire statement dishonest. He spoke of
eastern Aleppo as though it were under continual attack
from chemical weapons. I would ask him to produce a
single fact about this. He should understand that he is
not here to tell a brilliant story but to deliver a report on
the realities of a situation. He spoke as if the residents
of eastern Aleppo were sitting there in the expectation
that a chemical weapon might explode over their heads
at any moment. Let him produce just one fact in support
of that, or leave this kind of storytelling to the sort of
novel he might end up writing one day.

For three days, starting on 20 October, a 11-
hour humanitarian pause was instituted daily and
subsequently extended by a day. However, the situation
in Aleppo has been exacerbated by the fact that the
long-promised separation of the moderate opposition
from Al-Nusra has still not materialized. The American
side has not fulfilled its obligation in that regard. The
specific explanation given was that it would take seven
no-fly days to sort the moderates from the terrorists.
The Russian and Syrian moratorium on military flights
over Aleppo is now in its eighth day, while the moderates
and the terrorists have still not been separated. We hope
that the Lausanne-format discussions can provide some
movement in that direction.

During the humanitarian pause, an attempt was
made to organize the medical evacuation that the
United Nations humanitarian staff have constantly
claimed to be so essential. Buses and medical vehicles
were prepared to transport the sick and wounded. For
civilians who wanted to leave the city, six humanitarian
corridors were equipped with stations providing hot food
and first aid. Additional beds were set up in hospitals
in western Aleppo. In order to enable militants to leave
the city and travel towards the Turkish border or Idlib
unhindered, two corridors were opened in the area of
the Castello road and the Souq Al-Hai market. The
Syrian army command withdrew its forces at a distance
from the exit corridors so that the fighters could safely
leave Aleppo and avoid possible provocations.

How have events unfolded since then? Four
days later, United Nations representatives suddenly
announced that only two people had agreed to leave
the city. And then those two apparently changed their
minds. So what became of the 200 sick and wounded
who we had been assured were in dire need ofassistance
and for whose sake Russia had been asked to stop the
air strikes? Instead of enabling us to conduct a medical
evacuation, the illegal armed groups began demanding
that painkillers and antibiotics be delivered to eastern
Aleppo and that wounded militants get medical help. The
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria 4 which has lately virtually abandoned
the fundamental direction of its work on a political
settlement and has of its own volition switched over to
a parallel track - played along with this. Frankly, we
do not understand who is running the United Nations
effort in Syria. Is it Mr. O'Brien or Mr. Egeland?
Mr. Egeland gives everyone the impression that it is in
fact he who is heading up the humanitarian work in this
crucial area. And the United Nations staff in Syria are
in total turmoil.

The armed opposition that is mixed up with the
terrorists has blocked the humanitarian corridors and
has been directing fire along them. Jihadists have been
organizing show executions. Taking advantage of the
lull, the insurgents have begun to regroup and prepare
for active offensives aimed at breaking through the
front line. The Al-Nusra fighters and their associates
have rejected Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura's
offers for a guaranteed exit from Aleppo. As early
as 21 October, the field commander of the Harakat
Nour Al-Din Al-Zenki, without waiting for the end
of the humanitarian pause, announced the beginning
of the decisive battle for Aleppo, and a press release
issued jointly by representatives of the Syrian National
Coalition and the Free Syrian Army attacked the United
Nations humanitarian initiative sharply.

The illegal armed groups, along with the local
council in Aleppo, have once again demonstrated that
they prefer to use residents as bargaining chips and
human shields to hide behind. By the way, that obvious
fact is never reflected in either the Secretary-General's
reports or Mr. O'Brien's briefings. The outside sponsors
embedded in groups in eastern Aleppo have been either
unable or unwilling to exert a positive influence on the
insurgents and convince them to stop shelling, release
civilians or leave themselves. Moreover, the groups
continue to receive arms and ammunition, including
TOW anti-tank missiles and American-produced man-
portable air defence systems.

We have to regretfully conclude that the United
Nations did not properly think through its operation
for transporting the sick and wounded. Its work with
the opposition groups and local council in the city was
neglected. Nor did the United Nations put the needed
pressure on the sponsors of the illegal armed groups
to ensure that they cooperated with humanitarian
personnel. At the same time, attempts began to shift the
blame for the problem onto someone else. Completely
unsupported claims were made that the wounded were
supposedly afraid to leave eastern Aleppo for fear of
some kind of reprisals from the Syrian Government.
They began asking us for additional security guarantees
for the evacuees, ignoring the fact that they had long
ago been given those assurances already.

Yet another real opportunity to normalize the
situation in Aleppo has been missed. The deficiencies of
the United Nations personnel are disappointing. After
asking for Russia's help in implementing their poorly
thought-out initiatives, they have been unable to come
through on their part of the job when it mattered. That
exceedingly unprofessional approach has sometimes
cost us dearly as well. On 20 October, three officers
from the reconciliation centre in Hmeymim were
injured in the course of their duties as they prepared for
the medical evacuation. On 24 October, Mr. O'Brien
made a statement in which he attempted to distribute
responsibility for the failure of the evacuation
measures equally between the Aleppo local council, the
insurgents and the Government. In that connection, it
should be recalled that Damascus had raised objections
only regarding the artificial linking of the issues of
the medical evacuation and the supply of medicines.
In general, the Government has displayed goodwill
and constructiveness, and we have been working very
productively with it on this.

We are still open to cooperating with United
Nations humanitarian agencies on every issue related
to assisting those in need. At the same time, we are
still awaiting some genuine effort of the opposition and
its sponsors, who so far have done nothing but create
obstacles, disrupt humanitarian operations and threaten
humanitarian personnel. In future, we believe it would
be advisable to introduce humanitarian pauses only
with firm guarantees from the United Nations as to its
readiness for a medical evacuation.

The negative attitude to local pacification on the
part of some of our partners and, unfortunately, some
United Nations representatives is incomprehensible.
It is that practice, of which the end to the blockade
of Darayya is a successful example, that will enable
us to normalize situations through direct agreements
with local residents. However, at the moment the only
insurgents being evacuated are irreconcilable militants,
mostly from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and Al-Nusra, who are not ready to lay down
their arms. The peaceful civilians are staying at home.

What forced displacement are we talking about? It
appears that someone would like to see the humanitarian
situation in the difficult cities remain in limbo. Does
somebody want to play along with the insurgents and
strengthen their position? That is a two-faced attitude
that has nothing to do with caring for people.

Despite the promises of some members of the
International Syria Support Group to work with the
terrorists of Ahrar Al-Sham, the Shiite enclaves of
Al-Fu'ah and Kafraya are still on the list of the most
problematic areas. We have not succeeded in getting
Turkey to open the Nusaybin-Qamishli border crossing,
as a result of which assistance to Hasakah province has
had to be supplied by air.

In discussing the humanitarian situation in Syria,
we cannot fail to mention the effect of the unilateral
economic and trade sanctions against Damascus. Their
victims are the ordinary Syrians who are suffering under
the siege as a result of the continuing deterioration of
the country's socioeconomic infrastructure, which was
of a very high standard before the start of the conflict.

We cannot agree with the conclusion of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2016/873) that it is
impossible to make progress on the political track until
the cessation ofhostilities is restored. That runs counter
to Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), which
includes no such link. A political settlement should
be the top priority, for the United Nations Secretariat
as well as for the Security Council. The same applies
to the fight against terrorism. And our approaches to
solving the fundamental issues should be united rather
than fluctuating according to the geopolitical mood in
one capital or another.

In conclusion, I would like to say a few words
about New Zealand's initiative. We are grateful to the
delegation of New Zealand for its attempt to find a
position that the members of the Security Council could
unite around and that could somehow enable all of us to
take a step towards a political settlement in Syria and to
relieve the humanitarian situation there. But any such
attempt must respond to a fundamental question - how
do we continue the fight against terrorism within the
parameters it proposes?

In our view, the fundamental positions - which
we all agree on; they are affirmed in unanimous
Council resolution - are that the terrorists in both
Syria and Iraq must be deprived of their safe havens,
and that the ceasefire regime should not apply to the
terrorist organizations Jabhat Al-Nusra and ISIL. That
means that whatever ceasefire regimes are instituted,
we must always continue to fight the terrorists. We
have observed with regret that when such regimes
are introduced, the terrorists, as well as a number of
organizations that cooperate with them, are able to
regroup, gather strength and re-emerge at a new level
of militant activity. If a project could be launched that
would enable us to fight the terrorists on a large scale
while improving the humanitarian situation and putting
us on track for a political settlement, we would all be
extremely grateful.

I now resume my functions as President.

