Mr. Spatafora (Italy): Let me first express our
warmest welcome to President Tadic' and President
Sejdiu and thank them for their statements.

I would also like to extend a warm welcome to
the Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, to whom goes
our deepest and most sincere appreciation for his
efforts and good offices with the parties and the key
stakeholders at a politically very delicate juncture.
Italy fully supports the realistic, wise, balanced and
forward-looking way forward that the Secretary-
General has outlined in his so important and
meaningful report (S/2008/354).

The uncertainty of recent months is to no one's
benefit, least of all that of the ethnic minorities we are
trying to protect, who need, more than ever, a stable
environment.

Kosovo has considerably advanced on the path of
stabilization and in building up its democratic
institutions. Nevertheless, shortcomings still exist, and
the objective of harmonious multi-ethnic coexistence
has not yet been reached. An extra effort - an extra
mile - to reach this goal must be made.

As the Secretary-General rightly stated in his
report, "the process of full reconciliation and integration
of Kosovo communities will be a long-term one"
(S/2008/354, para. 2). The international community
must remain engaged in Kosovo as long as necessary
and must provide strong support in that regard.

It is encouraging to read in the report of the
Secretary-General that both Pristina and Belgrade
recognize the need to find a solution to continue the
international civil presence in Kosovo. Additionally,
Council members have confirmed their interest in
adjusting the operational role of the United Nations in
the light of the evolving circumstances.

Italy fully shares the Secretary-General's
assessment that

"the objectives of the United Nations would be
best obtained through an enhanced operational
role for the European Union in the area of the
rule of law under the umbrella of the United
Nations, headed by my Special Representative".
(S/2008/354, para. 13)

The European Union is ready to play that role in
Kosovo. It will complement the work of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security and make available its resources and long-
standing expertise in the Balkans.

Significantly, just today, the European Council
concluded as follows - I will quote just a few
excerpts:

"[T]he European Union remains committed to
playing a leading role in ensuring the stability of
Kosovo . The European Union welcomes the
[United Nations Secretary-General's] report on
UNMIK [the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo] and his
intention to reconfigure the international civil
presence in Kosovo. This would facilitate the
deployment of EULEX Kosovo [the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo]
throughout Kosovo".

With the European Union enabled to play an
enhanced role in Kosovo through the EULEX mission,
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999), it will
be possible to achieve major progress in the field of
minority rights with specific regard to the Serb
minority in Kosovo, including protection of its
religious and cultural heritage.

The European Union must develop its role in
areas of the police, justice and customs. At the same
time, the United Nations should redesign its role while
preserving certain fundamental functions, such as that
of facilitating the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, so that solutions may be found to pending
issues.

Italy reaffirms its commitment to contributing to
the international effort in Kosovo and to regional
stability. We will continue to work with the United
Nations to be one of the main contributors to the
Kosovo Force, and we favour an enhanced role for the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). In addition, we will be one of the main
participants in EULEX since we firmly believe that a
stronger European Union role in Kosovo will pave the
way towards the future integration of this country
within the EU.
I would like to conclude by quoting Benjamin
Disraeli: "Success is the child of audacity". Let all of
us around this table be audacious, supporting the way
forward as outlined by the Secretary-General, in order
to safeguard and consolidate peace and stability and to
give Kosovo, Serbia and the whole region a chance to
move forward towards a more stable and prosperous
future in the European Union.

