Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We congratulate Kuwait on
assuming the presidency and convening this important
open debate. Since the Security Council acts on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations, it should
understand and respond to their concerns on Council
transparency, efficiency and accessibility. In this
positive endeavour, the Council should not lose sight
of the basic reality that working methods are not an
end but a means to an end, where there must be an
effective and equitable resolution of conflicts, based on
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant international law.

The working methods of the Security Council are
crucial to its ability to fulfil its responsibility to act
promptly and effectively on behalf of international peace
and security. Over the past decade, the Security Council
has made further progress in codifying and improving
its working methods. Indonesia welcomes those steps,
such as more open debates, increased consultations
with the Presidents of principal organs and suborgans
and voices from regional and multilateral organizations,
civil society, non-governmental organizations and the
private sector to enrich Council discourse.

We would also like to commend Japan for its
work as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and other Procedural Questions in
2016 and 2017, particularly on improving transitional
arrangements for newly elected Council members, and,
of course, the update of note S/2010/507. That note is
not only actively used by Security Council members, it
is also an important aid for the non-permanent members
preparing to work in the Council. To help bolster the
Council's work, Indonesia emphasizes the following.

First, the Council should not mirror power statuses,
but stand up credibly for the weak and powerless. On
far too many occasions, the Council has been impeded
by veto in the face of mass atrocities and severe
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. While Indonesia calls for the abolishment of
veto rights, considering present entrenched realities, it
encourages the Council to consider proposals, such as
those presented by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group and the French-Mexican initiative.
The regulation of veto use would, first and foremost,
be a great push to elevate Council effectiveness and
global credibility. Issues of human rights and humanity,
as in the case of mass atrocities that are vetoed for
narrow political raisons d'etre, are issues that affect
the existence of the Security Council in the eyes of
many of our stakeholders. Until veto regulation is
realized, we support a formal explanation of veto use
by the permanent five being circulated to all General
Assembly members.

Secondly, a key factor behind sustaining peace
and ensuring that concrete ground results are achieved
posterior to the restructuring of the United Nations
peace and security pillar are the Council consultations,
cooperation and support vis-a-vis stakeholders of
United Nations special political missions, peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding. Since United Nations
peacekeeping is indispensable, Indonesia urges the
Council to regularly and meaningfully consult with
troop- and police-contributing countries throughout
the different mission stages and strategy-making.

Indonesia, which has been involved in United
Nations peacekeeping for 60 years and as its ninth-
largest troop- and police-contributing country, believes
that at no stage have there been efforts to institutionalize
consultations among the Council, the Secretariat
and troop- and police-contributing countries. Such
consultations are an improvement that many have asked
for in various forums, but remain to be implemented years
after their necessity. That would increase the efficiency
and effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and raise
more support from countries that have contributed to
sending their troops to conflict areas, since they have a
sense of belonging and involvement in the process. As
we are sending our boys and girls in harm's way, troop-
and police-contributing countries must be involved in
decision-making related to predeployment, deployment
and mandate changes.

Furthermore, the Peacebuilding Commission,
now in existence for more than a decade, has acquired
valuable expertise not just on specific country
situations but on many vital themes, such as financing
for peacebuilding, private-sector partnerships and
illicit financial flows. Greater drawing by the Council
on the Peacebuilding Commission's expertise, as well
as improved collaboration with the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, particularly as
conflicts become more complex and multidimensional,
will only enable the Council to develop more
comprehensive solutions. Synergized responses will
also enhance wider ownership in Council decisions.

Thirdly, reiterating inclusivity and meaningful
consultations, Indonesia stresses the implementation of
Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter by fully taking into
account the views of affected non-member countries.
Since regional countries have critical bearing in various
ongoing conflicts, their input and support, along with
that of regional organizations, could be harnessed
better by the Council.

In conclusion, Indonesia, once again, underscores
that by building on the faithful implementation of
note 507 and the various views expressed by the wider
membership of today, it is hoped that the Security
Council would enhance its inclusivity and promote
more substantive participation by non-permanent
Council members, as well as members not in the
Council. The world outside this room is awaiting with
keen interest and expectations for the Council to act
justly and decisively, implement various decisions
and live up to the Charter promise. The Council must
keep the trust reposed in it so as to gain credibility and
continue to exist as a beacon for peace and humankind.
Transparency and trust are the key.

The President (spoke in Arabic) I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.

