Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the delegation of Chad for
its timely initiative to hold today's meeting on such an
important and urgent issue. We should like to thank
the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Feltman, and the
Permanent Observer of the African Union, Mr. Antonio,
for their substantive briefings.

I would like to begin by expressing the sincere
condolences to the delegation of countries that have
recently suffered from terrorist acts. The horror and
senseless nature of terrorist acts becomes especially
obvious when children are its victims. This Security
Council meeting is taking place against the backdrop
of those tragic events, highlighting the urgency of
the links between terrorism and transnational crime.
Thus cutting off the channels of financing for terrorist
acts in the Afghan-Pakistan border region would
seriously reduce the capacities of the groups operating
in that region, including Tehrik-i-Taliban, which was
responsible for the bloody raid in Peshawar.

The Security Council has frequently drawn
the attention of the international community to the
nexus between international terrorism, transnational
organized crime and the illegal drugs trade. The risk of
financing terrorism from those sources is demonstrated
in the recent report of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Security Council's
Sanctions Committee concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban movement (see S/2014/815), and also in the
report on the typologies research project ofthe Financial
Action Task Force aimed at identifying and blocking
the illicit funds flowing from the illegal production
of and trade in Afghan narcotics. We must also not
forget such important income sources for terrorists as
the illegal trade in Syrian and Iraqi oil. With regard
to the African continent, on which today's discussion
has focused, suppressing the illegal exploitation by
terrorists of other natural resources, including gold and
other precious metals and stones, remains of particular
urgency.

Threats of terrorism, transnational organized
crime and drug trafficking can be effectively dealt with
only through the actions of the whole international
community under the leadership of the United Nations.
It is also important to further strengthen the treaty and
legal basis for international cooperation in countering
those threats.

With regard to the African region, of particular
importance is technical cooperation aimed at capacity-
building for law enforcement forces and improving
border security. We welcome the active efforts of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) in coordinating assistance to African and other
States. The support for designing real and effective
measures to prevent threats related to the financing of
terrorism through the proceeds of crime is particularly
important. We support the work of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) with the
African Union and other regional structures, through
cooperation in the anti-criminal sphere.

We welcome the Security Council's adoption
today of resolution 2195 (2014), aimed at drawing
the international community's attention to the need
to comprehensively combat financing for terrorism
through various types of criminal activity and the
illegal drug trade. The resolution contains measures
to strengthen and further improve the work of United
Nations agencies dealing in counter-terrorism and
anti-crime. We look forward to the Secretary-General
report on the efforts of various United Nations entities
in response to the threats of fuelling terrorism from the
proceeds of criminal activity on the basis ofinformation
provided by UNODC, CTED, the Monitoring Team and
other specialized United Nations entities+.

Today's resolution particularly emphasizes the role
of public-private partnership. Indeed, at the national
level, it is important to create conditions for establishing
full cooperation between State and business entities in
combating transnational organized crime, corruption
and terrorism. We hope that the adoption of today's
resolution will be followed up results-oriented measures
by States and United Nations specialized agencies the
implementation of which will lead to cutting the links
between terrorism and transnational crime.

