Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation is grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), Mr. Abou Moussa, for his presentation
updating us on the most recent developments and for
the recently circulated report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/923).

The presence and action of UNOCA in facilitating
regional and subregional initiatives has undeniably
had a positive impact on the recently held electoral
processes and in preventing conflicts in Central Africa.
The work carried out by the Regional Office is a clear
example of improved regional coordination that takes
into account the major challenges facing the population
and catalyzes initiatives of other regional actors, as well
as of the United Nations itselft, to tackle the principle
challenges to development.

Despite the progress made, we are aware that
new challenges are emerging, especially in terms of
security. That is why we take a positive View of the role
currently being played by UNOCA, jointly with the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
United Nations Office for West Africa, in responding to
the insecurity created by piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
and to youth unemployment. In that regard, we hope
that the recommendations of the joint meeting of the
committee on maritime security of the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, held in October, can be implemented,
specifically with regard to the holding of a ministerial
meeting in the month of February next year to address
this topic.

With regard to the threat that the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) continues to pose, we reiterate our
concern regarding the effects of that armed group
and its activities on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic, South Sudan and
Uganda. Their acts of brutality continue to menace the
lives of innocent civilians, particularly children. We
condemn the atrocities that that group continues to
commit, including kidnappings and the recruitment of
minors for criminal activities, as well as the recent acts
that resulted in the deaths of a number of humanitarian
personnel.

Guatemala condemns in the most emphatic terms
the constant violations of international law and of
international human rights standards committed by the
LRA. The group's campaign has the potential to trigger
greater instability in the Central African region, as
well as to make it more difficult for countries to move
towards peace and security. It is important to eliminate
the threat of the LRA in order to create and build a safer
and more stable environment in the countries affected.

Our delegation commends the initiatives taken
to implement the United Nations regional strategy to
counter the LRA. Those initiatives are based on the
framework for action provided by the five objectives
established in the strategy, which incorporate priorities
and mechanisms over the medium and long terms to
reduce the threat posed by that group. We request the
authorities of each of the affected countries to support
and cooperate with the strategy, in the interests of the
populations that have endured the scourge of that armed
group for decades.

We call for the execution of the arrest warrants
issued by the International Criminal Court for the three
leaders ofthe Lord's Resistance Army on charges ofwar
crimes and crimes against humanity, including murder,
rape and child recruitment through kidnapping. We call
on all States to cooperate with the Court in executing
the warrants and to ensure that those responsible for
such atrocities are brought to justice.

Finally, we express our support for the prompt
adoption of a draft presidential statement on this matter.

