Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We welcome the
presence of the honourable Minister of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the Council.

Pakistan fully supports the Framework for Peace,
Security and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, which lays the foundation
for durable peace in the region. We commend the role
and important contribution of regional and subregional
organizations, including the Southern African
Development Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, towards peace
and security in the region. We particularly appreciate
the mediation role of the Secretary-General, and we
express our full support for his comprehensive approach
towards a political solution to the recurring cycles of
instability in the region by addressing the underlying
causes.

Over the years, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) has been a stabilizing factor
in the country. It has made vital contributions to the
protection of civilians, in line with its mandate. The
Mission's continued presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is an important part of the new
comprehensive approach.

The collective goal of the Security Council and the
international community should be to build the capacity
of Congolese national security institutions for the
progressive and time-bound transfer of responsibility
to the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That will enable the Government to assume its
primary responsibility to maintain peace and security
in the eastern part of the country and to bring war
criminals and fugitives to justice.
Before the negotiations on resolution 2098 (2013),
we had several reservations. However, through intense
engagements, a number of those concerns have been
addressed. Our interpretation of this resolution with
regard to the Intervention Brigade is as follows.

The resolution clearly states, in paragraph 9, that
the establishment of the Intervention Brigade is "on an
exceptional basis and without creating a precedent or
any prejudice to the agreed principles of peacekeeping".
The resolution clearly defines the goals and tasks of
the Intervention Brigade and outlines its exit strategy,
which focuses on building the capacity of a Congolese
rapid-reaction force that would take over the tasks of
the Intervention Brigade. Moreover, the resolution
clearly outlines the respective tasks of the Intervention
Brigade and its regular forces, including the associated
mission concept, the concept of operations and the
rules of engagement. The text also lays particular
emphasis on deterring any attacks against peacekeeper
and underlines the need for strengthening the security
of United Nations personnel.

Pakistan remains fully committed to the basic
principles ofpeacekeeping, including the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force, except
in self-defence and defence of the mandate. Deployed
in one of the most restive regions in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Pakistani
peacekeepers are an integral part of the Mission and
have played an important role in the effective discharge
of the Mission's mandate.

Notwithstanding our continuing concerns and
reservations with regard to the concept of the
Intervention Brigade and its possible implications for
the safety and security of peacekeepers, we supported
the resolution as an expression of our commitment
to peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the wider region. We will continue to
support the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and to stand by its people in their quest for
security and stability.

