Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
1 would like to thank the delegation of Senegal for
convening today's open debate and the briefers for
their presentations.

The Security Council has increasingly deployed
peacekeeping operations in complex environments with
non-State armed groups that use asymmetrical terrorist
tactics against the United Nations, thereby causing a
rising number of casualties among the Organization's
staff. My country honours those who have given
their lives in the service of peace. We condemn the
murders and other acts of violence committed against
peacekeepers. We stress the need to develop more
effective security measures for peace missions.

There is no doubt that peacekeeping operations
should be endowed with the means required to guarantee
the safety of their staff and equipment, enabling them to
effectively discharge their mandates, and in particular
to ensure the protection of civilians who are also the
targets of asymmetrical threats. Amid such measures
and on the basis of the considerations of both the
Report of the High-level Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and today's interesting concept note (see
S/2016/927, annex), Argentina considers it important
to highlight the following: first, the specific equipment
and training capabilities needed to defend against
asymmetrical threats and the special financing required
to acquire them; secondly, the development of special
training manuals by the Secretariat in close consultation
with the States Members of the United Nations; thirdly,
a suitable operations concept and clear and specific
rules of engagement for operational environments
with asymmetrical threats; fourthly, a mandate that
includes elements needed for capacity-building and
peacebuilding in host countries, in particular assistance
in rebuilding their national security institutions,
especially in the areas of the rule of law and security
sector reform, in line with the new goal of sustaining
peace; fifthly, the use of new technologies, including
unmanned aerial vehicles, in order to maximize
operational knowledge of the situation, without
prejudice to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations or to the principles of peacekeeping; sixthly,
the strengthening of institutional cooperation and the
sharing of information among United Nations counter-
terrorism entities, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Political Affairs and
peacekeeping operations, using the tools that the
Organization already possesses.

As highlighted in the interesting concept note
drafted by Senegal, it is one thing to give peacekeepers
the tools with which to protect themselves and civilians
against asymmetrical threats and quite another to have
them engaged in counter-terrorism efforts in areas
where peacekeeping missions are deployed. In that
regard, Argentina reiterates its position, which is in line
with that outlined in the Report of the High-level Panel
on Peace Operations, which states that peacekeeping
operations were not designed, trained or equipped to
impose political solutions through the sustained use of
force of an offensive nature. Peacekeeping operations
are therefore not an appropriate instrument for
conducting military counter-terrorism operations.

We understand that there are more effective counter-
terrorism tools which, at the same time, enable the
principles ofpeacekeeping operations to be safeguarded
and to serve as guidelines for peace operations
processes, above and beyond their peacekeeping
mandates. In that way, the essence of such mandates
are not distorted by the introduction of elements that
impose peace and are foreign to peacekeeping. In that
regard and in conclusion, Argentina is ready to engage
in discussion on such tools, not only in the Security
Council but also in the wider forum of the General
Assembly and, in particular, in the Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.

