Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2397 (2017), which reinforces
the range of existing sanctions, specifically with
respect to prohibitions on coal, crude oil exports,
condensates, refined oils and natural liquefied gas
from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The
stated aim of the resolution is to strip that country of
financial resources intended for its illegal nuclear
weapons programme.

In the wake of the intercontinental ballistic missile
test in November, the international community as a
whole, and the Security Council in particular, had an
obligation to respond by applying increased pressure
on the Pyongyang authorities. Today's unanimous vote
therefore sends a strong message from the Security
Council and is a logical reaction to the methodical
pursuit by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
of its military nuclear programme.

Although it has already been mentioned, it bears
repeating that said programme is a deliberate violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and
gravely undermines the international non-proliferation
regimes. Furthermore, the programme constitutes a
direct threat to air security and the safety of millions of
people residing, working or travelling in those densely
populated and busy areas. The North Korean launches
and tests are not subject to either prior notification or
authorization. Because it seeks to ensure the welfare
of the people of North Korea, the Security Council
has sought to provide for humanitarian exemptions
to preclude any negative humanitarian repercussions
of the measures imposed that could afflict the North
Korean population.

The Senegalese delegation reaffirms that this range
of highly targeted measures imposed to respond to the
challenges posed by the North Korean ballistic-missile
programme, must be part and parcel ofa comprehensive
political strategy to resolutely engage stakeholders in
meaningful, good-faith dialogue, with the support ofthe
international community. Senegal therefore solemnly
reaffirms its call to resume the Six-Party Talks so as to
arrive at the verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula, and the peaceful coexistence
of the countries in the region.

I should like to conclude by reaffirming our call
for unity among Security Council members and the
international community in order to tackle this critical
phase of the situation on the Korean peninsula. The
Olympic Winter Games, which are set to commence in
several weeks in the Republic of Korea, could provide a
good opportunity to move in that direction.

