The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Burundi, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nkingiye
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
resume its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council took note with
satisfaction of the declaration signed on 15 May
2005 in Dar es Salaam by the President of
Burundi, Mr. Domitien Ndayizeye, and by the
leader of the rebel group of Palipehutu-FNL,
Mr. Agathon Rwasa. The Council took note in
particular of the commitment by both parties to
immediately cease hostilities, agree within a
month on a permanent ceasefire, and negotiate
without disturbing the electoral process.

"The Security Council shares the
understanding that this declaration is a first step
that should allow FNL to be rapidly integrated, in
a negotiated manner, into the transitional process
currently in progress in Burundi. The Council
remains convinced that FNL's participation in this
process will facilitate the holding of the
forthcoming elections, in accordance with the
timetable confirmed at the last meeting of
member States of the Regional Initiative for
Peace in Burundi, on 22 April 2005 in Entebbe.

"The Security Council commends the
the

mediation of President Benjamin Mkapa and of
the Government of the United Republic of
Tanzania and, more generally, the efforts of States
of the Regional Initiative chaired by Ugandan
President Yoweri Museveni and of the
Facilitation led by South African Deputy
President Jacob Zuma, as well as those made by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, to bring the peace and national
reconciliation process in Burundi to a successful
conclusion. The Council reiterates that bringing
an end to the climate of impunity in Burundi and
the Great Lakes region is essential to that
process.

"The Security Council urges all Burundian
parties to exert greater efforts to ensure success
of the transition, national reconciliation and
stability of the country in the longer term."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/19.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

