Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): As President of
the Non-Aligned Movement, I have the honour to
speak today on its behalf. We would like to thank the
delegation of Senegal, especially Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal, for organizing
today's important debate. We are also grateful to Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson; Ms. Michaelle Jean,
Secretary-General of the International Organization
of la Francophonie; Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime; Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, Executive Director of
the Executive Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee; and Mr. Arthur Boutellis, Director of the
Brian Urquhart Center for Peacekeeping Operations for
their interventions.

The Non-Aligned Movement notes that
peacekeeping has become the main activity of the
United Nations and highlights the fact that non-aligned
countries currently provide more than 88 per cent of the
peacekeeping troops on the ground, thereby contributing
significantly to the maintenance of international peace
and security under the Organization's auspices. The
Non-Aligned Movement is deeply concerned about
the large number of deaths of peacekeeping personnel
in recent years, and urges the Secretariat and other
interested parties to make the safety and security of
United Nations peacekeeping staff a top priority.

Inview ofthe deteriorating security situationinmany
field missions, the Non-Aligned Movement stresses the
need for the United Nations to adopt effective security
and protection policies for peacekeeping personnel. In
view of the worsening situation in many field missions,
NAM. also stresses the need for the United Nations
to develop effective security and protection policies
for peacekeeping personnel, and strongly condemns
the killing and kidnapping of, and selective acts of
aggression against, United Nations peacekeepers as
well as all acts of violence against them.

Aware of the risks inherent in the maintenance of
peace, NAM. wishes to convey its deepest respect for
the memory of United Nations peacekeeping personnel
who lost their lives in the service of peace. Their
sacrifice must be lasting testimony to the unparalleled
work that they did for peace and stability.

The Non-Aligned Movement wishes to emphasize
that the establishment of any peacekeeping operation
or the extension of the mandate of such an operation
must be done with strict respect for the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations as well
as for the principles that it has elaborated to regulate
such operations, which have become basic principles,
mainly, the consent of the parties, impartiality and
the non-use of force except in cases of self-defence.
These basic principles, which have guided United
Nations peacekeeping operations for five decades
now without any controversy, remain relevant and
must be preserved. We must also preserve respect
for the principles of sovereign equality, political
independence, the territorial integrity of all States and
non-interference in affairs that are essentially part of
the internal jurisdiction of States.

NAM. believes that peacekeeping operations should
not be used as an alternative either to deal with the
root causes of conflicts or to manage them. Conflict
management must be based on and implemented
through political, social and development tools in order
to achieve a fluid transition to lasting peace, security
and sustainable development. I must also add that
exit strategies must always be agreed upon at the first
stage of mission planning and must be reviewed on
a periodic basis.
Although information-gathering, sometimes
called intelligence, can contribute to the security and
protection of peacekeeping personnel and civilians,
NAM. recognizes that there remain valid and legitimate
concerns in this respect. The Movement praises the
commitment of the Secretariat and Member States in
this respect and stresses the need to reach a consensus
among Member States on this very important and delicate
topic in the framework of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations before continuing to develop
a policy framework.

NAM. reiterates its position that the General
Assembly has the essential function within the United
Nations system of formulating concepts, policies and
budgetary questions related to peacekeeping. That is
why NAM. reiterates that the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations is the only United Nations
forum that has the mandate of comprehensively
considering the issue of United Nations peacekeeping
operations in all their aspects, and that the role of the
Committee continues to have great importance in the
process of drawing up strategic recommendations.

Likewise, the Movement stresses the importance of
the full participation of troop- and police-contributing
countries in the formulation of policies and in the
decision-making process so as to collaboratively
achieve the effectiveness required for the success of
United Nations peacekeeping missions.

NAM. also highlights the need to establish
effective triangular cooperation between troop- and
police-contributing countries, the Secretariat and
the Security Council. NAM. also firmly supports the
complete reorganization of current modalities for
triangular cooperation in order for this cooperation
to be more results-oriented and more beneficial to all.
We are prepared to undertake cooperation with the
Secretariat and the Security Council to continue to
develop new modes of international cooperation that
would make it possible for both the parties concerned
and United Nations peacekeeping operations to benefit
from renewed and revitalized cooperation.

In my national capacity, I wish to express our
condolences to the families of the victims of terrorist
attacks that took place on 6 November in Mali, and
our expressions of support and condolence to the
Governments of Mali and Togo, the Blue Helmets and
the French-led international force, which were the
target of violent acts.

Furthermore, Venezuela wishes to stress that
peacekeeping operations were not created to initiate or
relaunch political processes; administer conflicts where
there is no peace; or participate in military operations
against terrorist groups or take on the residual tasks of
anti-terrorist or other offensive operations undertaken
by ad hoc coalitions or by regional or subregional forces
that have withdrawn from the field.

Our delegation believes that the joint report of the
African Union and the United Nations on benchmarks
for the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia of 30 June 2015 established an
important precedent by determining that the security
situation on the ground was not yet appropriate for
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. This parameter must be borne in mind in
assessing the potential deployment of a peacekeeping
operation in the field.

In this vein, we reaffirm the important responsibility
of the Secretariat, in the framework of the sequential
focus, to travel to the field beforehand and undertake an
in-depth analysis of the context of the conflict and the
priorities and intentions of the parties and other relevant
stakeholders in determining whether the security and
political conditions on the ground are appropriate for
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. Failing that, the mission would become
involved in the conflict and a constant target of attacks.

Likewise, in undertaking their functions,
peacekeeping operations must have clear mandates
approved by the Security Council with regard to the
protection of civilians, avoiding their involvement as a
party to the conflict. In this process, we must ensure that
peacekeeping operations have the necessary logistical
and technical training resources to carry out its complex
tasks. Under no circumstances can the United Nations
use electronic media to gather intelligence signals or to
detect radar or radio-electric waves emitted by the host
State or its neighbours, which would compromise the
confidentiality and security of the communications of
such States. The same applies to any other technology
or similarly invasive method, except when it has the
consent of the State concerned. It goes without saying
that information-gathering through covert actions, the
tapping of communications and the use of informant
networks is unacceptable and cannot take place been
under any circumstances.

To conclude, we wish to reaffirm that sustained
peace and the well-being ofpeoples is achieved through
a political resolution to conflict and dealing with the
root causes. This should be the guiding light of our
efforts in the framework of the United Nations.

