Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): At the outset, I
should like to thank you, Sir, for having invited me to
this meeting to present to the Council the report of the
Senior Advisory Group on civilian capacity
(S/ZOll/SS). I should also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Malcorra and the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Gasana, for
being here today.

The report before the Council is truly the product
of a collaborative effort. I note the presence here today
of Ambassador Mitra Vasisht, a member of the
Advisory Group. I believe without the diversity of
points of view expressed in the Group, we would not
be where we are today. This report is a result of a
collective effort also in terms of the diversity and
variety of the consultations we were able to hold in the
preparatory phase. We met with Member States,
regional organizations, civil society, individuals
2
affected by conflict and actors from conflict zones, and
their points of View inform this report.

Let me first make a few remarks on the origins of
this report. As Council members know, it arose from
growing concerns among the international community,
and the United Nations in particular, on how to
provide, in a timely manner, people with the needed
qualities in difficult situations, and how to deploy them
rapidly in conflict-affected areas. This difficulty, which
is common to all major multisectoral missions, affects
the ability of United Nations missions - missions
authorized by the Council - to fulfil their mandates
and thus to build lasting peace. This is the overarching
problem that our report aims to address.

Of course, it is not a new problem. Members will
recall that during a debate in the General Assembly last
June marking the tenth anniversary of the Brahimi
report (S/2000/809), Lakhdar Brahimi noted that there
is no substitute for getting the right people into the
right jobs at the right time, and only for the time that is
necessary. He went on to say that many peacekeeping
veterans had told the panel he chaired in 2000 that the
civilian personnel system was failing peacekeeping
missions and that if there was only one problem to fix
as a priority, it should be this. Ten years later,
regrettably, he expressed his fear that many of the
problems identified in 2000 had not yet been resolved.

In the past ten years, the operating environment
of missions has become considerably more
complicated, and the expectations of the international
community have also significantly changed. The scope
of the missions mandated by the Council has continued
to expand, with missions playing ever more diverse
and varied roles covering a very wide range of
activities relating to the re-establishment of peace and
security. This requires much greater agility at
Headquarters and on the ground and a much broader
range of skills and expertise, including specialized
skills that are often hard to find.

(spoke in English)

As the Secretary-General said during the
Council's debate on post-conflict peacebuilding and
institution building in January (S/PV.6472), "More
nimble and agile systems are also required, including
stronger partnerships that can provide the most
appropriate civilian capacity", particularly from the
Global South and among women.
11-33213

I would like to say a few words on the key

features of the report. Council members are already

familiar with its four main areas: national ownership,

global partnership, expertise and nimbleness. I would

like to explain why it was these four key issues that we
chose to concentrate on.

First, national ownership. As the Peacebuilding
Commission has emphasized, unless conflict-affected
countries develop their own capacities to cope with
crisis and change, international assistance will not
succeed. Yet we heard repeatedly from conflict-
affected countries that we do not sufficiently respect
national ownership or develop national capacities. In
Liberia, for example, where the last peace agreement
was concluded in 2003, despite the international
community's efforts since then, the lack of specialized
capacity in many areas remains a major challenge. For
the Liberian National Police alone, civilian expertise is
needed in the areas of administration, communications,
criminal investigation, institutional capacity-building
and logistics. We need more than just the uniformed
personnel, who of course play a critical role; there is a
whole supporting civilian environment that needs to be
developed in parallel.

Our report is therefore founded on the principle
that international assistance has to identify, protect and
nurture latent national capabilities - in short, that it
must build on what is already there, not start from a
blank slate. That means stronger support to core State
capacities, such as aid coordination, policy and public
financial management, maximizing the economic
impact of our interventions through local procurement,
and using local capacities as much as possible,
including in professional positions in United Nations
missions. This support has to start early. In Southern
Sudan, for example, I hope that the United Nations will
aim to build up the capacities of the Southern Sudanese
to articulate their priorities so that it will be the
Southern Sudanese themselves, who will truly shape
the future of their country, with the United Nations
planning process then aligning with those nationally
defined priorities.

The second area of focus is partnerships.
Conflict-affected countries have increasingly
specialized needs in a variety of fields, from natural
resource management, as we have seen in Liberia, to
land management in Darfur, harbour management in
Timor-Leste - the scope is unlimited. The United
Nations obviously cannot hope to meet all of these
11-33213

needs from its own ranks. Instead, it needs to establish
and operate effective partnerships with outside
providers, as many agencies, funds and programmes
already do. We therefore recommend establishing a
civilian partnership cell to link field needs to the
capacities of Member State and non-governmental
organization and to enable faster, more effective
deployment of Member State capacities.

We emphasize, too, the need for greater South-
South cooperation and triangular cooperation. The sort
of expertise needed in conflict-affected countries can
often be found in countries with a recent experience of
transition or institutional transformation. South Africa,
for example, has provided electoral and mediation
expertise in Burundi. The capacity development needs
of the Liberian National Police are being supported by
neighbours in the subregion. Triangular cooperation is
helping restore and strengthen core State functions in
South Sudan, where 200 advisors from the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and 150
United Nations Volunteers, supported by the United
Nations Development Programme, will be outposted to
work at the local level with Government counterparts
and provided with technical and advisory support.

The next issue of focus is expertise. The
Secretary-General's report on peacebuilding in 2009
(8/2009/304) stressed the need for predictable delivery
of assistance in the core areas of peacebuilding. Yet
efforts are still hampered by the lack of quickly
deployable expert capacity, including in such mission-
critical areas as the rule of law. Part of the problem is a
lack of clarity about roles and responsibilities, with
gaps in some areas and overlap in others where
multiple actors do the same tasks under competing
mandates. This is why the report recommends
establishing a clear model defining who does what,
with clearly designated leads for all areas. The aims
here are to strengthen responsibility and accountability,
and to fill obvious capacity gaps.

The last is of focus is nimbleness. The Secretary-
General's representatives in the field are entrusted by
the Security Council with great political and diplomatic
responsibility to carry out the Council's mandates. But
when it comes to management, they actually often have
very little flexibility and need the authority to adapt
their implementation plans to react to the unforeseen
and to seize opportunities. The implementation of their
mandates could sometimes be well served by missions
being enabled to undertake certain programmatic
3
activities, at least before United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes have got their programmes
under way. Examples such as the community violence
reduction programme carried out by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, and a road-building
scheme managed by the United Nations Mission in
Liberia that employed 75,000 Liberians, a third of
them ex-combatants, are illustrations of the enormous
potential value of using mission funds for carefully
targeted programmes within the mandate.

The report also makes one cross-cutting
recommendation for more seamless arrangements
within the United Nations to enable rapid response and
interoperability across the system. This points, I must
say, to a deeper problem - a single human resources
system that tries to cater both to the recruitment of
Headquarters staff and to the management of field
missions. These are two vastly different tasks, perhaps
impossible to do within one single set of rules without
at least some adaptations.

In conclusion, let me stress that the international
community has too often missed the window of
opportunity that the immediate post-conflict period
offers to provide basic security, deliver peace
dividends, build confidence in political processes and
strengthen core national capacities to lead
peacebuilding efforts.

The stakes are very high. As the recently
published World Development Report underlines,

"insecurity has become the primary development
challenge of our time. One-and-a-half billion people
live in areas affected by fragility, conflict, or large-
scale, organized criminal violence, and no low-
income fragile or conflict-affected country has
yet to achieve a single United Nations
Millennium Development Goal".

To meet the needs of post-conflict countries, the
United Nations currently tries to recruit a vast array of
specialized personnel instead of building partnerships
that will provide access to the necessary capacities as
and when they are needed. Inevitably, then, its
response to conflict is determined by the supply of its
own human resources, and not by demand. Improving
the way we deliver civilian capacity requires a shift
from this supply-driven to a demand-driven approach
that respects and understands the needs of conflict-
affected countries and adapts itself to fill them, rather
than simply providing the capacities it happens to have.
It requires going outside the boxes that we have built to
describe our activities in post-conflict peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. These have
sometimes proved to be an obstacle rather than a help
because the reality is that the effort to rebuild a country
that has suffered conflict is really a continuum. Too
often, because of those boxes, our interventions are
like a cliff, with at one stage a massive engagement
and then suddenly very little. We do not know how to
turn that cliff into a more gentle slope, which is really
what is needed.

Our recommendations are intended to equip the
international community to better respond to these
demands. To that end, we envision a core of United
Nations staff working in close partnership with host
communities and civilians from Member States,
regional organizations and other partners, accessing
temporary capacities in response to need.

A meeting organized by the United Nations and
the African Union in Addis Ababa in December 2010
was quite clear on this point. The concluding statement
of that meeting said, in part:

"The spirit of partnership must drive the next
generation of engagement with conflict-affected
States. The United Nations must be open and
respectful. It must engage host communities,
Member States which have appropriate capacities,
regional and subregional organizations, civil society
and the private sector, with a willingness to learn
from them and adapt."

This message goes to the very heart of the report.

Our ideas and proposals are now for Member
States and the Secretary-General to weigh and
consider. I hope that some of them will prove of some
value. I thank the members of the Council for their
interest, and look forward to hearing their views on our
report and its relevance to their work.

