Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): The European Union
has already spoken on the matter, but I would like
to make an additional statement on behalf of Poland
and my country, Croatia, and to brief the Council on
a joint endeavour our two countries undertook earlier
this year to promote the objectives of resolution 1977
(2011) within the scope of resolution 1540 (2004). As
the Council is aware, resolution 1977 (2011) extended
the mandate of resolution 1540 (2004) for ten years
and tasked the 1540 Committee to work to identify
effective practices, templates and guidance for the
implementation of that resolution.

Poland and Croatia combined their efforts in that
regard and gave birth to an initiative known as peer
review, which was officially launched in Croatia in June
2013. The 1540 peer review was a tailored process of
cooperation between Poland and Croatia by which the
two countries engaged their national non-proliferation
experts in coming together to compare national
measures, regulations and legal frameworks related to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Although
it is by no means a novelty in the overall international
security architecture, Poland's and Croatia's peer review
was fairly uncharted territory in the 1540 arena. Poland
and Croatia moved beyond the traditional tools of 1540
implementation and introduced a brand-new concept
in identifying effective implementation practices. The
peer review initiative featured an exchange of visits of
national peers and opposite numbers to their respective
capitals and their hands-on interaction on a wide range
of 1540-related matters.

A pivotal question here is what makes the peer
review such a ground-breaking idea in the entire 1540
framework.The highlight of the initiative was the local
ownership of the process, which enabled Poland and
Croatia to engage in a voluntary dialogue, identifying
differences rather than setbacks and opportunities rather
than shortcomings in a cooperative, non-patronizing,
audit-free way. The United Nations Office of
Disarmament Affairs and 1540 experts maintained an
advisory role throughout the entire process.

As I already mentioned, the peer review process was
rolled out in two phases - phase one in Croatia in June
2013 and phase two following in Poland four months
later, in October. As a wrap-up of the final session in
Warsaw, the two delegations presented several tools and
measures hand-picked as the effective 1540 practices.
They included, inter alia, a national strategy and/or
a pertinent action plan serving as a framework 1540
document at the national level; the interaction of national
agencies and stakeholders; regional cooperation and
activities fostering collaboration between individual
States; and awareness-raising among industry and
academia. A detailed report will be presented to the
1540 Committee early next year.

Finally, let me briefly add, in my national capacity,
that Croatia stands ready to share that experience with
our partners in South-East Europe. Thus in the lead-up
to the tenth anniversary of the 1540 resolution, I can
announce the follow-up to the peer-review initiative
next year in Croatia. It will take the form of a regional
workshop, which we intend to hold in our ancient city
of Split in spring 2014.

