Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman, Assistant Secretary-
General Simonovie and Director Ging for their timely
briefings today.

We share the briefers' grave concern at the
situation in eastern Ukraine. This week the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights reported that more than 6,000 people have been
killed since April 2014. In that time, over 15,000 people
have been wounded, and more than 1.5 million have
fled their homes. It should trouble us all that these grim
milestones have been met in less than one year and in
spite of successive ceasefires.

Behind those statistics lies a worrying and escalating
humanitarian crisis that has further undermined the
human rights of all those living in eastern Ukraine. I
can understand why the representative of Russia does
not want to discuss the human rights situation in the
country because the latest report by the United Nations
Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine details
a growing level of violations and abuse, including
reports of arbitrary arrests, summary executions,
torture and enforced disappearances. The report details
indiscriminate shelling of populated areas, including
deliberate attacks by Russian-backed separatists
on civilians being evacuated through Ukrainian-
controlled routes, and it highlights the human cost of
the fighting - overburdened centres for internally
displaced persons, collapsing social services and a
growing scarcity of food, water and heating.

The violence is having a disproportionate effect
on the most vulnerable, with women, children and
the elderly increasingly caught up in the fighting.
Thousands remain trapped in volatile locations like
Debaltseve. Hospitals, schools and kindergartens have
been deliberately shelled, and disturbing reports of
sexual violence are on the rise.

We call on both sides to respect international law,
to ensure the safety and security of all in the region
and to take active steps to ensure accountability for
any violations and abuses of human rights. Sadly,
investigations have been hindered by the separatists'
refusal to grant access to the territory they control.
We urge Russia to use its influence to overcome that
situation.

More must also be done, as agreed in Minsk on
12 February, to ensure the exchange of all hostages and
unlawfully detained persons who remain in captivity.
That includes Ukrainian pilot Nadiya Savchenko,
being held in solitary confinement, who has been on
an extended hunger strike. Recent reports indicate that
she has had to suspend her hunger strike after 83 days
without food amid serious concerns for her health. As
part of the agreement, Russia committed to releasing
all prisoners, and yet Ms. Savchenko and many others
remain in captivity. That is a clear violation of the
Minsk agreements. I would like to ask the Russian
representative here today to explain to the Security
Council why Ms. Savchenko is still being held. I would
also like to remind the Russian Federation authorities
that while Ms. Savchenko remains in their custody they
are fully responsible for her health and well-being.

One year on from the illegal annexation of Crimea,
we must be clear in our condemnation today of what the
United Nations describes as "systematic human rights
violations affecting mostly Crimean Tatars and those
who opposed the March "referendum". The report
details arrests, arbitrary detention and deportation of
Crimean Tatar activists, denying them their freedom
of religion and belief, their right to free expression
and their right to peaceful assembly. The continued
denial of access to Crimea to the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities is of
particular concern.

We must send a united message today on the issue of

access. The Minsk agreement calls for the safe delivery
of humanitarian aid to those in need. It calls for the
OSCE to observe the withdrawal of heavy weapons, the
border and the ceasefire. None of that can be achieved
unless the Russian-backed separatists grant free and
unfettered access to the territory they control. We
welcome Ukrainian President Poroshenko's statement
this week that the OSCE will be granted access by the
separatists to 10 locations in the east. I look forward
to Russia's confirmation that it will be support this
commitment and that it will use all its influence to
improve access for humanitarian deliveries.

Russian so-called humanitarian convoys remain
of grave concern. Some are clearly being used as
cover for the delivery of military supplies. Russian
military hardware remains in eastern Ukraine despite
the agreement at Minsk to withdraw foreign military
formations. The United Nations Human Rights
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine details credible reports
of

"a continuing influx of heavy and sophisticated
weaponry to armed groups in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions, as well as foreign fighters,
including from the Russian Federation."
The OSCE reported on Wednesday that an 83-vehicle
convoy crossed the border from Russia at Donetsk.
The Ukrainian Government has made clear that it
has not authorized such convoys. They are therefore a
clear violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial
integrity and of international law.

Should Russia wish to support the humanitarian
effort, I urge it to donate money to the United Nations
aid programme. Unless Russia changes its approach,
we will have no choice but to maintain sanctions
and continue our condemnation of Russia's flagrant
disregard for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine and the human rights of its people.

