Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to join my
colleagues in warmly welcoming the Foreign Minister

of Lithuania to the Council today. May I also thank
him for his comprehensive briefing setting out the
priorities of Lithuania as Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2011.

Germany shares the Chairman's priorities and
looks forward to working with Lithuania on the key
issues facing the OSCE. Let me briefly comment on
three aspects.

First, we consider progress in the resolution of
protracted conflicts in Eastern Europe and Asia to be of
particular relevance. The OSCE plays an important role
as a facilitator in this regard. However, no success can
be achieved without the political will of the relevant
players on the ground. Unresolved issues in Moldova,
Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan have to be addressed
by partners in a consensual and peaceful manner and
on the basis of respect for human rights, including
minority rights.

Germany commends the OSCE's active
participation in the political process aimed at settling
the Transdniestrian conflict. The Chairman-in-Office
has already conducted helpful consultations with the
parties involved. The recent formation of a coalition
Government in Moldova provides an opportunity to
move forward. We encourage parties to take up
discussions in the formal five plus two talks as soon as
possible.

Germany welcomes the role of the OSCE in
pursuing a settlement of the Nagorny Karabakh
conflict within the framework of the Minsk Group, and
agrees with the Chairman-in-Office that a
strengthening of the OSCE monitoring activities could
prove beneficial.

On Georgia, we remain committed to the
principle of an OSCE presence as part of the
international monitoring of the situation. We continue
to support the active engagement of the OSCE in the
ongoing Geneva international discussions to reduce
tensions and build trust among affected communities.
We also stress the importance of the functioning of the
two incident-prevention mechanisms. In this context,
we urge the conclusion of a swift agreement
concerning the continued funding of the work of the
United Nations representative to the Geneva talks.

Secondly, Germany wishes to express concern
regarding the closure of the OSCE office in Minsk by
the Government of Belarus. We share the views
presented by the Lithuanian Chairman-in-Office on this
issue. The OSCE office in Minsk makes an important
contribution to strengthening institutions and the rule
of law in Belarus, and its work has not yet been
completed. Germany appreciates the efforts made by
the Lithuanian chairmanship to reopen the office and
ensure that it can continue with its mission.

Thirdly, let me underline that Germany attaches
great importance to close cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations. Cooperation in the fight
against terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and organized crime are important
examples of areas in which the international
community can benefit from close cooperation and
relations between the two Organizations.

As a regional arrangement under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, the OSCE is, among
other things, a key instrument for post-conflict
rehabilitation in its region. We welcome the ideas of
the Lithuanian chairmanship to examine the OSCE role
in stabilization, reconstruction and peacebuilding in
more detail. The Secretary-General's report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) may be considered a pertinent
underpinning for these deliberations and shows how
the two organizations complement each other in their
efforts.

To conclude, let me thank the Chairman-in-Office
once again for his briefing and reiterate Germany's full
support for the Lithuanian OSCE chairmanship.

