Mr. Ybafiez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to express my appreciation for the briefings given
by Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, Mr. Deloire on
behalf of Reporters Without Borders, and Ms. Pearl.
Their briefings were quite moving and we will have
to carefully examine their proposals. I would also like
to thank the Lithuanian presidency for organizing this
open debate and for supporting resolution 2222 (2015),
which we adopted today.

We are joined today in the Chamber by a sizeable
delegation from the Congress of Deputies of Spain
representing the various political forces of my country.
Their visit reflects their desire to learn about the work
of the Council, benefiting from our presence in this
body, and to support the important work of this organ.

Freedom of the press, as a clear expression of
freedom of expression and opinion, is the backbone of
a free society. Freedom of expression and opinion is
the oxygen that is essential to all democratic systems
worthy of that name. That right is clearly enshrined
in article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which expresses its dual role and states that
it is essential for everyone to be able to express their
views without interference and to seek, receive and
impart information and ideas through any media and
regardless of frontiers.

The exercise of freedom ofthe press is fundamental,
not only by journalists. It is a difficult profession
as it must be guided by the need to provide truthful
information. In that undertaking, it is inevitable that
disagreements will arise with political authorities.
However this job is essential in order to be able to
know, to think and to shape opinions. Hence, the role of
journalists is particularly important in armed conflicts.
The independent press informs us about realities on
the ground. The development of new technologies has
significantly facilitated access to information and news
in real-time, has increased the number of information
sources and enhanced the role of the media.

Journalists are an important counterweight against
propaganda, which often tries to manipulate public
opinion. Abuses can occur, such as when radio stations
were used in the Great Lakes region two decades ago
to incite hatred. In some cases, journalists are the only
mode of access to truthful information: today we would
not know much about events taking place in Yemen or
Syria if it were not for the presence of reporters who
often take their commitment to their job to heroic
extremes. Very often, journalists are the only voices
that the victims of abuses and attacks against civilians
have to rely on. Hence, they play an essential role to
ensure a response by the international community to
try to prevent an escalation of violence or, at least,
mitigate its consequences.

Furthermore, they are important to make sure that
crimes do not go unpunished and that perpetrators area
brought to justice. For example, the pictures taken and
preserved by the Spanish deportee Francisco Boix in
the Mauthausen concentration camp were critical in
establishing responsibility in the trials after the Second
World War. The media spurs Governments and civil
society to find peaceful solutions to conflicts. Indeed,
journalism has contributed to shaping the agenda of
the Security Council by bringing attention to notions
including the protection of civilians, children in armed
conflict, and women and peace and security. The
pressure to whichjournalists are subjected to in conflict
situations is the best reflection of the uncomfortable
yet irreplaceable role played by journalism such
circumstances. In Burundi, for example, independent
radio and television channels have not been able to
broadcast for many weeks. Such type of pressure occurs
in many parts of the world. Attacks against journalists
in Ukraine throughout last year, for example, are very
troubling.

The working conditions of journalists are
unfortunately increasingly difficult due to the threat
of terrorism. The pressure and intimidation by terrorist
groups is increasing. Abductions of journalists
increased by 30 per cent in 2014. In parts of Iraq and
Syria we are now talking of a news blackout because
there is no possible access by the media. The year
2015 had a painful and outrageous beginning with the
attack on Charlie Hebdo. Terrorists are increasing their
scope of action. The reason that terrorist groups have
chosen the press is clear: they abhor pluralism and try
to impose themselves using coercive means. Countries
such as Spain that have suffered terrorist attacks know
from experience that these groups are moved by a
totalitarian instinct. Jihadi terrorism uses the Internet
and social media as key tools to recruit combatants
and obtain financing. Groups such as Daesh use social
networks to publicize their activities and to terrorize.
In the medium- and long-term, the best way to combat
jihadist propoganda is through truthful information
about the real face of terrorism. The testimony of the
Yazidi girls that managed to escape Daesh in Iraq and
the Nigerian girls who were recently freed from the
inhumane imprisonment of Boko Haram are telling
examples.

We owe a great deal to the media. In contrast, our
tools to ensure their protection are very limited. Let
me just mention some measures that can be used to
improve the conditions in which they conduct their very
difficult work. It is necessary to publicly acknowledge
the work carried out by the media and to reiterate our
commitment to their protection. Open debates such as
today's are an excellent opportunity to do this. The
work of the Security Council also offers opportunities
such as adopting draft resolutions and press statements
or even imposing sanctions.

States should actively promote the establishment
of a secure framework so that journalists can exercise
their profession free of coercion and intimidation.
That begins with the ratification and implementation
of the relevant international instruments in the area
of international humanitarian law and human rights,
including the 1977 Additional Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, or mechanisms such as the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the
right to freedom of opinion and expression, the Human
Rights Council and the Special Rapporteur of the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. It is
also essential to support the work Representative on
Freedom of the Media of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe.

It is essential that we take into account the views of
the media themselves as we identify activities to protect
their security. No one is better placed than professionals
of the press to contribute to this debate. Before coming
to New York, I had the opportunity to meet in Madrid
with professional associations of the Spanish press,
including Reporters Without Borders, and to hear their
views. I heard very interesting proposals, some of
which I would like to highlight here.

One was a proposal for the prosecution of crimes
against journalists as war crimes, pursuant to various
considerations. I have already mentioned the important
role of the media in armed conflict. Journalists, given
the specific nature of their work, are particularly
exposed to threats and dangers. The abduction and
execution of journalists are instruments of propaganda,
intimidation and terrorism used by terrorist groups
to influence public opinion. There is a high level of
impunity for crimes against journalists, as has been
highlighted in the briefings today, which calls for
enhanced cooperation between the Council and the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.

It would also be useful - again I am conveying a
proposal by the media in Spain-to receive a report from
the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection
of the right to freedom of opinion and expression on
the increasingly frequent and worrisome phenomenon
of the forced exile of numerous journalists. According
to Reporters Without Borders, in 2014 139 journalists
and 20 bloggers had to seek exile, almost twice the
number of the previous year. The main reason was the
threat of violence or imprisonment related to the issues
under their investigation. Only 5 per cent returned to
their countries of origin, and the remaining 95 per cent
remain vulnerable even in exile.

I would now like to refer briefly to Spain's three
priorities of significant importance bearing on the
subject of today's debate.

First, on gender equality, the communications
media are essential both to prevent violence against
women and to articulate their participation in peace
processes. The radio station Okapi in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a partner of the United Nations
with 14 million listeners, is an excellent example of
this. Last year, Spain awarded its most prestigious
award, the Princess of Asturias Award for Concordia,
to journalist Caddy Adzuba for defending human rights
and freedom of the press. We would point to such
concrete measures as the inclusion in the sanctions
committees the designation criteria related to the
violation of the rights of women, including the many
women journalists who champion them.

Second is the review of peacekeeping operations.
We believe that the role of the media should be given
priority attention in defining the terms of reference of
United Nations political missions and peacekeeping
operations. Resolution 2222 (2015), which we adopted
today, emphasizes the importance of that factor.

Third is the factor against terrorism. The
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
underscores the media's important role in curbing the
spread of extremist ideologies. The review to take place
in 2016 will give us the opportunity to strengthen that
perspective. Moreover, for our part, during the meeting
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee in Madrid in
July, we will address the role of the media in a panel
dedicated to the identification and prevention of the
recruitment of foreign fighters.

I should like to conclude with another proposal. The
United Nations has an extensive network of agencies
and institutions that could contribute to improving
the security of journalists, as reflected in the United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue oflmpunity, approved by UNESCO in 2012. It
would be a good idea to assess its impact and to transmit
its findings to the relevant bodies of the United Nations
system. The tenth anniversary ofresolution 1738 (2006)
in 2016 will be an excellent opportunity for that, and to
strengthen cooperation in this field between the United
Nations and regional organizations.

Finally, I should like to express my admiration and
gratitude to the professionals of the press, particularly
those who risk their lives in situations of conflict, for
their noble commitment to give voice to witnesses.
Their stories are critical to keeping our consciences
awake and helping us to respond to crimes and abuses.
On behalf of Spain, I pay tribute to them.

