Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): As a
country associated with the European Union, Bulgaria
fully supports the statement made earlier by the
representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union.

Bulgaria, like all other members of the Council
and of the United Nations as a whole, is concerned by
the worsening of the situation in the Middle East. We
call upon the parties to the crisis to exercise restraint.
That restraint should be exercised not only through acts
but also through language. Sometimes linguistic or
rhetorical excesses can be as dangerous and harmful as
actions.

My country believes that resolutions 1397 (2002)
and 1402 (2002) represent a clear and unequivocal road
map to resolve the current crisis. Those Council
resolutions provide a solid basis for action by all who
are engaged on the ground to help resolve the crisis. I
am thinking in particular of the Special Envoy of
President Bush, General Zinni; the Special Envoy of
the European Union, Mr. Moratinos; Terry Larsen;
Mr. Vdovine; and others. My country welcomes the
decision just taken by the European Union to dispatch
to the region the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain,
Mr. Pique, and the European Union's High
Representative for Common Foreign and Security
Policy, Mr. Solana.

Bulgaria calls upon Israel to implement
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) and to put an
end to the isolation of President Arafat and to the
danger to his physical integrity. We are concerned by
information we have received concerning difficulties
that prominent representatives of the international
community are having in contacting President Arafat,
who remains the legitimate leader of the Palestinian
people. We read in the press that the current President
of the European Union himself, the Prime Minister of
Spain, Mr. Jose Maria Aznar, was prevented from
having a telephone conversation with President Arafat.
If that is the case, we protest strongly against such an
action on the part of the Israeli authorities.

Terrorist attacks represent a major source of the
current tension in the region. They have continued
since the adoption of the two resolutions. Bulgaria
condemns them unequivocally. They are inexcusable,
not only from a moral point of view but also from a
political standpoint. It is undeniable that they have
introduced into the conflict an element that is irrational
and inhuman from every perspective. They have done
so to an unprecedented extent in this already ghastly
conflict. Such acts of suicide represent a phenomenon
with grave consequences. What really disgusts us is
that they are very often encouraged by political leaders.

I would like to say this very clearly: the culture of
the glorification of sacrifice must go, not only for the
moral reasons that I just mentioned, but also for
political reasons. Quite simply, such acts do not help
the Palestinian cause. The Palestinian people is being
called to live with the Israeli people. I cannot resist the
temptation to cite the eminent nineteenth-century
statesman and diplomat Talleyrand, who, when
referring to a political assassination, said it was worse
than a crime - it was a mistake. Unfortunately,
however, that is the case here.

