Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank our colleagues from the
United Kingdom, South Africa, Peru and France for
their briefings, and to congratulate them on the great
expertise that they demonstrated in leading this
important visit by the Council to Africa.

My country, which, as the Council knows,
attaches particular importance to the African continent,
welcomes the fact that this mission took place during a
month under our presidency.

The communique that was jointly adopted on
16 June last by this Council and the African Union's
Peace and Security Council in Addis Ababa reflects the
Belgian desire to see the relationship between the
United Nations and the African Union better defined
and based on coordination, cooperation and coherence.

Belgium greatly welcomes the exchange of views
that took place between these two organizations on
issues such as Sudan, Somalia, Cote d'Ivoire and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Belgium also welcomes the fact that, during its
visit to Sudan, the Sudanese Government reaffirmed its
unequivocal commitment to the hybrid operation.
Belgium is of the view that efforts must now be made
to ensure that this agreement is implemented without
delay. By authorizing the deployment of the operation,
we must ensure that the unity of command and control
is scrupulously respected.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Security Council's visit took place in a new context,
where the new democratically elected authorities are
vigorously attacking the challenges of the country.
Among these challenges, we should include the very
disturbing situation in the east of the country, an issue
that was referred to by all of our interlocutors, but also,
and in more general terms, the difficult socio-economic
conditions that persist, where the population is
impatiently awaiting the dividends of peace.

This fragility requires the constant attention of
the international community and of our Council with
regard to the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It has been clearly shown that the elections
have not resolved all problems. We should consider by
what means our Council and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) can contribute to consolidating
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
through partnership and through dialogue with the new
authorities.
The benchmarking exercise that was established
in resolution 1756 (2007) provides us with a unique

opportunity to better define the objectives for our
action during this post-electoral phase, and will allow
us to better match the available means with the desired
objectives. Bringing peace and stability to the east will
require the adoption of an innovative approach where
the regional dimension must be fully taken into
account.

To conclude and touch briefly upon the C6te
d'Ivoire, the visit to C6te d'Ivoire allowed the Council
to listen to the parties and to the facilitator in the new
context that has been set by the Ouagadougou
agreements. We have noted with pleasure that there is a
new mood prevailing in Cote d'Ivoire and that the
majority of the interlocutors considered a return to
hostilities unlikely - even though the process remains
fragile, as was shown by the recent attempted
assassination of the Prime Minister.

The mission also noted that Ivorian political
forces as a whole want the United Nations to continue
to play an essential role in supporting the peace
process. In spite of all of these positive developments,
my delegation also notes that there has been a
significant delay with regard to the implementation of
the Ouagadougou agreement. Most of the work remains
to be done with regard to organizing free, open and
transparent elections, and my delegation would urge all
parties involved in the Ivorian crisis to implement the
provisions of the agreement without delay.

