Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would
like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, for his detailed report on recent
developments in Burundi. We also thank Ambassador
Jiirg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his informative briefing.
I am also pleased to see my brother Ambassador Albert
Shingiro, Permanent Representative of Burundi, here
with us today.

We appreciate the efforts and work of the facilitator
and mediator for the conversations throughout the
inter-Burundian dialogue process and hope that
President Museveni of the East African Community
will continue his work.

Equatorial Guinea very much appreciates the
spirit of reconciliation and tolerance that is currently
evident in Burundi with the return home of exiled
political leaders under guarantees for their security.
To that should be added the approval of the Congres
national pour la liberte, a new opposition party led by
Mr. Agathon Rwasa, as well as various negotiations
being conducted both inside and outside the country for
the return ofpolitical exiles and refugees. Together with
the release of more than 3,000 prisoners, among them
former insurgents during the violent demonstrations of
2015, as well as the return ofmore than 210,000 refugees
since 2016 with the support of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, those facts
speak to the very positive evolution of the situation in
our brother country in Central Africa. In that regard, we
welcome the agreement signed with Tanzania. As the
African Union did at its thirty-second summit of Heads
of State and Government on 10 February, the delegation
of Equatorial Guinea therefore warmly welcomes
Burundi's major efforts to establish and consolidate the
calm and political stability that currently reign in the
country, which have resulted in its election to the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union and show
us that there is now a return to normality in Burundi
following the destabilization attempts in the wake of
the electoral process in 2015.

We welcomed the visit to Burundi on 31 August
by Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Africa. We also consider the meetings held between
various sectors of the population, the Government,
political actors and members of civil society to be
productive, and we welcome their recommendations
to Burundi on improving relations with the United
Nations, strengthening and invigorating the
inter-Burundi dialogue and building peace through
preventive diplomacy. I would like to point out that
Burundi is a major troop contributor to peace missions,
having contributed more than 6,000 troops.

I also express our satisfaction at the high level of
political will shown by the Government of Burundi
in assuming 100 per cent of the costs of the electoral
process, demonstrating once again its commitment
to that process. Its willingness is also embodied by
the appointment of new members to the Independent
National Electoral Commission and the publication of
the electoral calendar on 28 June, which establishes
deadlines for the elections and addresses other
procedural matters. In that regard, we would like to
highlight that President Nkurunziza has decided not to
stand as a candidate in next year's elections. We continue
to encourage the Government of Burundi to continue
leveraging and fostering inclusive dialogue among all
the parties involved and interested in the establishment
and strengthening of adequate mechanisms for the
peaceful, transparent, credible and inclusive holding of
elections in May 2020, in accordance with the Arusha
Agreement, the Kayanza road map and democratic
principles and values, whereby respect for human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law prevails.

In conclusion, the international community
must continue to resolutely support the Government
and other parties directly involved in promoting
confidence-building measures in order to guarantee
an environment conducive to peaceful elections and
the fulfilment of commitments to the Constitution and
the Kayanza road map towards the peaceful transfer
of power in an atmosphere of national peace and
harmony, above all by providing financial support to
the Government for the reintegration of refugees who
are returning voluntarily and en masse to the country.

We believe that the positive evolution of events
points to the need to remove Burundi from the Security
Council's agenda. Both the Government and the
people of Burundi deserve a vote of confidence from
the international community and the Council, and the
national sovereignty of Burundi must be respected.

