Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today's meeting.

I thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
briefing, and the Secretary-General for the written
recommendations recently submitted to the Council,
which China will carefully study.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are
important tools in maintaining international peace
and security. Peacekeeping forces are responsible for
implementing the Council's mandates on the ground.
Enhancing the rapid deployment capabilities of
peacekeeping forces and improving the capabilities of
peacekeepers are important for increasing the efficiency
and effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. I would
like to emphasize two points.

First, the international community should pay
great attention to the real needs of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), in particular developing countries,
and strengthen support to troop-contributing countries
in the area of capacity-building. We must also ensure
that peacekeeping operations have the necessary
training, resources and capabilities for fulfilling their
tasks, as well as adequate and targeted pre-deployment
training and the necessary equipment to ensure that
such tasks are carried out. The international community
should enhance the peacekeeping capacity-building of
developing States that are TCCs through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation. Meanwhile, it is vital to attach
great importance to and support the important role that
the African Union and other regional and subregional
organizations play in maintaining peace and security
in Africa, and assist Africa in strengthening its
peacekeeping capacity-building.

Secondly, as the manager of peacekeeping
operations, the Secretariat should provide more efficient
and higher-quality support to peacekeeping forces so as
to enhance their ability to address complex situations.
The Secretariat and peacekeeping missions should
give priority to the security and medical capabilities of
peacekeepers, improve the internal sharing of security
information and ensure that security protection,
medical equipment and measures are in place on time.
Peacekeeping missions should give priority to the
training of peacekeepers being deployed, which should
be targeted in the light of the situation in the area
concerned. The Secretariat should further improve the
management and efficiency of an optimized logistical
guarantee mechanism so as to maximize the use of
peacekeeping resources.

As a major troop-contributing country to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, China remains
committed to enhancing pre-deployment training and
the standby capabilities of its peacekeeping forces
and police. China has also actively supported other
TCCS and police-contributing countries in the area
of capacity-building. China works hard to deliver on
the commitments made by Chinese leaders at the 2015
United Nations summit on peacekeeping operations.
Over the past two years, China has trained more
than 800 peacekeepers for the United Nations and
other countries. China has also dispatched the first
helicopter contingent to a peacekeeping mission in
Africa. It is also providing military assistance valued
at $100 million to the African Union. China has also
decided to work through the China-United Nations
Peace and Development Trust Fund to support TCCs,
in particular African countries, in their capacity-
building. China has formally completed its registration
of a standby force of 8,000 peacekeepers in the
United Nations standby mechanism. Two Chinese
peacekeeping police contingents have also been
established and have been registered as part of the
United Nations standby mechanism. The first group of
contingents and equipment has met the requirements
for rapid deployment.

China remains committed to honouring its
commitment to world peace, and we join hands with
all parties to further promote the United Nations path
towards peace.

