Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
Like other members of the Security Council, we are pleased
to welcome you, Sir, to preside over the Council at this
special meeting on Africa - a meeting in which many
States Members of the United Nations are participating,
including some that are represented at ministerial level. We
consider this meeting to be not merely a contribution to
resolving the problems of Africa, but a worthy conclusion
to the Netherlands presidency of this body during the month
of September.

The Security Council is constantly focusing its
attention on the problems of Africa, and this is an
adequate reflection of the concern of the international
community with regard to the situation in the African
continent. In the year since the previous meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in Africa, developments
on that continent continue to be multidimensional and
deserving of serious analysis. This was reaffirmed by the
statements made by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, by the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and by the representative of
Algeria, on behalf of the Chairman of the Organization of
African Unity.

We note with satisfaction that, thanks to the peaceful
initiatives of interested States and the diplomatic efforts
of the United Nations and regional organizations,
important, positive changes have taken place in the
political settlement of the most serious conflicts, such as
those in Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. On the other hand, unfortunately, in spite of the
long and intensive months of effort by the international
community, in particular the OAU, the prospects for a
resolution of the dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea are
not good. We are also greatly concerned about the
smouldering hot bed of war in Angola, where conflict has
once again broken out through the fault of UNITA.
Particular concern has been expressed about the threat of
internal conflicts spilling over into armed inter-State
clashes.

We agree with the concerns expressed in the report
of the Secretary-General of 25 September 1999 on the
progress of the implementation of the recommendations
contained in his report of 13 April 1998 on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa. In this connection, we
believe that it is important for the provisions of the
Charter to be actively implemented in encouraging
regional organizations to take a more active initiative in
preventive diplomacy and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. This would mean strengthening regional
peacekeeping operations, with the support of the Security
Council; the implementation by regional structures of
peacekeeping operations through the use of force is
admissible only with the clear sanction of the Security
Council, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter. This
immutable rule also pertains to the activities of coalition
forces formed on an ad hoc basis. Without a durable
settlement of conflicts, the countries of Africa will not be
able to take the path of sustainable and dynamic growth

 

or eliminate poverty; nor will the full integration of those
countries into the world economy be encouraged.

A key role in strengthening peace and security on the
continent is rightly to be played by the Organization of
African Unity. The efforts of that pan-African forum in
preventing and settling conflicts and ensuring sustainable
development and prosperity for the entire continent should
be greatly appreciated. We believe that the two most recent
OAU summits have made a substantial contribution to that
end. We would like to emphasize the role of the OAU in
resolving serious humanitarian problems and the useful
results of its activities in the area of regional integration
and in making progress towards African economic unity.

One of the key components in the strategy of
strengthening peace in Africa should be the establishment
of an effective Africa-wide system geared to the prevention
and settlement of conflicts as well as to a comprehensive
resolution of the problems involved in the task of post-
conflict recovery. The OAU has great potential in this area.
In this regard, we also greatly value the activities of such
subregional organizations as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) and the
Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and Development
(IGADD).

African efforts must be fully backed by the authority
and capabilities of the United Nations. Here we are
speaking not of replacing African efforts, but of
complementary cooperation and assistance from the United
Nations and from other organizations and countries in the
establishment of pan-African peacekeeping machinery.

The Russian Federation notes with great satisfaction
the growing role played by African States in world affairs,
and the contribution of those States to international
economic integration and to strengthening the global
security system. We welcome the adoption by those
countries of reforms intended to strengthen the democratic
foundations of political life.

Russia intends to assist in solving the problems of the
African continent.

