Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on organizing this
important debate to consider the inaugural report of the
Peacebuilding Commission (S/2007/458). I would also
like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador Yukio Takasu on his election as Chairman
of the Organizational Committee and to wish him
every success in his future endeavours. Our thanks go,
of course, to his predecessor for the work done.

The United Nations Peacebuilding Commission
was set up with high expectations that it would tackle
the daunting task of ensuring post-conflict
reconstruction and rehabilitation. With recognition
given to the fact that development, peace and security
and human rights are mutually reinforcing, the
Commission was put in place to offer local, national
and international stakeholders in peacebuilding a
coordinating forum in which to strengthen their work
with one another and with the United Nations.

Indeed, one of the strengths of the Peacebuilding
Commission is that it can bring together all key
political, military and development stakeholders and
that its membership can vary, depending on the country
under consideration. In that connection, efforts must be
continued to strengthen the modalities and principles of
further cooperation, as well as the relationship among
the various bodies involved, including the Security
Council. The Peacebuilding Commission should also
continue to work on how best to relate to civil society.

Backed by a standing Peacebuilding Fund, the
Commission is also well equipped to harness
international resources and sustained commitment from
donor partners, which are necessary to effectively
support its growing work in the field. However, the
Fund was designed not to finance long-term
peacebuilding requirements, but rather to fill funding
gaps at the earliest stages of the recovery process.

The third pillar, the Peacebuilding Support
Office, is actively supporting the Peacebuilding
Commission in its important work, both in the field
and at Headquarters. Concerning the ongoing efforts to
strengthen the institutional capacity of the
Organization - and in that context, I mean
restructuring and reform of the Secretariat - we must
ensure that the Peacebuilding Support Office is placed
within the structure of the Secretariat in a way that
allows it to respond effectively to the demands placed
on it.
A little more than a year after the establishment
of the Peacebuilding Commission, the reaction to its
functioning has been positive overall. My delegation,
too, believes that the Commission is steadily becoming
a proactive force within the peacebuilding community.

During the reporting period, the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission reached
an agreement on the participation of key institutional
donors, fully engaged with the Governments of
Burundi and Sierra Leone, and maximized the
involvement of parties in the field, including national
authorities, United Nations country teams and civil
society organizations. The Commission was also able
to adopt work plans for Burundi and Sierra Leone. It
identified critical priority areas for peace consolidation
in each of the two countries and launched processes for
the development of integrated peacebuilding strategies.

It is crucial to sustain the political and financial
support for those countries in order to help them stay
on track for peace. An important part of that effort will
be the development of benchmarks and monitoring
mechanisms to assess risks to the peace process in the
two countries. These are also necessary in order to
review country involvement and to monitor the
progress of implementation.

The overarching goal of peacebuilding must be to
strengthen the capacity of societies to manage conflict
without violence. Long-term priorities must include
building national institutions, including in the security
sector; fostering an all-inclusive political environment;
strengthening respect for human rights; and promoting
steady economic growth that reduces social tensions.

National ownership of recovery strategies is
essential. The complexities of current conflicts and of
our peacebuilding efforts call for close coordination
with national actors in order to identify their short-,
medium- and long-term objectives. What is most
important in the work of the Commission is to make
tangible progress on the ground.

My delegation has strongly supported the role of
the Peacebuilding Commission within the United
Nations, which consists of drawing on lessons learned
and becoming the repository for advice on critical
peacebuilding issues. We welcome the establishment of
the Working Group on Lessons Learned, which
includes broad participation by all Commission
members.
There is no shortage of countries that need help
getting on their feet. The Commission could begin
considering the possible addition of a country or
countries to its agenda, within manageable limits.

There is real interest among United Nations
Members in the Peacebuilding Commission and in
what it could do to draw fragile States into the
mainstream of democracy and development. It is of
great importance that the Commission show results, so
that donors and other international and regional actors
engaged in the process can have a strong basis for
continuing to strengthen their involvement and for
providing increased funding. In that context, the
Security Council should work hard to make the
Commission a success by engaging effectively and
constructively in its work.

In conclusion, Slovakia shares the disappointment
expressed by the representative of Italy that agreement
was not reached on allowing other important United
Nations Member States to speak in this debate - in
particular, Portugal, on behalf of the presidency of the
European Union; El Salvador, as Vice-Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Chair of the Working
Group on Lessons Learned; and Jamaica, as
coordinator of the Non-Aligned Movement.

