Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me to start with
words of appreciation, since this is the last open
discussion in this Chamber under your leadership,
Mr. President. I would like to express my appreciation
to you, Sir, and your team. I commend you personally, as
well as your colleagues, for your leadership, creativity
and professionalism. It has been a pleasure to work with
Equatorial Guinea during this very busy month.

Allow me also to thank our guest, Special Envoy
Christine Schraner Burgener, for her informative
briefing. She can count on our support. We appreciate
her efforts to find a durable solution to the crisis in
Rakhine state. Again, we are very pleased.

I would also like to very warmly welcome Foreign
Secretary Shahidul Haque and commend the authorities
of Bangladesh for the generosity extended to the
refugees from Rakhine state.

Poland believes that our primary goal as members
ofthe Security Council should be to seek comprehensive
and durable solutions that address the root causes of
the problems in Myanmar, including the elimination of
statelessness, discrimination and underdevelopment,
as outlined in the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State. The ongoing Rohingya
crisis requires close cooperation among all relevant
actors, with special responsibility falling on the
Government of Myanmar.

We repeatedly underline the need to establish
conditions conducive to the safe, voluntary, dignified
and sustainable return and reintegration of displaced
persons to Rakhine state. We hope that the Government
will proceed with easing restrictions on freedom
of movement in order to facilitate access for all
communities to livelihood opportunities, education,
health care and other services. We have not forgotten
the responsibility of the Myanmar military to ensure the
protection of all civilians without discrimination and to
fully observe its international human rights obligations.

There are legitimate concerns that the Myanmar
authorities are backtracking on their commitments to
addressing the Rohingya refugee crisis. Just a couple of
days ago, we were able to learn through media reports
that the highest-ranked officer in the Myanmar military
denies the fact that the army systematically persecuted
the Rohingya Muslim minority, claiming that any
allegation in that respect is an insult to his country's
honour. If this man refuses to believe the eyewitness
testimony of thousands of raped women and orphaned
children who fled for their lives and found shelter in
Cox's Bazaar, how can we believe official Government
rhetoric on bringing perpetrators to justice? Is there any
hope left for any scraps of accountability? We call upon
the Government of Myanmar and the security forces
to ensure that security, rule of law and accountability
prevail in the country, including in Rakhine, Kachin
and Shan states. In this manner we also hope that the
postponed visit of United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), Mr. Filippo Grandi, to Rakhine
will finally take place immediately after the conditions
on the ground are assessed as enabling such visit.

We further reiterate the call on the Myanmar
Government to take all measures to defuse tensions
between communities and grant full, safe and
unconditional humanitarian access without delay.
In this regard, we look forward to any progress in
the implementation of the arrangement between
Myanmar and Bangladesh on the return of displaced
persons from Rakhine state and the memorandum of
understanding signed by Myanmar, the UNHCR and
the United Nations Development Programme. We have
not forgotten about the two Reuters journalists jailed
and sentenced for investigating the killing of Rohingya
villagers in Rakhine state and call on officials for their
immediate and unconditional release.

In conclusion, I wish to underline that we have
not forgotten that Myanmar remains a country with a
fragile economy and prone to natural disasters and that
its internal capabilities need to be further developed.
We are aware that rebuilding Rakhine will be a long
process. We therefore offer our support and call on the
international community to focus on developing a long-
term strategy to assist Myanmar in a rebuilding process.

