Mr. McNee: It is a great pleasure to participate in
the Security Council's consultations as chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission's Sierra Leone
configuration. I last appeared before the Council in this
capacity immediately prior to a high-level special
session of the Sierra Leone configuration on June 10. I
am pleased to report that the session was a clear
success. My co-host, Foreign Minister Bangura of
Sierra Leone, led an impressive delegation that included
representation from the Government, a major
opposition party and civil society. The participation of
such a wide array of national stakeholders, including a
senior representative of the opposition, was testament
to the progress Sierra Leone has made towards
fostering national dialogue and building an inclusive
democratic society. I am also grateful to the Secretary-
General's Executive Representative for providing
insightful opening remarks today.

Beyond demonstrating that the international
community remains committed to Sierra Leone, the
special session also produced significant substantive
outcomes. It welcomed the Government of Sierra
09-51020

Leone's Agenda for Change, endorsed the innovative
peacebuilding framework proposed by the United
Nations, the United Nations Joint Vision for Sierra
Leone, and launched a new multi-donor trust fund.
These efforts represent an important step towards
rationalizing peacebuilding efforts, enhancing
coordination and improving the effectiveness of
international assistance.

At the special session, the Peacebuilding
Commission also decided to align its future
engagement in Sierra Leone with the Agenda for
Change, in particular focusing on three peacebuilding
priorities: youth unemployment, drug trafficking and
good governance. The Peacebuilding Commission will
continue to advocate for greater subregional
cooperation and the promotion of gender equality and
human rights. This new, lighter form of engagement
reaffirms national ownership and, at the same time,
simplifies the Peacebuilding Commission's support to
Sierra Leone.

With the strategy now firmly in place, it falls to
Sierra Leone and the international community to
address the remaining peacebuilding challenges. I am
pleased to note that Sierra Leone has remained calm
over the past three months. While the incidents of
political violence in March signalled that the country
remains fragile, the major political parties and the
United Nations family in Sierra Leone are to be
commended for their work on the follow-up to the joint
communique. In this respect, efforts to extend these
discussions beyond Freetown and to the youth wings of
the major political parties are particularly welcome. So
too is the establishment of a Commission of Inquiry to
investigate allegations that sexual violence occurred on
16 March during incidents of political violence. I am
also pleased to note that the Peacebuilding Fund has
provided useful support for the follow-up to the joint
communique through its emergency facility.

These are all positive developments, but the
international community must not become complacent.
Sierra Leone remains fragile and must consolidate the
progress made so far towards an inclusive, peaceful
and democratic political sphere. Indeed, serious threats
to peace consolidation remain. First, high youth
unemployment continues to pose a latent danger of
instability. While programmes have been initiated to
address this problem, a more coherent and coordinated
strategy is needed. In order to fulfil this role, the
Government of Sierra Leone should establish the
proposed national youth commission as quickly as
possible. In addition, support for the Agenda for
Change's strategy with respect to infrastructure and
agricultural development will help to spur economic
growth and job creation for those most at risk.

Secondly, illicit drug trafficking remains a serious
challenge. As it is a regional problem with global
implications, I was particularly pleased to participate
in the July launch of the joint West Africa Coast
Initiative of the United Nations, the Economic
Community of West African States and INTERPOL.
Not only will Sierra Leone directly benefit from this
programme, but it is also receiving similar support
from the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL and several
key donors to improve the performance of its Joint
Drug Interdiction Task Force. The fact that the Sierra
Leone security agencies have recently destroyed
substantial stocks of cannabis only highlights the need
to address this issue before it creates domestic socio-
economic problems.

Finally, progress is needed to consolidate
democracy and the rule of law. The constitutional
reform process has yet to be completed and capacity in
the justice sector must be enhanced, both in the formal
and traditional sectors. Similarly, the Anti-Corruption
Commission is working valiantly and with some recent
success, but more is needed to combat the culture of
corruption in Sierra Leone. Continuing to implement
the recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission will also help to demonstrate to the
civilian population that the conflict is truly behind
them.

The Peacebuilding Commission stands ready to
support efforts on each of these core priorities, but
Sierra Leone will not be able to pursue economic
development and meet its peacebuilding challenges
without active support from the international
community. That is particularly true given the
prevailing financial climate. Slower growth and the
effects of significant currency depreciation will affect
both the Government budget and individual Sierra
Leoneans. The Consultative Group meeting scheduled
for November assumes greater importance in this
context. The international community must ensure that
countries at a critical stage in their transition to
permanent peace and stability are not left to suffer the
effects of the financial crisis alone. Adequately funding
the Agenda for Change and the United Nations Joint
Vision will be essential.

In concluding, I would like to commend the
excellent work of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, UNIPSIL, and the United Nations
country team in Sierra Leone. Their approach is both
innovative and effective. It is a model to be studied
carefully and replicated wherever possible.

The Peacebuilding Commission remains fully
committed to supporting Sierra Leone. In the coming
months, the Commission will advocate on behalf of
Sierra Leone before the Consultative Group meeting,
monitor progress on the joint communique and engage
directly on the three core peacebuilding priorities
identified at the special session. In this effort, we look
forward to the continued strong support of the Security
Council.

