Mr. Moungara-Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): My delegation is delighted to see you, Sir,
presiding over this formal meeting on the question of
terrorism, bearing in mind your country's contribution to
the cause of peace in the world and, in particular, to the
elimination of terrorism.

When in June 1995 dangerous individuals made an
attempt on the life of an illustrious African head of State
who was attending a summit meeting of the Organization
of African Unity in Addis Ababa, my delegation
condemned that attack. When in August 1998 wanton
criminals took the precious lives of American diplomats
and peaceful Kenyan and Tanzanian citizens in
unjustified, indiscriminate terrorist attacks, the delegation
of Gabon joined other members of the Council in
condemning those odious acts forcefully and without
reservation.

Similarly, we have denounced and condemned all
other such attacks that have taken place in the past,
including those recently suffered by the Russian people.

At this time, my delegation wishes once again to
emphasize its condemnation of terrorism, whatever its
source, wherever it is committed and whatever its
motivations.

Terrorism is a violation of human rights, a threat to
the public freedoms that reign in a State of law and
establishes an atmosphere of psychosis, fear and terror
among the peoples who are its victims.

I have already mentioned acts that took American
and Russian lives, but the peoples of France and other
friendly countries have also been struck by these odious
crimes - crimes in which women and children have been
killed or mutilated or have suffered various forms of
lifelong incapacitation.

The links that exist between many terrorist
organizations and other criminal groups that are involved
in the illicit traffic of drugs and weapons should prompt
countries to extend cooperation and coordination in the
fight to eliminate the phenomenon of terrorism.

We are therefore gratified to see this item on the
agenda of the Sixth Committee every year.

For their part, the countries of Africa, at the summit
held in Algiers last July, adopted the Organization of
African Unity convention on the prevention of and fight

 

against terrorism. This is our continent's contribution to the
elimination of the abomination that is terrorism.

For this reason, my delegation will raise its hand high
to vote in favour of the draft resolution so carefully
prepared and submitted by the delegation of the Russian
Federation.

