Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): Let me start by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Keita and
Ambassador Vieira for their briefings today, which set
out a broadly optimistic assessment of Guinea-Bissau's
political trajectory. The United Kingdom shares this
cautious optimism.

The successful conduct of legislative elections
in March and the subsequent appointment of a
Prime Minister and formation of a Government were
significant steps forward, and we commend the Bissau-
Guinean authorities and people on this progress. The
turnout of 85 per cent in the legislative elections was an
impressive signal of the commitment to the people of
Guinea-Bissau to a democratic future for their country.

The next step in Guinea-Bissau's political transition
is the presidential election in November. We hope to see
the country build on the positive momentum generated
by the legislative elections earlier this year. The United
Kingdom notes the challenges set out by Assistant
Secretary-General Keita today and calls on all Bissau-
Guinean political stakeholders to put the national
interest first and play their part in delivering a free,
fair, timely, inclusive and credible election.

Like other Council members, we were encouraged
to see the enactment of the new Parity Law on the
Participation ofWomen in Politics and Decision-making
Spheres, requiring a minimum representation of
women in elections of 36 per cent. We urge Bissau-
Guinean political parties to adhere to this law. A more
diverse Government will be a stronger and most stable
Government. We also commend Prime Minister Gomes
for splitting his Cabinet posts equally between men and
women, and we would be encouraged to see this law
transferred to other national institutions in Guinea-
Bissau.
We note in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/696) the commendable behaviour of the
Guinea-Bissau military in the years following the
2012 coup. Should the presidential elections take place
as scheduled in November in a free and fair manner,
and pending implementation of the priority reforms as
outlined in the Conakry Agreement and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Road
Map for the Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea-
Bissau, the United Kingdom would be open to a review
of the sanction measures currently imposed under
resolution 2048 (2012).

The United Kingdom appreciates the supporting
role played in Guinea-Bissau by the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), the Peacebuilding Commission, the
United Nations country team and other United Nations
bodies and offices, which have helped build a more
robust and inclusive political environment. We welcome
the appointment of the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Sori-Coulibaly, and offer
her our full support in carrying out her mandate.

The United Kingdom also recognizes the key role
played by ECOWAS in holding political stakeholders
in Guinea-Bissau to account. We trust that ECOWAS
will remain as engaged and vigilant as Guinea-
Bissau prepares to hold its presidential elections in
November and throughout the full implementation of
the Conakry Agreement.

We also welcome the steps taken so far by
UNIOGBIS in preparation for transition and note that
these steps are a positive reflection of the political
progress made in Guinea-Bissau. The United Kingdom
continues to believe that December 2020 is a realistic
deadline for the UNIOGBIS withdrawal from Guinea-
Bissau. However, we will be ready to review this position
should there arise a serious threat to peace and stability.
It is our sincere hope, however, that such a threat does
not arise and that the shared sense of optimism we have
heard today continues to be well justified.

As UNIOGBIS prepares to withdraw from Guinea-
Bissau and hands over key responsibilities to the United
Nations country team and the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), it is imperative
that political stakeholders continue to engage positively
with United Nations good offices and sustain their
commitment to the Conakry Agreement until it has
been fully implemented. In that context, we welcome
UNOWAS efforts to increase its engagement on
Guinea-Bissau ahead of the departure of UNIOGBIS.
We hope that the political progress Guinea-Bissau
has achieved in recent years can be maintained to
carry the country out of its past and into a stronger,
more stable and more democratic future. The primary
responsibility for delivering this lies with the Bissau-
Guinean Government. The United Kingdom, along with
the international community, will continue to monitor
the situation closely and work with the Government in
support of this objective.

