Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): Austria fully endorses
the statement made earlier by Ambassador Dirk Jan
van den Berg on behalf of the European Union.

I would like to elaborate very briefly on the
following two points. First, in his excellent report
(S/2004/616), the Secretary-General stressed that the
most significant recent development in the
international community's struggle to advance the
cause of justice and the rule of law was the
establishment of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). In last year's debate, I expressed the confidence
that the United Nations and the ICC would cooperate
successfully to achieve their common goal of
strengthening the rule of law and justice in
international relations. We are very pleased to note that
just a few days ago the Secretary-General and the
President of the International Criminal Court signed
the Relationship Agreement between the United
Nations and the ICC. This is an important step forward
in enhancing the cooperation between the two
organizations. My delegation is convinced that close
cooperation between the United Nations and the ICC
will guarantee success in our common efforts to end
impunity and to strengthen the rule of law.

Secondly, my Government warmly welcomes the
Secretary-General's pledge to make the strengthening
of the rule of law and transitional justice in conflict
and post-conflict societies a priority for the remainder
of his term. In this respect, and in view of the unique
role and responsibility of the Security Council, the
Austrian Foreign Minister announced the initiation of a
discourse on the role and functions of the Security
Council in strengthening an international system based
on the rule of law. As a first step, Austria will convene
a panel, on 4 November, on the question of "The
Security Council as world legislator", during this
year's International Law Week at the United Nations in
New York. The panel, which is being organized in
cooperation with New York University, is designed to
enhance the dialogue between theory and practice on
this important topic. We hope that this initiative will
contribute to a stimulating and fruitful discussion.

