Mr. Valle (Brazil): First of all, I congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July, and I am assured that we
will have a productive term. In addition, I extend
compliments to Ambassador De La Sabliere for his
very successful leadership throughout a demanding
agenda during the month of June.

I express appreciation to Assistant Secretary-
General Danilo Tiirk for his important presentation and
highly commend his role in the process.

Brazil welcomes the first general elections for the
president and members of the House of Representatives
of the Autonomous Region of Bougainville, held from
20 May through 9 June, and wishes all the best to the
newly elected authorities. It goes without saying that
achieving peace is certainly much more difficult and
challenging than winning a conflict. In the case of
Bougainville, we are happy to recognize that there are
no winners and no losers.

The Autonomous Bougainville Government to be
led by President Joseph Kabui inaugurates a new phase
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement. We
recognize the essential role played by the Government
of Papua New Guinea and the Bougainville leaders to
solve their differences in a consistent and mutually
acceptable manner.

We urge all those who freely chose not to
participate at this stage in the electoral process to
respect the outcome of those free and fair elections. We
invite all the Bougainvilleans to join efforts to support
the newly elected Government in its peacebuilding
initiatives.

On this occasion, we also pay special tribute to
other international partners to a peaceful resolution of
that unfortunate conflict, namely, the Commonwealth
and the countries of the region, including the members
of the Pacific Islands Forum.

As recognized in the presidential statement
adopted by the Security Council on 15 June, the
experience of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Bougainville and its predecessor, the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville, constitute quite
successful examples of how the constitution of United
Nations political missions - extremely small, but with
clear mandates and benefiting from the acceptance of
the local political actors - can provide an invaluable
contribution to the peaceful resolution of regional
conflicts in an efficient and effective manner, and
should therefore be accounted as a success story and
serve as future reference.

Brazil stresses its continuing support for the
people of Bougainville and calls upon the international
community, in particular the international financial
institutions, the donor community and the United
Nations specialized agencies, to assist the local actors
and the Government of Papua New Guinea in the
pursuit of their economic and social development
goals, which are essential for a sustainable peace in the
region.

