Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I wish to
welcome President Olusegun Obasanjo and thank him
for having found time to come to the Security Council
to share his views with its members on important
issues of interest for the Council and for the African
continent. We are indeed very thankful and honoured. I
also welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr.
Alpha Oumar Konare, chairman of the African Union
Commission, and we are particularly honoured that
President Sam Nujoma and distinguished ministers
have graced this occasion. This is a clear
demonstration of the high importance of the issue
under consideration this morning.

President Obasanjo, your wisdom and dynamic
action has clearly demonstrated how the personal
commitment of leaders such as yourself can positively
impact on events such as the Darfur crisis. It is our
conviction that this will reinforce a new era in the
relationship between the Council and the African
Union, especially regarding the search for partnership
in finding solutions whenever important decisions have
to be taken. The Security Council and the African
Union have no choice but to cooperate. There is a
common understanding that almost 60 per cent of the
Council's work is dedicated to Africa. It would
therefore indicate a lack of realism to deal with African
issues without coordinating fully with the African
Union, a body entirely dedicated to the political and
economic life of the continent on a daily basis. This is
even more relevant since the creation of the Peace and
Security Council.

The strength of the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations has been fully
demonstrated through the commitment of the two
bodies in order to find a solution to the conflict of the
Sudanese region of Darfur now. In Burundi, the
integration of the African Union contingent into the
United Nations Operation in Burundi (UNOB) is also a
clear example of cooperation. Lessons should therefore
be drawn from those two experiences. With regard to
the cooperation of the United Nations and the African
Union in the case of Burundi, it is important to know
what went wrong and how we could better integrate the
two bodies' input in order to render them more
effective. Working together in Burundi and in Darfur
provides us with the opportunity to better take
advantage of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter regarding cooperation with regional
organizations, which are to be fully tapped. In this
connection, the establishment of a better channel for
the exchange of information should be one of the
priorities, in order to enhance our joint capacity to act
resolutely and in a timely manner in dealing with crises
such as Darfur.

Another relevant aspect has to do with the means
that should be provided to the African Union,
particularly logistics, as it has been clearly stressed by
President Obasanjo. This should be done in a timely
manner when a conflict arises, to enable the African
Union to adequately play a leadership role in resolving
the continent's crises with the support of the United
Nations and the international community as a whole.

It is important that Council members be well
informed on the work of the African Union, and this is
a particularly good opportunity to accomplish this,
given the briefing we have just had from President
Obasanjo. This is an historic session of the Security
Council and should constitute an important building
block in reinforcing the partnership between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council,
in providing, in a timely manner, solutions to crises
and in building peace and stability, thus creating
appropriate conditions for development in the
continent.

