Mr. Osman (Somalia): I would like to warmly
congratulate you, Madam President, on the accession
of your country, the United States of America, to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. I wish you every success in your leadership.

I also wish to thank Mr. Keating, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Madeira,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union, and Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of the UN-Women, for their briefings. I also
would not like to forget my brother, neighbour and
colleague the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia,
Mr. Amde, whose presence I welcome.

Since this is the last briefing of our good friend
Mr. Keating as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), I would like to take
this opportunity to thank him and acknowledge
the important role he played in supporting major
developments in Somalia over the past three years,
including the electoral process, the development of the
comprehensive approach to security strands to support
the national security architecture and the transition
plan, as well as in helping Somalia tackle the major
humanitarian crisis caused by the drought. We wish
him all the best in his future endeavours.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's appointment
of Nicholas Haysom as his new Special Representative
and Head of UNSOM. Mr. Haysom has our full support
and we wish him every success in fulfilling his duties.

The delegation of Somalia takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/800) commends the
fact that it refers to progress made and acknowledges
the positive steps taken by the Federal Government of
Somalia. However, we respectfully suggest that in the
future, in the interests of maximizing its usefulness,
the report be redesigned to contain less narrative
and detail about specific events and more in-depth
analysis of major issues as well as recommendations
and conclusions.

Over the past decade, we have come a long way in
our joint efforts and have much to show for our progress
in building our State institutions, ensuring essential
services for our people, enabling democracy to take
root and upholding the fundamental rights of all our
citizens. The Federal Government of Somalia continues
to believe that inclusive politics and legitimate
governance are the basis for all other progress in
Somalia. The path to achieving that vision is not always
smooth, and in recent weeks the divergent opinions
and views at various levels of Government in Somalia
have been evident as we debate the future shape of our
governance - the federalism structures - and how the
responsibilities of different levels of Government will
be allocated and resourced.

These are formative years for Somalia, and the
emergence of new forms of Government is often a
turbulent process. Many of the Council members
seated here in the Chamber will recognize in their own
histories similar disputes, disagreements, divergence of
ideologies and of views, and vigorous debate that came
to form the basis of their Governments and institutions.
Somalia is no different. Like those members of the
Council, we are committed to allowing those debates
and differences to be energetically aired, allow time for
solutions to emerge and provide the space for positions
to move closer together. We recognize that can happen
only through dialogue, which is why my President,
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, has invited the
federal member states to meet on 17 and 18 September
to continue our debate and national discourse. We urge
all federal member states tojoin us at the table to enable
dialogue, not statements and press conferences, to be
the basis on which we shape our relations.

Underlying this all, steady technical progress
continues through the Federalization Negotiation
Technical Committee, which is tasked with driving
forward negotiations on the fundamental pillars for
long-term stability, including the election model,
resource-sharing and the allocation of powers, to
support political agreements at the leadership level. We
also held the Somali National Constitutional Convention
in Mogadishu from 13 to 15 May, which set the tone and
pace for the constitutionally mandated institutions to
prioritize work, and set the timelines necessary for the
completion of the constitutional review process.

On the security front, Al-Shabaab remains a vicious
threat, able to conduct attacks against the Somali people,
Government institutions and the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). I take this opportunity to offer
my prayers to the victims of the recent suicide attack on
school and Government offices in Hodan district in the
capital and to extend my heartfelt condolences to their
families. Al-Shabaab must be defeated and neutralized
as a matter of priority. In addition to significantly
enhancing the efforts of Somali National Army and
AMISOM, we suggest that the Security Council take
urgent additional steps to cut off, forever, the means
of Al-Shabaab's survival. We propose in particular that
the Council authorize clear and adequate resources and
time to enable the sanctions committee to ascertain
definitively who finances Al-Shabaab, who provides
them weapons and how those weapons and financial
resources enter Somalia.

On our side, the Somali Government is working
to address the primary tactic of using improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) by developing a national
counter-IED strategy, which will bring together
Government departments to tackle the chain of events
that allows for IEDs to be manufactured, transported,
planted and detonated in Mogadishu and across the
country, as well as the to work on the detection of
devices and the prevention of casualties. That important
capacity-building work will include customs, ports and
law-enforcement agencies, as well as the development
of policies and legislation and the strengthening of
coordination and information exchange among security
institutions and the relevant Government ministries.

This year we also embarked upon transition - an
ambitious process whereby we Somalis are moving
towards full Somali sovereignty, national ownership
and leadership in an effort to realize our vision of a
secure, democratic and prosperous nation. We continue
with the implementation of the transition plan so as to
enable Somalia to assume responsibility for security
across the country, including the transfer of tasks from
AMISOM. to Somali security forces. In addition to
our solid national resolve, the success of the transition
process will depend on the continued support of the
international community, most importantly in building
the capacity of our national security institutions. In
parallel with the transition of security responsibilities,
we are focused on doing what is necessary to implement
the economic pillar of the transition process. That task
will be more difficult, requiring more time and the
sustained and long-term engagement of our international
partners during and after the transition process.

We believe that economic recovery is the centrepiece
of our Administration. We recognized early on that
in order to carry out infrastructural improvements,
institution-building and economic development,
we needed debt relief and access to international
financial institutions. We have therefore given our
firm commitment to the successful implementation of
the staff-monitored programme with the International
Monetary Fund, which is now a strategic objective of
our Government. Mobilizing domestic revenue is also
a high priority, as we view sustainable and reliable
domestic revenue as essential to reducing dependence
on aid, boosting economic development and providing
public services to our citizens, which for us is an
important factor for sustaining security improvement.

As part of the fiscal consolidation programme,
we are also in the process of reviewing security
expenditures. The reforms we are currently undertaking
include security-sector payroll reform, with biometric
registration of all security personnel. We are keen to
strengthen our systems through good governance.
Fighting corruption and ensuring transparency are key
priorities for my Government. There is a paradigm
shift in that regard in Somalia. We are on a clear path
of increased accountability and transparency, and
have commenced some difficult reforms, aimed at
transforming our nation, that demand accountability
at all levels, federal and regional alike. The Federal
Government of Somalia and our federal member states
are expected to meet these standards of governance,
and we are determined to support them in meeting
those goals.

With regard to women's rights, the Somali
Government remains fully committed to the promotion
and achievement of equality for all its citizens and to
women's empowerment. We commend the work of the
United Nations specialized agencies in Somalia, which
have supported us in improving the lives of young
girls and women throughout our journey back from
protracted civil strife. Historically, Somali women have
played an important role in conflict resolution and are
key to building sustainable peace in Somalia. Decades
of conflict have increased the burdens placed on our
women and girls, but our transition from conflict
also presents more opportunities to advance Somali
women's rights, in line with our Constitution and the
relevant international laws. For example, our current
constitutional review has the potential to significantly
increase equality and women's empowerment, today
and for generations to come. Our Ministry of Women
and Human Rights is therefore taking the lead in
bringing together prominent and strong Somali women
at the first national Somali women's conference, to be
held in Mogadishu in late October. The conference
aims to advance women's meaningful participation in
Somalia's constitutional review and their path towards
the elections in 2020 and 2021, through a nationally led
and owned process.

Somali women are very talented and we are proud
of them. We would like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Ms. Asli Hassan Abade, one of Africa's first
fighter pilots, who has proudly served her country
for decades. My Government's efforts will continue
to be based on the principle of leaving no woman or
girl behind.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the gratitude
of the Government and the people of Somalia to the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative in
Somalia and all other troop- and police-contributing
countries for the sacrifices they have made for a final
and lasting peace in Somalia. I thank all our partners
in the international community for standing beside us
in solidarity to strengthen the foundations of peace,
democracy and development that we have laid down.
On the way forward, that role must be enhanced
to strengthen Somalia's sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We will continue along the path to realizing
our common vision ofa peaceful, stable and democratic
Somalia that is self-reliant, a key factor in achieving
peace and cooperation in the region for all time.

The meeting rose at 12.35 pm.
