Guatemala would like to thank the Republic of Indonesia, as President of the Security Council, for having convened this high-level virtual open debate on pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace, as well as the Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres; Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary-General; and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation, New York University, for their presentations. We also would like to welcome the concept note (S/2020/765, annex) as a basis for our deliberations. Globally, according to the World Health Organization, there are more than 19 million confirmed cases of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), including more than 700,000 deaths worldwide. The COVID-19 pandemic is an unprecedented crisis that has affected us all. Efforts to flatten the curve could give rise to huge but unquantified costs for the most vulnerable people on the ground. For fragile and conflict-affected countries, the pandemic represents an enormous challenge in various pivotal areas for development, including health, the economy and politics. This experience has shown us that pandemics cannot be addressed solely as a health issue. Beyond its immediate health and humanitarian impact, COVID-19 risks deepening pre-existing social, economic and political fissures. At the same time, the pandemic is leading to an increase in social violence and conflict. It is also a threat to the achievements made in the area of international peace and security and exacerbates existing grievances and inequalities, affecting in particular the most vulnerable in conflict-affected areas. In that regard, Guatemala would like to emphasize the importance of paying special attention to a fundamental element for a peace consolidation strategy - addressing violence against women, which has increased significantly during the pandemic. We issue a call to action to eradicate all forms of gender violence, in line with resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2467 (2019), as well as General Assembly resolution 65/69. It is evident that the pandemic has affected the work of the United Nations system, including peacekeeping operations, special political missions, and peacebuilding mandates on the ground. In that regard, the attention and support of the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission are crucial if we are to address the sustaining peace implications of this pandemic. We need to address not only the conceptual elements, but also the main needs in order to avoid a relapse to previous situations. The current crisis is also creating opportunities for immediate ceasefires that could become permanent and ultimately lead to peace. In that regard, we welcome that the Secretary-General has called for a global ceasefire, which enjoys the support of various countries and relevant stakeholders around the world, thus creating the conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance, open space for diplomacy and hope for those most vulnerable to COVID-19. Guatemala concurs with Secretary- General Antonio Guterres that "Tt]he most effective way to protect civilians is to prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of armed conflict. As the world confronts the monumental challenge of the COVID-19 pandemic, the need to silence the guns could not be more acute" (S/2020/366, para. 67). In that regard, the international community needs to mobilize a concerted, collective response in conflict-affected countries. It is critical that in crafting responses to the pandemic, policymakers consider social fractures. It is crucial that policymakers adopt a proactive approach to mitigate the impacts of both the health crisis and the response to it, based on an assessment of pre-existing conflict risks. Building peace is never a straightforward mission. We live in a time when the Security Council needs to adapt to the current crisis. Unless effective policy actions are taken to support highest-risk countries, the hard-won gains on the ground in peace, security, development and human rights may be reversed. The Security Council should continue exploring ways to strengthen prevention, early detection systems and operational action to avoid conflicts, on the basis of an approach that considers the interconnected elements of peace and security, development and human rights. The international community and the United Nations system must see the coronavirus disease pandemic as an opportunity to address risk factors for violence in conflict-affected countries. It is important to identify opportunities to strengthen national institutions. Health and peace are interdependent. We must recognize that while peace is a precondition for a healthy society, health could also be a bridge towards peace by delivering services equitably. In conclusion, Guatemala attaches great importance to peacebuilding efforts worldwide. The prevention of conflict is critical for sustaining peace and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals while implementing a whole-of-system approach that bridges the three pillars of the United Nations. The pandemic has shown us the importance of pooling efforts worldwide to build resilient societies and of investing in social schemes, particularly health and economic systems, in order to meet the needs of our populations.
