President Chiluba: Today marks the end of an
unprecedented and highly significant month for Africa in
the Security Council, during which a number of very
important issues affecting the continent have been
addressed. As Africans, we wish to thank you,
Ambassador Holbrooke, not only for taking the initiative
to convene these special meetings during your country's
presidency, but also for the trouble you personally took to
Visit a number of African countries to consult on the
matter. Your tour of Africa demonstrated the importance
that the Clinton Administration continues to attach to
African issues. We wish, in that connection, to express
our appreciation for this gesture of friendship and for the
extension of a hand of partnership to Africa.

I also wish to commend the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, for his unrelenting efforts and his total
commitment to the search for peaceful and lasting
solutions to problems affecting all of us. I further wish to
acknowledge the support which the members of the
Security Council and other Members of the United

 

Nations have demonstrated regarding the African issues
addressed during the month.

During the past month, the Security Council has
discussed the questions of the scourge of HIV/AIDS, the
plight of refugees and internally displaced persons, the
Burundi peace process, the war in Angola and the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as they impact
on peace and security in Africa. All of these situations have
had a negative impact on the populations of Africa and
have, in varying degrees, presented critical challenges to
peace and stability on the continent. These challenges call
for answers today and not tomorrow.

The AIDS pandemic today threatens to wipe out the
most productive sectors of our populations. AIDS is already
having catastrophic consequences for the peace and
development of our countries, which, as the Secretary-
General observed when he addressed the Security Council
during its debate on the impact of AIDS on peace and
security in Africa, are no less destructive than those of
warfare itself.

African countries have adopted serious measures to
address the pandemic. This can be seen from the results of
the Eleventh International Conference on AIDS in Africa,
held in Lusaka in September last year. AIDS is, however,
a catastrophe that transcends borders. It is too big for
Africa to confront on her own. We therefore welcome and
deeply appreciate the interest that the United States
Administration and the United Nations have manifested in
our plight by tabling the AIDS question during the "month
of Africa". It is our hope that this interest will soon
translate into practical measures.

The problem of refugees and internally displaced
persons in Africa has not only been a humanitarian disaster
in itself; it also continues to pose a real threat to peace and
stability in the countries where conflict has occurred. Here
again, as in the case of the AIDS pandemic, Africa
welcomes the support of the international community in the
search for comprehensive solutions, solutions that get at the
root cause of conflict, which leads to the problem of
internally displaced persons and refugees.

The situation in Burundi, as this body heard in the
discussions on the matter, calls for the concerted efforts of
the United Nations and the international community at
large. The only hope at the moment for finding a durable
and peaceful settlement to the Burundi conflict lies in the
ongoing Arusha peace process under the facilitation of Mr.
Nelson Mandela.

With regard to the situation in Angola, Mr. Jonas
Savimbi today bears the primary responsibility for the
continuation of the war in that country. Mr. Savimbi has
abrogated his responsibilities under the Lusaka Protocol,
to which his party voluntarily committed itself in
November 1994. He has thus prolonged the war and
caused a tragic humanitarian catastrophe in Angola and in
neighbouring countries. As a neighbour of Angola,
Zambia can bear witness to this daily humanitarian
tragedy. The tragedy of Angola, however, also extends to
an international cartel of illegal suppliers of arms and
ammunition, who have perpetuated the war in that
country. The international community should speak with
one voice and assume the responsibility for exposing
these arms traffickers who are sustaining conflicts all over
Africa.

The peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been the main focus of my visit to New York.
The reaffirmation of commitment by the parties to the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and their pledge to guarantee
the safety, security and freedom of movement of United
Nations and associated personnel are some of the major
achievements of this special session. My appeal to the
Council is that it meet the parties half way by expediting
the process of deployment of the recommended 5,537
military personnel under the second phase and of a
peacekeeping mission under the third phase, in order to
build on the momentum already gathered by this very
important session.

The importance of the programme of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) to the successful
implementation of the Agreement cannot be
overemphasized. I therefore welcome the initiative of the
World Bank and the United Nations Children's Fund to
finance the first phase of the DDR programme initiated
by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in 1997. It is my hope that the subsequent
meetings of the Political Committee of the Joint Military
Commission will work out and finalize plans for the
second phase of the DDR programme outlined under
chapter 9 of the Lusaka Agreement.

However, I wish to emphasize also that the
deployment of a peacekeeping mission is not an end in
itself but is intended to facilitate the charting of a
long-term, new internal political dispensation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - for which, we all
know, President Sir Ketumile Masire has been appointed.
It is to this end that the international community should
commit sufficient resources to the inter-Congolese

 

political negotiations. It is my very sincere belief that if the
internal process does not succeed, we risk returning to
square one. I therefore wish to take this opportunity to
thank those countries that have already pledged
contributions towards these negotiations.

Let me hasten to point out here that the issues arising
from the conflict situations that we have been addressing
this month are not unique to those countries, no they are
not; nor are they indeed unique to the regions concerned.
Rather, these problems are common to Africa. They also
hinge on adherence to obligations under international
conventions and norms.

When we convened last week to discuss the deadlock
in the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement,
the main issue that preoccupied all our minds was the
reaffirmation of the commitment of the parties to the
Agreement that they all voluntarily signed. One of the most
important messages of the special session on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is of the need to adhere
to the international law principle of pacta sunt servanda,
meaning that agreements and stipulations of the parties to
a contract or treaty must be observed or respected.

More lessons have to be drawn from the "month of
Africa", especially in relation to the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. These lessons should,
however, also be seen in the context of the hope that they
will bring for Africa in the twenty-first century.

One of the rallying calls in last week's debate had to
do with the question of adequately addressing the external
dimension of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and of the need, therefore, to convene an
international conference on peace and security in the Great
Lakes region. It has been our conviction in the region that
the problem in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
extends far beyond the territorial boundaries of the country.
Thus permanent and comprehensive solution requires the
consideration of the root causes of the problem. This would
entail addressing issues both of peace and security and
those of democracy and the development of the countries in
the region, as peace is more than just the absence of war.

With regard to the internal dimension, I wish to appeal
to the international community to show greater
understanding as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, or
indeed any other African country, embarks on its
democratization programme. Africa in general has had a
vision of promoting principles of democracy and of
building democratic institutions.

Admittedly, there have been some lapses on the
continent. Africa's resolve over the past 10 years,
however, has been such that even when such lapses have
occurred we have picked up the pieces and moved
forward. During the thirty-fifth ordinary session of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), which was held in
Algeria, we made a further decision to suspend from
participation in future OAU meetings any country whose
Government assumed power through unconstitutional
means, with effect from last year. Africa today believes
that it is only through an inclusive political system that
citizens can contribute towards shaping the destiny of
their countries.

With specific reference to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, it is our hope that once peace is
consolidated in that country, and democracy is allowed to
flourish and political and economic stability prevail, the
international community will be able to provide direct
investment to that country. It is equally our hope that
international financial institutions and Governments alike
will be able to consider cancelling the debt of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to allow the country
to start its economic reconstruction on a fresh note.

I wish to reiterate that Africa has the resolve,
determination and vision to work for peace and
development in the twenty-first century. However, the
vision can be realized only if Africa works in partnership
with its global allies, as Africa is not an island. Yesterday
Africa needed - and still needs - the assistance and
cooperation of the international community. She needs
them today, and she needs them in the future.

