Mr. Brites Pereira (Portugal): I would like to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate on children and armed conflict, an
issue to which Portugal attaches great importance. I
also wish to welcome and thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF,
for their briefings. I also take this opportunity to
commend their work and efforts to ensure the
protection of children in situations of armed conflict.

Let me start by reaffirm Portugal's strong
commitment to the promotion and protection of human
rights and the safeguarding of international
humanitarian law. The protection of civilians in armed
conflict has been one of the priorities of our action as
an elected member of the Council.

Back in 1998, during our last tenure in the
Council, we promoted the first debate held here on the
issue of children and armed conflict (see S/PV.3896).
We were already convinced then, as we are today, that
this issue has serious implications for international
peace and security. To protect children in armed
conflict requires the commitment of the international
community as a whole. Portugal is fully committed to
this objective.

Since then, the Council has made significant
progress and established, step by step, a strong
normative framework and mechanism to monitor,
report and respond to grave violations against children.
The resolution that we have adopted today (resolution 1998 (2011)) expands the causes for listing parties in
the annexes of the reports of the Secretary-General to
include attacks on schools and hospitals, as well as
attacks and threats of attacks against schoolchildren
and educational and medical personnel. That will
enable the Security Council to act in a consistent and
timely manner to further enhance the protection of
children and their access to education and health
services.

The inadequate provision of education and health
to children in situations of armed conflict is a serious
problem that will have consequences for the long-term
development of the countries concerned. According to
UNESCO, 28 million children are denied their right to
education because of armed conflict. This situation is
totally unacceptable and it needs to be urgently
redressed.

In that regard, my county has regularly
introduced a draft resolution at the Commission on
Human Rights and at the Human Rights Council on the
realization of the right to education, which was at the
origin of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the
right to education. This resolution, as well as the
resolution on education in emergency situations
adopted last year in the General Assembly, which my
country co-sponsored (resolution 64/290), is a step in
the right direction that will guarantee not only a
fundamental human right but also an important tool in
the fulfilment of other basic rights.
In this context, let me say a word of appreciation
for the important work carried out by civil society in
terms of increasing the protection of children's rights,
which has significantly helped to pave the way for the
work of the Security Council in this very important
area.

During the past few years, the Security Council
has consistently strengthened accountability for
persistent perpetrators of grave violations against
children. In the near future, we hope to see all such
violations given equal treatment, including the
abduction of children and denial of humanitarian
access.

This normative framework for the protection of
children in situations of armed conflict must furthered.
Portugal believes that the Council must continue to
address certain situations of concern while striving to
find the best way to promote the protection of children
affected by armed conflict. In that regard, action plans
are an excellent tool for engaging armed forces and
organized armed groups. But we must bear in mind that
such plans might not be as efficient in cases involving
militias or other non-State armed groups that do not
have a firm command structure.

Furthermore, many conflicts have a cross-border
impact. That perspective might be lost when adopting a
country-by-country approach. Parties like the Lord's
Resistance Army act with complete disregard for
borders. Children are abducted in one country and
taken to another, and sometimes to a third. In that
regard, we welcome the ongoing coordination efforts
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
UNICEF and the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. But we believe that more
needs to be done in terms of coordination to address
cross-border child protection concerns.

The ability to impose targeted measures on
persistent perpetrators of grave violations against
children is an important tool available to the Security
Council in this area. We strongly believe that, as they
are being renewed or established, the mandates of
existing sanctions committees should include child
protection criteria and expertise.

But Portugal also believes that the Council needs
to find a solution to consider targeted measures for
perpetrators of grave violations against children in
situations where a dedicated sanctions committee does
not exist. We welcome the discussion that will take
place in the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict on options to increase pressure on persistent
perpetrators of acts committed against children in
situations of armed conflict.

The advocacy and dedication of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and her Office
have been crucial in promoting this agenda. Let me
welcome the five field trips that she undertook since
the last debate (see S/PV.6341) and the commitments
reached in each and every place she visited. Portugal
supports the renewal of her mandate. That mandate has
helped to foster progress on the promotion and
protection of the rights of children.

Let me conclude by underlining that much has
been done since 1996, when Graca Machel's report
(see A/51/306) on the impact of armed conflict on
children revealed the suffering of children in situations
of armed conflict throughout the world. This study is
clearly the foundation for the children in armed
conflict agenda, but each resolution adopted by the
Security Council has reinforced the children's
protection framework. I hope that this open debate and
the resolution that we have just adopted will be useful
tools in assisting the work of the Council and that of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
the discharge of her mandate.

The harmful and widespread impact of armed
conflict on children and its long-term consequences for
durable peace, security and development are nowadays
widely recognized. As Graca Machel said in 1996, the
impact of armed conflict on children must be
everyone's responsibility. It still is.

