Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing appreciation to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Annadif and Ambassador
Skoog for their comprehensive briefings. We also
welcome to Chamber His Excellency Mr. Tieman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Republic of Mali.
We thank him for being with us today. We fully
endorse the Secretary-General's well-reflected
quarterly report (S/2018/273) and make the following
observations and recommendations for the Security
Council's consideration.

It is clear that the accelerated implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
should be our main priority. Kazakhstan welcomes the
efforts of the Malian Government, with the support of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the African Union and regional actors, to work
with all sides towards advancing compliance with
the Agreement. We hope that recent developments,
including the visits by His Excellency Prime Minister
Maiga to Mopti and Kidal and the visits to Mali by the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali,
and by the United Nations Panel of Experts, as well
as the establishment of the International Commission
of Inquiry for Mali, will give impetus to the peace
process. We encourage all parties to comply with the
agreed road map to operationalize the "chronogram"
for the implementation of the remaining provisions of
the Agreement.

To achieve lasting peace and stability in Mali,
it is necessary to implement the key provisions of
the Agreement related to decentralization, defence
and security areas. That should be accompanied
by efforts to bring about national reconciliation, as
well as ensure basic services, resilience-building,
economic development, good governance and the rule
of law. In that regard, we support the Government's
multidimensional strategy for the central regions and
emphasis on the importance of creating potential for
the security-development nexus, as well as a revamped
and innovative regional approach to finalize the
development agenda for the northern regions. On the
other hand, genuinely including women and youth in the
peace process and decision-making is also important
for enduring stability.

Another critical task is to ensure the transparent,
fair, peaceful and inclusive holding of the 2018
presidential and legislative elections in one of the
leading democracies in Africa, as stressed today by the
Permanent Representative of Ethiopia. The assistance
from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and from
the international community will therefore be most
critical for a successful electoral process and final
elections, beneficial to all. Addressing the deteriorating
humanitarian situation is equally important. We
therefore call on international partners and donors to
fund the humanitarian response plan for 2018, and urge
all parties to comply with international humanitarian
law and human rights law.

Kazakhstan is deeply concerned by the significantly
deteriorating, grave security situation in the north
and centre of Mali. To address the capability gaps of
MINUSMA, it is essential to provide better equipment
and predeployment training for the contingents, with
enhanced equipment, surveillance and more robust
combat capabilities, which is needed as situations
of asymmetrical conflict arise in Mali. We believe
that the ongoing strategic review of MINUSMA will
contribute to enhancing the Mission's capabilities and
improving the security situation. In that vein, it is
time to protect not only the Mission's personnel, but
also Malians themselves. Most of the activities and
the budget of MINUSMA, from now on, should be
rearranged accordingly.

We are convinced that the operationalization
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) will substantially reinforce the efforts of
MINUSMA and the national security forces of Mali to
combat terrorism and other cross-border threats that
require innovative approaches to completely eliminate
the scourge. We commend international partners for
mobilizing financial support for the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force at the Brussels conference, which will make the
Force fully operational. We also support the decision of
the African Union Peace and Security Council made on
23 March on the situation in Mali.

Finally, we, like others, strongly condemn violent
attacks perpetrated by terrorist groups against
civilians, humanitarian workers, Malian security forces
and MINUSMA. We would like to conclude by paying
special tribute to the brave men and women who made

the ultimate sacrifice of their life for the cause ofpeace.

