Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (Spoke in Russian): We have a positive assessment of the
Security Council mission to the Great Lakes region. In
our view, it helped to strengthen positive tendencies
towards settling the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we join in praising the
work of the mission, and particularly the leader of the
mission, the Permanent Representative of France,
Ambassador Jean-David Levitte.

In our view, encouraging results have been
achieved in the peace process of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. There has been a successful
deployment of United Nations contingents in phase II
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), with the
full cooperation of the Government. The ceasefire is
being observed, and generally, despite the well-known
problems in the Equateur Province, the process of the
disengagement of forces involved in the conflict has
begun.

The Security Council mission to the region
showed that the relations between the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations and MONUC have shifted from antagonism to
a solid and positive partnership. The main problems
now facing the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are created by the armed
opposition. We consider that the policy adopted by the
members of the mission in the course of the meetings
they held in the region showed convincingly that the
time of violating with impunity peace agreements and
commitments entered into under Security Council
resolutions has ended. The time of plundering the
natural wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and committing atrocities against civilians has
ended. As a matter of principle it is important that the
mission has confirmed the need for the withdrawal of
foreign forces from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in accordance with demands set out in Security
Council resolutions.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo confirms its commitment to the inter-
Congolese dialogue, and the dialogue would certainly
benefit from the adoption by the transitional parliament
of the law on political parties and social organizations,
listing virtually all legal and financial restrictions on
political activities in the country. The results of the
meeting of the members of the mission with
Sir Ketumile Masire showed that the facilitator is also
preparing for more concrete and realistic measures in
organizing the inter-Congolese dialogue. In this
connection, we note that 16 July has been decided as
the date for the preparatory meeting for the dialogue.

Evidence of a responsible approach to power was
provided in a statement by President Joseph Kabila on
17 May, when he recognized the wretched situation of
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and promised to take steps to improve it. It is the duty
of the international community to provide assistance in
these efforts, primarily by meeting the urgent
humanitarian needs of the population in that nation.
Along with moving towards a peaceful settlement,
international humanitarian efforts in that country
should also be intensified. The Russian side has
already informed the leadership of United Nations
humanitarian agencies that we are interested and ready
to participate in the planned international humanitarian
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We think it is important that the mission helped to
confirm the principal responsibility of the parties to the
conflict for a settlement to it. I think it also showed
them a realistic picture of the limits on the assistance
that can be provided to them by the United Nations
within the context of efforts to find a settlement.

In turn the picture that the participants in the
mission got will also help the Council in determining
its position as to what the United Nations actually has
to do in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
concerns phase III of the peacekeeping operation. We
are willing to work towards reaching agreement on a
decision in the Council on transiting to phase III of
MONUC, which implies a strengthening of the mission
within the context of the authorized numbers of
persons involved. We continue to believe that a
practical increase in the scope of this operation must be
preceded by additional steps by parties to the conflict
to implement their respective obligations, primarily in
completing the disengagement of forces and ensuring
an adequate level of security for United Nations
peacekeeping personnel.

As for the Council's consideration of further
measures to stop illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
this matter is still important, and, in our view, we
should continue to consider it, taking into account the
reliable and verified information about the dynamics of
the situation in this area. As we know, this kind of
information is to be submitted to the Council by the
Panel of Experts and the Secretary-General.

Russia shares the concern over the danger of a
resumption of large-scale violence in Burundi, and it
also agrees that there is no military solution to the
conflict in that country. We agree with the members of
the Security Council mission that there is a need to
intensify the efforts of States members of the regional
initiative in order to encourage the armed opposition to
enter into the dialogue with the Government. Overall,
we are willing to support the proposals on
strengthening the negotiating mechanisms for Burundi
by broadening the role of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General after these proposals have been
appropriately discussed and worked through with the
international facilitator for the Arusha process, Nelson
Mandela.

In conclusion, I would just like to say to all
members of the mission that we are grateful to them for
the work they have done.

