Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me to begin by
thanking you, Madam President, for organizing today's
timely meeting and to express my delegation's deep
appreciation to Mr. Robert Serry for his comprehensive
briefing.

We meet today a few days after the adoption of a
presidential statement, on 10 July in which all members
around this table expressed

"deep concern at all violations of Lebanon's
sovereignty and call[ed] on all parties to fully
respect Lebanon's sovereignty, territorial integrity,
unity and political independence within its
internationally recognized borders, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions".
(S/PRST/2013/9)

While my delegation expresses its appreciation for
the Security Council's reiterated calls for full respect of
Lebanon's sovereignty, I stand before it today to remind
the Council that the basic foundations of resolution
1701 (2006) and of that presidential statement are
challenged on a daily basis by Israeli fighterjets. That is
highlighted by the Secretary-General in paragraph 9 of
his latest report (S/2013/381) on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006), where he stated that, "[d]uring
the period from 3 to 5 May alone, [the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)] counted 49 Israeli
fighter jets violating Lebanese airspace". UNIFIL
and my Government protested those violations - my
Government did so in the strongest terms - and called
for their immediate cessation.

Need I also remind the Council that Israel persists
in violating the territorial integrity of my country by
occupying the Shaba'a farms and Kfar Shuba Hills?
Need I also remind the Council that Israel delays
in even responding to the plan proposed by UNIFIL
for ending Israel's occupation of the northern part of
Ghajar? It is indeed high time that Israel withdraw from
the remaining occupied Lebanese territories.

Moreover, it is my privilege once again to recognize
the determination of the troop-contributing countries
and the men and women of UNIFIL and commend
them for their tireless efforts in helping to maintain
stability and security in southern Lebanon. Their
determination matches Lebanon's commitment to the
full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).

On the situation in Syria, let me thank you, Madam
President, for the concerns expressed in the Council's
presidential statement regarding the "marked increase
of cross-border fire from the Syrian Arab Republic into
Lebanon" (S/PRST/2013/9), which violates my country's
sovereignty and threatens to destabilize it.

It is a well-known fact that since the beginning of
the crisis in Syria, my country has adopted a policy of
dissociation aimed at safeguarding Lebanon's internal
unity and stability from regional conflicts, which
is a policy that has been reaffirmed in the Baabda
Declaration, adopted by the national dialogue committee
on 11 June 2012. However, dissociation from the Syrian
conflict could not and did not mean dissociating
Lebanon from its responsibilities towards our Syrian
brothers and its obligation under international law and
international humanitarian law. As I told the Council last
week, Lebanon will not close its borders, will not turn
back refugees and will continue to provide assistance
to them within available means (see S/PV.7000). Yet,
let me stress once again that Lebanon will not be
able, within its scarce and diminishing resources, to
cope with the increasing influx of Syrian refugees by
itself, hence our repeated appeal for the international
community to share the burden and intensify direct
support to Lebanon politically and financially.

Turning now to the main subject of today's meeting,
I would like to commend the efforts of the Secretary
of State of the United States, Mr. John Kerry, for the
resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations in the
hope that they will lead to a just and lasting peace that,
in our view, can only be based on the principles and
rules of international law, the relevant decisions of the
United Nations, the Madrid terms of reference and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

Still, let us state it loud and clear: the main
danger facing such negotiations is the continuation
of provocative Israeli actions capable of undermining
them. To protect the negotiations, those actions
ought to be completely stopped. Obviously, there is
no better example of such actions than the unabated
construction in the past months of Israeli settlements
at an unprecedented rate, let alone the approval of new
settlement units, the latest being 1,169 units in June
and approximately 900 so far this month. How, too, can
we not mention the ongoing acts of land confiscation,
attacks on property and settler violence?

As to the prospects for the success of the
negotiations, the issue was eloquently framed in an
editorial in the leading Israeli paper, Ha'aretz, on
21 July:

cc

. the main responsibility for moving the talks
ahead rests on Israel. Only Israel can put an end
to the occupation, which is the key to everything
else."
Finally, reference has been made in today's meeting
to the addition by the European Union (EU) of what it
labeled "the military wing of Hizbullah" to its terrorist
list. As expressed yesterday by President Michel
Sleiman, my country hopes that the EU

"will re-examine its position on the basis ofavoiding
hasty decisions, of safeguarding the stability
of Lebanon and of confirming the fundamental
options under discussion in the national dialogue
committee, mainly dealing with the terms of the
Baabda Declaration and the presidential plan for a
national defence strategy".

In that regard, it is also clearly fitting to remind
the Security Council that, on 19 July, the EU also
issued a landmark directive barring cooperation with,
and financial support to, Israeli entities and projects
beyond the 1967 line in the occupied territories of the
West Bank, East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights. It
might be a small step, as many have said, in view of the
guideline nature of the EU instrument, but it is indeed
an important step in the right direction. We strongly
welcome that development to ask whether or not it is
high time for the Council to also send a similar message,
indicating that continued occupation in violation of
international law can no longer benefit from impunity.

