Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I should like to thank the Egyptian presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this important
meeting, as well as the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, for his
very informative briefing.

With 13 active sanctions regimes, sanctions
have become a crucial tool available to the Security
Council. Although they are never an end in themselves,
sanctions can be an essential instrument for preserving
international peace and security in two ways.

The first is by targeting terrorist groups or
individuals. Collectively, the sanctions regime against
Al-Qaida and Da'esh represents more than half of the
entities and individuals sanctioned by the Security
Council today.

The second way is by intervening in support of
States weakened by insecurity, the presence of armed
groups in their territory, deficiencies in the political
process, the prevalence of weapons, or human rights
violations, factors that have triggered the majority of
the Security Council sanctions regimes.

Sanctions regimes can make a significant
contribution to advancing a political process. The
adoption of targeted measures against individuals or
entities impeding the peace process is an important
lever for stopping such behaviour or for weakening
those who do so. That was particularly the case in Cote
d'Ivoire at the height of the post-election crisis there.
In Somalia, the embargo on charcoal undermines one
of Al-Shabaab's sources of funding. These are just a
few examples.

Implemented in the 1990s, sometimes
indiscriminately, sanctions regimes have since
undergone considerable change, taking into account both
the humanitarian needs and the rights of individuals. In
its practice, the Council has ensured that such schemes
have been targeted as precisely as possible to reach
the persons, entities or sectors that directly affect
the stability of States, and that such schemes have no
negative consequences for the population. No one can
say in good faith that, in a context of active armed
conflict and large-scale violence against civilians, an
arms embargo is a measure that would negatively affect
the population.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, it was possible to adapt the sanctions regime
to changing circumstances. Introduced in 2003, the
arms embargo there has been continually adjusted.
Since 2008, it has only targeted non-State entities.
Individual sanctions against armed groups have also
had to be adapted to developments in the situation.

France also attaches great importance to
strengthening respect for the rules for a fair hearing
with regard to sanctions decided by the Council.
Considerable progress has been made in that area, with
the creation of a focal-point mechanism and, above all,
the Office ofthe Ombudsperson in 2009. In that respect,
France wishes to recall the importance of ensuring a
rapid and effective transition following the departure of
Ms. Marchi-Uhel, who is to take on other functions. It
is essential that we continue to improve the functioning
and transparency of sanctions regimes.

It is also essential that sanctions and embargoes,
whether targeting arms or other products, be fully
respected and implemented by all actors present in the
territory to which they apply. There are often exemption
mechanisms that provide flexibility for specific cases. It
is necessary to remind and educate everyone of the need
to respect the procedures laid down for that purpose.

France will, of course, continue to fully play its
part in such efforts.

