Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): We meet today in pain
and grief over what is happening in Palestine. Only
three weeks ago, the Security Council acted with
courage and wisdom, reaffirming the vision of a lasting
peace in the Middle East. That vision, unfortunately,
has been blurred by the events of the past 24 hours,
demonstrating how fragile and precarious the situation
in that region has become.

Only yesterday, the Arab countries together gave
the entire world a clarion call for peace in the Middle
East with justice and dignity, and the best opportunity
ever to move back from the brink of violence and
destruction and find a way out of this tragic quagmire.
The Beirut Declaration of the Arab League was a
message of hope, sincerity and reconciliation. Today
we are witnessing the response, in the form of
intransigence and belligerence. The vestiges of hope
for peace are being demolished underneath tank tracks.

Ramallah's smog has peace under siege. We are
all seeing this on television screens. The headlines say,
"Arafat Cornered". The fact is, it is peace and the
international community that have been cornered. The
headquarters of a people's elected leader are being
systematically taken apart with violence and
bloodshed. Is this the response the Beirut Declaration
merits? The spirit of commitment and sincerity shown
at Beirut has now been rebuffed amid the chaos of
heavy gunfire.

The Palestinian issue is not confined to Ramallah.
The recent incidents in the region are alarming and the
loss ofinnocent lives shocking, but they are linked to a
sense of injustice and desperation. After all, we must
ask ourselves: why would high school girls, who have a
bright future ahead of them, opt for these acts of
desperation and sacrifice their lives? Why are the
Palestinians, one after another, becoming suicidal?
Why are we not trying to listen to their cries of anger
and anguish? For what reason are other innocent people
also losing their lives?

The loss of innocent life on one side or the other
is the loss of humanity. Are we so caught up in the
horror of these acts of desperation that we do not think
of their underlying causes? Are we so blind that we do
not see obvious reasons for what is happening? Not
only is this a matter worthy of serious reflection; it
calls for some soul-searching by all and for urgent
action. The Council must act today, if not for its own
credibility, at least for preventing the current crisis
from erupting into a full-scale conflict or war.

Three weeks ago, the Secretary-General had
appropriately surmised that - and these are his
words - "we are nearing the edge of an abyss". Today,
we are indeed at the edge of that abyss. If something is
not done urgently to reverse the situation, the
consequences will be unimaginable.

It is unfortunate that the present deterioration of
the situation should have come about in the very month
during which bold new initiatives were being launched
and hopes for peace revived. Yesterday's Beirut
declaration came only two weeks after historic Security
Council resolution 1397 (2002), which affirmed the
vision of a Palestinian state living side by side with
Israel within secure and recognized borders. The
resolution demanded an immediate cessation of all acts
of violence in the region and the resumption of the
peace process.

Resolution 1397 (2002) also welcomed the recent
peace initiatives, including that of Saudi Arabia's
Crown Prince Abdullah. This is in addition to the
efforts that the Secretary-General himself has been
making to induce the parties, and, indeed, the
international community, to move towards the path of
peace. He has been acting as the conscience of this
world body, if not that of the world itself. It is
regrettable that such bold and imaginative initiatives
for peace are being thwarted by the roar oftanks.

Over the last two years, there has been a pressing
need for the resumption of negotiations. This need
could not be more urgent now, especially in the light of
the spiralling and escalating violence that has claimed
hundreds of innocent lives. With the peace process
derailed and violence spiralling out of control, never in
the history of the Palestine crisis has the situation been
so alarming and the need to respond more critical.

We have debated the issue of Palestine in this
Chamber for well over half a century. It is one of two
unresolved disputes - the other being the Kashmir
issue - involving the destiny of peoples and their
inalienable right of self-determination, with serious
implications for world peace and security, which have
been on the agenda of the Security Council all these
years.

In both cases, there are Security Council
resolutions which provide a framework for their
implementation, and, unfortunately, in both cases the
Council's resolutions remain on the shelf,
unimplemented. While in the case of Kashmir, the
unimplemented resolutions are decades old, ironically,
resolution 1397 (2002) was passed only three weeks
ago, and yet we have not moved an inch towards its
implementation.

As these resolutions remain unimplemented,
peace in both Kashmir and Palestine also remains
elusive, as ever. Violence continues to escalate,
oppression continues unabated, and people - in both
Kashmir and Palestine - continue to be deprived of
their legitimate right of self-determination. While we
have waited for this body to act and to implement its
own resolutions, the situation has reached alarming
proportions.

My Government has expressed its grave concern
over the aggressive actions by Israel in surrounding
and attacking President Arafat's Ramallah
headquarters. The loss of life and injuries resulting
from that action simply cannot be justified. Israel's
reoccupation of Palestinian Authority territories
constitutes a serious threat to regional peace and
security and puts in jeopardy the efforts of the
international community for the resumption of the
peace process.

These and other recent Israeli actions are all the
more provocative in View of the Arab League's
declaration offering Israel peace, security and
recognition in exchange for its complete withdrawal
from the territories that it occupied in June 1967.

Pakistan calls upon the international community,
and especially this body, which is charged with the
maintenance of international peace and security, to
urge Israel immediately to halt its attacks on the
Palestinian Authority and resume peace negotiations.

Violence only begets violence. Force will not
solve any problem. However, our objective should not
be to achieve a ceasefire alone. Our objective is
actually the attainment of a final peace settlement in
the Middle East. The framework for that settlement
already exists in all of the recent peace initiatives, in
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002), and in the Beirut declaration. Those
who have the responsibility to maintain international
peace, especially the Security Council, must therefore
act, and act now, to realize this objective and save what
remains of the hopes for a durable peace in the Middle
East.

