Mr. Wehbe (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his
frank and comprehensive briefing to the Council this
morning on the latest developments in Kosovo. We also
welcome the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2003/421).

My delegation is pleased with the important
progress made in the first three months of this year,
reflected in the transfer of further powers to Kosovo's
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
accordance with chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework. Likewise, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General will retain the responsibilities
reserved for him under chapter 8 of the Constitutional
Framework. In addition, the establishment of the
Transfer Council will lead to coordination of efforts in
methodically transferring responsibilities to Kosovo's
local authorities.
We welcome the holding of the first meeting and
the establishment of the three working groups, on
finance, technical assistance, and monitoring and
intervention. At the same time, we regret that rivalries
among parties within the Provisional Institutions
prevented more progress from being made in important
areas. The shattered political infrastructure of the
Kosovo Albanians has affected the work of the
Government and of the presidency of the Kosovo
Assembly. Those rivalries are undermining the role of
both institutions and are threatening their stability.

We believe that we should now focus on
establishing the rule of law, combating organized crime
and preventing ethnic violence, in order to create the
right atmosphere for a smooth transfer of powers,
which will lead to stabilization of the political and
security situation in Kosovo. Moreover, we must
ensure freedom of movement everywhere in Kosovo
for all segments of society, in a way that will guarantee
their security and safety and will encourage their
participation in all economic sectors in the rebuilding
of the province, which has experienced tension for so
long. We believe that if such a security situation is
created, it will lead to the return of refugees and
emigres to their country in order to participate in the
rebuilding of Kosovo and will encourage more focused
investment in all sectors of society.

We also heard from Mr. Annabi that there has
been an increase in the number of returning refugees
and displaced persons. We reaffirm the need for
continued dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, so
that the Provisional Institutions can join UNMIK in its
efforts to establish a direct dialogue on practical issues
with neighbouring countries.

We agree with the observations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/42l), and we
reaffirm that the process of transferring responsibilities
must be studied thoroughly so that we will not create
unforeseen problems as a result of haste, especially
during the transfer process, which requires greater
security and closer attention.

Finally, we should like to thank Mr. Steiner and
UNMIK for their efforts to achieve a settlement and
stability in that important part of the world. Once
again, the role of the United Nations is proving to be
crucial in the settlement of post-conflict problems.

