Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing this morning. Since the Council met last month (see S/PV.8694), the humanitarian crisis situation in Syria has significantly deteriorated, as we have seen and heard. The lives of millions of civilians are now at even greater risk, as the combined forces of the Al-Assad regime, Russia, the Iranian regime and Hizbullah escalate their offensive to cement a military, not a political end to the conflict in Syria. Russia has denied principled humanitarian aid for those in need throughout Syria for more than eight years. Now, with China blindly following its lead, Russia has escalated its campaign to restrict humanitarian access in Syria through a cynical and politicized effort to undermine the cross-border resolution (resolution 2504 (2020)). The step taken by Russia and China on10 January to drastically reduce aid delivery is part of a clear strategy to completely sever the cross-border lifeline on which 4 million people rely. We cannot let that happen. The Council must work with, not against, humanitarian partners on the most important task at hand: ensuring that humanitarian assistance reaches the millions of civilians in need across Syria, including in the north-east, where more than | million lives hang in the balance. The closure of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing halted approximately 40 per cent of United Nations medical equipment and supplies to civilians in north-east Syria. At Al-Hol camp, the amount of critical medical supplies was cut overnight by 60 to 70 per cent. Other items that routinely crossed Al-Yarubiyah included kits that help combat water-borne illnesses, supplies for child protection and educational activities that reach thousands of traumatized children, and life-saving nutrition services for tens of thousands of children and pregnant women. These entirely preventable cuts in aid confirm what we already know: there is not a single good reason for that border crossing to have ever been closed. The United States looks forward to the Secretary-General's report to the Council, which should include a clear and specific analysis of whether or not there are feasible alternatives to Al-Yarubiyah. We expect that the report will document the access restraints facing United Nations agencies and other humanitarians operating in the country. There are those on the Council who question why United Nations aid cannot simply be delivered in a rapid, unhindered manner through Damascus. The answer to that is clear. The Al-Assad regime is using humanitarian aid as a weapon of collective punishment against Syrian civilians - a strategy that, sadly, is not new. Take for example the situation at the internally displaced persons camp in Rukban. It required enormous effort to convince Russia and the regime to agree to three humanitarian deliveries in the past 18 months. We cannot allow Rukban to serve as a model for how we deliver aid in Syria, where Russia and the regime time and again refuse, restrict and delay the delivery of life-saving aid to a population entirely reliant on humanitarian assistance. The Council should not accept such a bleak reality for the millions of Syrians counting on us to ease their suffering. That brings me to another disturbing example of the Russians and their ally, the regime, knowingly exasperating humanitarian tragedy. As we have just heard, in the past two days alone, as a result of the offensive in north-west Syria, 20,000 civilians were forced to flee their homes in Idlib and western Aleppo, due to a barrage of air strikes and artillery fire launched by the combined forces of the Al-Assad regime, Russia, the Iranian regime and Hizbullah. Those air strikes have continued unabated, striking more than 50 communities since 14 January and killing at least 50 civilians. Russia and the regime are writing their military strategy in Syrian blood. The United States offers its full support to the United Nations board of inquiry mandated to investigate attacks that have struck United Nations and United Nations-supported facilities in north-west Syria, for which the regime and Russia are overwhelmingly responsible. We will continue to support the board of inquiry and its work and encourage all Member States to do the same. The United States remains eager to work with its partners in the Council to ensure unhindered humanitarian access to all Syrians, regardless of who controls the territory.
