Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
emergency meeting. My thanks go also to His
Excellency the Secretary-General for his presence and
for his statement.

Once again, we had wished that the people of the
entire world without exception could be enjoying days
of peace and calm at this time commemorating the
birth of Jesus, the prophet of love, tolerance and peace.
But others had a different View.

As everyone knows, the Gaza Strip is under siege
and has been the target of Israeli military aggression
since mid-2007. A truce between the Palestinians in the
Gaza Strip and the Israelis was agreed upon last June,
under the sponsorship of Egypt. In it, both parties
committed themselves to halting violence of all kinds,
and the Israelis pledged to end the siege, open the
crossings and restore the situation to the pre-June 2007
status.

Everyone knows, and neutral observers agree,
that the Palestinians religiously observed the truce, in
spite of the fact that the Israelis violated it at least 190
times and, during this period, killed more than 25
inhabitants of Gaza. They never opened the crossings
or lifted the siege, except partially. Indeed, they
prevented many civilian goods from being delivered to
the Strip. On 4 November 2008, the Israeli army
penetrated well into the eastern part of Gaza, without
provocation. In the course of that incursion, the Israelis
killed six Palestinians in yet another violation of the
truce. What, then, could be expected? Of course, it is
normal that the Palestinians would react.

I can confirm that from that date the Palestinians
never fired a single bullet except in response to an
Israeli violation of the truce. Since 5 November, the
Israelis have imposed a total land, sea and air blockade

on Gaza. This has even extended to the humanitarian
assistance provided by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), in clear defiance of resolution 1674 (2006)
and the Fourth Geneva Convention. The Israeli
authorities prevented UNRWA trucks from entering the
Gaza Strip, forcing the Agency to suspend deliveries of
basic commodities and food. Everybody knows - and
this is nothing new - that half of the Gaza population
live on that aid: more than 750,000 Gazans depend on
it. What, then, does it mean to block that aid? It can
have only one outcome: the imposition of hunger and
starvation on the Palestinians. And what will that lead
to?

These practices, in themselves, constitute a crime
of genocide, a crime against humanity and a war crime
under articles 6 (c), 7 (b) and 8 of the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court. If any Council
member harbours any doubt about that, I will gladly
read out the text of those articles.

At the Council meeting held on 18 December (see S/PV.6049), my delegation spoke of the outcome of the
blockade: complete paralysis of all activity. Even grain
mills and bakeries cannot operate, and 80 per cent of
Palestinian families are not merely living beneath the
poverty line but are suffering from hunger. There has
been a complete collapse of water and sewage services.
Water is life. Water supply stations are inoperable, and
Gazans have access to clean water only once a week:
that is according to the United Nations. Sewage
processing plants have stopped working, with sewage
inundating entire municipalities. Supplies of medicine
have been nearly exhausted: as members must be
aware, United Nations officials have stated that 150
basic medicines no longer exist in Gaza. And the
Council is well aware that, as a result of the blockade,
more than 400 Palestinians have died because of a lack
of access to medical treatment outside the Strip.
Members also know that an electrical power station
that meets 50 per cent of the needs of the Strip has shut
down almost completely.

The long list of facts is known to everyone; I
need not recite it item by item. This has been carried
out with the full knowledge of the Council, which,
despite the assessments of United Nations officials,
unfortunately never lifted a finger. I ask members:
what do you expect from people living under such
conditions? The fact that the Council made no move
encouraged the occupation authorities to do what they

have been doing since 27 December: conducting
extensive aerial and naval bombardments with Israel's
most modern and sophisticated weaponry.

All of that led to this horrible massacre, a heinous
crime that thus far has left 400 dead and 2,000
wounded, most of them civilians, including large
numbers of children. The attacks have utterly destroyed
civilian buildings, homes, schools, mosques,
governmental buildings and an already fragile
infrastructure.

On the night of 27 December, the Security
Council met. The meeting was not public, and the
Council could agree only on a press statement that
called for an immediate halt to all military activities
and for the opening of border crossings. What we
expected to occur happened, and it was nothing new.
The Israelis refused to respond, despite appeals by the
Secretary-General, the Quartet, the European Union
and many countries. Indeed, Israeli officials stated that
this was only the beginning - that they would expand
the attacks. They massed their ground forces on the
borders of Gaza and continued killing and besieging
the citizens of Gaza. And that is what led the Arab
foreign ministers to request the Arab representative in
the Council to call for today's meeting.

Unfortunately, the Israelis have proved once
again that they are interested not in peace, but in
seizing land and terrorizing Palestinians and expelling
them from their homes by every possible means,
including killing and starvation. As we have said many
times before, Israel's actions are essentially part of a
very direct approach whose results are known to all.
And I reiterate that what Israel they did on
27 December was precisely the response that they were
expected to make to resolution 1850 (2008) adopted by
the Council earlier this month. How can all Israeli
practices on the ground be ignored? How could the
force used by the Israelis be more excessive? How
could there be greater disregard for international
human rights and humanitarian law than that displayed
by the Israelis through their actions in the besieged,
starved and impoverished Gaza Strip?

We have prepared a draft resolution, and I have
requested the Secretariat to circulate the text. Very
briefly, it includes the following elements. First, it
strongly condemns the Israeli military attacks, which
have resulted in the deaths or injury of thousands of
civilians. Second, it calls upon Israel to immediately

cease its military attacks and to scrupulously abide by
its obligations, as the occupying Power, under
international law. Third, it calls for the immediate
provision of protection for the Palestinian civilian
population in the Gaza Strip in accordance with
resolution 1674 (2006). Fourth, it calls also on Israel
for an immediate and sustained opening of the Gaza
Strip's border crossings to allow for the unrestricted
and unhindered access of humanitarian aid and basic
supplies. Fifth, it calls for immediate measures to be
undertaken by all members of the international
community to address the severe humanitarian crisis
and the economic needs of the civilian population in
the Gaza Strip. Sixth, it stresses the need for
restoration of calm in full, in order to pave the way for
resolving all issues in a peaceful manner. And seventh,
it requests the Secretary-General, in the light of the
urgency of the matter, to follow up on the
implementation of the resolution.

In conclusion, I appeal to the Council to swiftly
adopt a binding measure so that another Srebrenica or
Rwanda is not added to its history.

