Mr. Vershinin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I am very pleased to be here in the Council
today to participate in this regular but nonetheless
very important discussion of the current situation in
Syria, particularly on the humanitarian front. I think
that today's exchange will help us to better understand
all aspects of the situation and to consider it in the
way it should be considered by the Security Council
and the United Nations, objectively and impartially. I
would like to thank Ms. Mueller, Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, for her briefing on
the situation in Syria.

First of all, I want to say that we share the concerns
about the situation in and around Idlib. In November,
the influence of the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham militias had
spread across 60 per cent of the Idlib de-escalation
zone, and they now control 99 per cent. Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham's aggressive actions and its shelling of towns
and Syrian Government positions are a threat to the
civilian population and have resulted in the deaths of
civilians, including women and children. In April and
May, Russia identified 398 violations of the ceasefire
by the militias in the Idlib de-escalation zone. During
that time, the terrorists' shelling killed 76 Syrian
military personnel and wounded 194, while 19 civilians
were killed and 42 injured. I am purposely citing these
statistics, and I will cite more, to make it clear that we
are not talking about statements but about real people
who are dying at the hands of terrorists.

The attacks on Russian military facilities in Syria
using of multiple rocket launch systems and combat
drones continue, representing a direct threat to the
security of Russian military personnel who are in Syria
entirely legitimately. In the last month alone terrorists
shelled the Khmeimim base seven times. On 19 May,
the anti-aircraft system at the base shot down six
rockets and destroyed two combat drones. On 21 May,
militias from illegal armed groups shelled Khmeimim
four times with rocket-launchers, firing l7 rockets.
The most recent attack was on 22 May, when four
rockets were launched. Terrorists are continuing their
aggressive activity from southern areas of the Idlib
de-escalation zone, with three attacks taking place in
April and another 18 already this month, in May. The
Council can judge for itself.

The Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham militias are terrorizing
the local population and using civilian infrastructure
for military purposes. They are also using civilians as
human shields. They are not bothered about verifying
their targets. On 12 May, as a result ofa terrorist attack
on a preschool education centre in Al-Suqaylabiyah, a
Christian town in north-western Hama governorate, four
children and one woman died, and around 10 children
were injured. Yesterday, that same town and the village
of Muhradah were attacked twice, injuring residents
and doing significant damage to civilian infrastructure.

In response to this kind of aggressive action, the
Russian Aerospace Forces are providing the necessary
support to the Syrian Government forces to drive the
terrorists out of the areas being used to shell Russian
bases and Syrian armed forces' positions in order to
crush the hotbeds of terrorist activity in the southern
areas of the Idlib de-escalation zone. According to
intelligence data, in all of the areas where there is
fighting, the Syrian armed forces are clashing with
illegal armed groups from Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. As we
know, that means terrorists. The strikes by the Syrian
armed forces and the Russian Aerospace Forces are
directed exclusively at terrorist targets that have been
verified by intelligence. Russia is committed to the
agreements on stabilizing Idlib and to our memorandum
of understanding with Turkey of 17 September 2018. I
want to remind the Council that it affirms the parties'
determination to continue fighting the terrorists.

We are particularly concerned about the terrorist
leadership's efforts to exacerbate the situation using
fabricated evidence, including with regard to the
alleged use of chemical weapons by Government
forces. According to our information, a separate
structure, known as the chemical branch, has been
created within Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham for the purposes
of staging chemical attacks. It is headed by Abu Basir
Al-Britani of the Haras Al-Din group affiliated with
Al-Qaida. The chemical branch's head office, which
plans and coordinates the staging for filming fake
attacks, is in Idlib. The Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham militias
make fake announcements for mass information outlets
that are then picked up by the Western media. Thus
on 19 May announced that Damascus was alleged to
have used chlorine near Kabani, in the hills in Latakia
governorate. We want to once again draw the attention
of the Secretariat, the specialized United Nations
agencies and all of our colleagues to the importance of
carefully checking any information received.

Against a backdrop of newly alarmist statements
about Idlib the Security Council should be sure to
keep the worrying situation on the eastern bank of the
Euphrates, which is not under the control of the Syrian
Government, on its agenda. We are seeing a rise in
tensions there, and in our view the only way to avert a
large-scale escalation and establish a reliable process of
national reconciliation is by ending the illegal United
States-led international occupation and establishing a
dialogue between the local ethnic communities and the
Syrian authorities.

We should pay very close attention to the situation
in Raqqa, Hajin, Baghouz, and every town that is still
in ruins and not in a fit state for civilians to live in.
We must continue to focus ourjoint efforts on what is
happening in the Al-Hol camp, where the situation is
disastrous. As has been said today, more than 73,000
people are living there in terrible conditions, more than
47,000 of whom are children under the age of 18. There
is a severe shortage of water, food, medical personnel,
medicines and medical services in Al-Hol, and thanks
to the impossibility of ensuring basic personal hygiene,
infectious diseases are spreading in the camp. The
standards for sheltering people have been significantly
exceeded and more than 15,000 people have been
obliged to live in dugouts.

We also think it is important to complete people's
voluntary departure from Rukban camp as quickly as
possible. Obstructing that process is simply immoral.
States with an influence on the Maghawir Al-Thawra
militias should put pressure on them to stop terrorizing
the temporarily displaced and allow them to leave
the camp. More than 13,000 people have left Rukban
since the end of March. The majority have also left
the temporary settlements in Horns and have returned
to their homes in areas under Syrian Government
control. Incidentally, the settlements were visited
by representatives of United Nations specialized
agencies, specifically the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, at the beginning of
May, when they were able to verify that the necessary
conditions for receiving refugees were in place.

The international community should support
the stabilization processes in Syria that will enable
progress on a political settlement and the improvement
of the humanitarian situation. Russia will do its part,
and we have no intention of politicizing humanitarian
issues. Since 18 July 2018 Russian assistance in Syria
has helped to restore 856 education and 168 medical
institutions, to repair of five road bridges and more
than 1,000 kilometres of road, to lay more than 968
kilometres of power lines, and return to functioning
143 water supply plants, 196 bakeries, 645 electrical
sub-stations and 14,305 industrial enterprises. We are
also deploying humanitarian and demining efforts.

Listening to statistics is dull work, but I would
like to hear similar dull statistics from our friends
and partners too, because everything being done is in
the interests of improving the humanitarian situation
in Syria. We urge all interested parties to unite their
efforts, because together we can eradicate terrorism,
accelerate post-conflict reconstruction and assist in
the voluntary return home of refugees and internally
displaced persons.

I would like to thank the Council for its attention.
I have listened very attentively to everything that has
been said here. We take note of our partners' concerns.
I want to say that what Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller said is important to us. The simple questions
that she asked at the end of her statement about what
must be done to protect civilians clearly require our
consideration and direct action. I too have some simple
questions about that, such as what can and should the
Security Council do to ensure that the millions of
people in Idlib we are talking about today are no longer
held hostage by terrorists? I do not think anyone here
has any doubts that they are terrorists. I also listened
carefully to the representative of Belgium, speaking on
behalf of the humanitarian troika of Germany, Kuwait
and Belgium, who expressed some interesting thoughts
that we should unquestionably all consider together.

I have some questions, too. When people talk about
how all the parties in Idlib should absolutely comply
with and abide by international humanitarian law,
needless to say I would like to know exactly what parties
they are referring to. If they mean the Government and
the opposition, I understand that. But are they also
talking about the 99 per cent of Idlib territory that, as I
said, is currently controlled by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham,
which is on the Council's list of terrorist organizations?
I have questions about that. Is it even possible for us to
say that terrorists have an obligation to do something
under international humanitarian law? Should they or
can they have such obligations?

