Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Recent years have been characterized by
an active evolution in the theory and practice of
international peacekeeping. This is an objective process.
The enormity and complexity of the tasks facing us in
that area dictate the need for a constant improvement of
the mechanisms for preventing and settling regional
crises. The peacekeeping efforts of the international
community must be as effective as possible. At the same
time, the United Nations Charter, which assigns to the
Security Council primary responsibility for and a central
role in this very important area, remains the immutable
and universal legal basis for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

It was precisely on the basis of the United Nations
Charter that the fundamental, universally recognized
principles of peacekeeping were formed including, first
and foremost, ensuring that the Security Council
maintained political leadership and control over
peacekeeping operations, impartiality, the agreement of

 

the parties and the existence of clearly formulated mandates
for those operations, backed by sufficient resources. Precise
adherence to those principles in practice is a prerequisite
for the success of any peacekeeping operation.

Russia has consistently based its policies on the
conviction that the use of force by the international
community is an exceptional and extreme measure, to be
taken only in cases where a real threat to international
peace and security exists under Chapter VII of the Charter
and when all political and diplomatic opportunities for the
settlement of a conflict have been exhausted. Enforcement
peacekeeping operations, which are justified under such
conditions, can be implemented only through a decision of
the Security Council and under the tight political and
appropriate operational control of the Council. This also
applies fully to enforcement operations carried out by
regional organizations or multinational coalitions, which
cannot be deployed without the authorization of the
Security Council and which must be transparent and
accountable to the Council.

Modern international practice offers quite a few
examples of constructive interaction between regional
organizations or multinational coalitions and the United
Nations in the conduct of peacekeeping operations on
various continents, with the Security Council playing the
central role. Such a positive practice must be encouraged
and strengthened as much as possible.

Against that background, we must express our concern
about attempts to make it possible for individual States or
coalitions to use force or take enforcement measures
without the approval of the Security Council. In that
respect, the clearest such attempt can be seen in the
drawing up of a new strategic concept of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO). According to reports, an idea
is being considered to transform NATO into a leading
international peacekeeping organization whose actions,
which would extend beyond the bounds of the geographic
zone for which the Alliance has responsibility, would be
taken solely on the basis of its own assessments and
decisions, thereby sidestepping the Security Council.

It is clear that we are talking about attempts to replace
the Charter-based functions and the prerogatives of the
Security Council with unilateral actions taken by regional
mechanisms, directly contravening the United Nations
Charter. The implementation of such attempts could
destabilize and destroy the entire international system,
which is founded on the primacy of the United Nations and
on international law. We trust that in considering such
concepts the relevant States will remember that in
addition to being members of a defensive alliance created
during the cold-war era, they also bear responsibility, as
Members of the United Nations, for respecting the system
of collective security enshrined in the Charter.

We are convinced of the need to strengthen the
central role of the United Nations in peacekeeping. The
resolution of this problem is linked to the development of
the potential of the United Nations in the area of rapid
crisis response, and Russia supports the efforts undertaken
by Member States and by the United Nations Secretariat
to enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
and to expand their resource base.

We are open to the possibility of practical
cooperation being further developed in this area. The
most effective means to achieve that objective remains the
system of United Nations stand-by arrangements, which
is currently being formulated. We welcome the strategy
that is being established at international level for conflict
prevention and settlement in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter. An
important component of this strategy is post-conflict
peace-building.

The practice of post-conflict peace-building, which
is developing vigorously, is so far raising more questions
than it is providing answers, but it has become clear that
without effective efforts in this area it will be impossible
to reliably establish necessary conditions for the non-
resumption of conflicts.

A number of concrete peace-building tasks, such as
disarmament, the demobilization and reintegration into
peaceful life of armed parties included in conflicts and
demining are sometimes included in the mandates of
multifunctional peacekeeping operations conducted under
Security Council mandates. In practice, a smooth
transition is thereby ensured from the peacekeeping stage
to the following phase of post-conflict peace-building. On
the whole, however, post-conflict peace-building
represents a fully independent aspect of that complex
peacekeeping strategy, and usually provides for the
implementation of large-scale, long-term and often
expensive projects that go beyond the bounds of
peacekeeping operations. In concentrating primarily on a
solution to the social, economic and humanitarian tasks of
recovery, peace-building for the most part falls within the
sphere of competence of the Economic and Social
Council and the specialized agencies of the United
Nations system, which must work in close contact with

 

other international financial, economic and humanitarian
Organizations, in particular in providing material and
financial resources for peace-building activities.

In this context, we attach great significance to the
reactivation of Article 65 of the Charter with regard to the
Economic and Social Council's provision of information
and assistance to the Security Council. This chapter of the
Charter is also fully applicable on the preventive level,
insofar as the Security Council can and must draw the
attention of the Economic and Social Council to the
relevant problems of various regions, as the Security
Council, within the framework of its competence, closely
follows destabilizing trends in the social, economic and
humanitarian fields that which can lead to the emergence or
escalation of conflicts.

The indispensable political role in the sphere of post-
conflict peace-building must be carried out by the General
Assembly by, inter alia, defining the basic framework and
criteria for activity in that area, including abidance by the
fundamental principle of respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. Such interaction of the
Security Council with other major United Nations organs is
fully in keeping with the Charter and with the task of
strengthening and improving coordination within the
framework of the United Nations system. We are ready for
constructive work in this area so that the relevant provisions
of the United Nations Charter can be activated.

