Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate
Morocco on assuming the presidency of the Council
for this month. I believe that under your leadership our
work this month will be very fruitful. I also wish to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation and
congratulations to Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri,
the Permanent Representative of India, and his team for
the wonderful work they accomplished during India's
presidency in November. I would like to thank Special
Adviser Benomar for his briefing.

More than a year ago, the parties in Yemen,
through dialogue and consultation, succeeded in
signing the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Initiative
and Implementation Mechanism. This is a political
transition process completely led by the Yemeni people.
In view of Yemen's political, security, development and
humanitarian situation, and based on respect for the
will of the Yemeni Government and people, the Security
Council has issued multiple presidential statements on
the situation there and has adopted resolutions 2014
(2011) and 2051 (2012).

The political transition process in Yemen has made
progress, and the people are carefully implementing the
Council's relevant resolutions and the GCC Initiative and
Implementation Mechanism. A supreme commission
for the election referendum has been established, and
the National Dialogue Conference will be launched
soon. The Yemeni Government has drafted a national
strategy and development transition plan outlining
steps for future development. China welcomes this.

Meanwhile, the future development of Yemen still
faces many challenges. As to how to deal with the
issues I have mentioned at the next stage, I would like
to make the following four points.

First, Yemen should be supported in its efforts
to uphold peace and move forward with the political
process. The Yemeni people should continue to lead
that process. The international community should fully
respect Yemen's sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, as well as the rights of the Yemeni
people to choose their own development path. China
supports various parties in Yemen in carrying out,
in accordance with the relevant Council resolution,
the GCC Initiative and Implementation Mechanism,
and in resolving their differences through dialogue
and consultation, as well as in launching the National
Dialogue Conference on time.

Secondly, we should support Yemen's efforts to
maintain State security and stability. The international
community should continue to support the Government
in strengthening capacity-building for the security
sector, guarding against and containing the spread
of terrorism and safeguarding State security and
territorial integrity. The international community
should work more closely with the Government, adopt
a holistic approach in dealing with the security threats
Yemen faces and help to eliminate breeding grounds for
terrorism, with the aim of achieving long-term stability
and security.

Thirdly, we should help Yemen to speed up its
economic and social reconstruction. The international
community should honour its aid commitments to
Yemen, help it overcome the current serious economic
and social development challenges and alleviate its
humanitarian needs. Substantive progress in Yemen's
social and economic reconstruction would also be
conducive to smooth completion ofthe political process.
Fourthly, we should continue to support the
good offices of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Mr. Benomar, the Special Adviser. China welcomes
the GCC's continuing important role in seeking an
appropriate settlement to this issue. The international
community can coordinate its help and support for the
Yemeni Government through the Friends of Yemen.

The Chinese Government has consistently
supported the Yemeni Government's efforts to promote
domestic political, economic and social reforms. Over
the years, we have provided assistance, within our
capacity, to Yemen's economic and social development
and its endeavours to improve its people's well-
being. That assistance has been used for economic
and social development programmes, to improve the
humanitarian situation and to help the Government and
people overcome their difficulties. China will continue
to provide what assistance it can through various
means, and to work with the rest of the international
community to carry out positive efforts to help Yemen
move forward with its political transition process and
economic reconstruction, in order to achieve long-term
stability and development.

