Mr. Zenati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): 1 thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary- General for Syria, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under- Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings. Since the two Security Council meetings on Syria held last week (see S/PV.8707 and S/PV.8708), violence and terrorist acts in Idlib have continued unabated despite the calls from many Security Council members for an end to the military escalation and a return to calm. We are gravely concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian situation due to escalation in north-west Syria, as civilian casualties continue to mount in Idlib and its vicinity and more than half a million people are being displaced. There are also reports indicating a risk of the spread of diseases, while humanitarian and medical assistance and services cannot meet the increasing needs. Tunisia reiterates its condemnation of the attacks against civilians, regardless of their origin, in particular attacks by Security Council-designated terrorist groups. We call upon all parties to fulfil their obligations under international humanitarian law and international law in order to ensure the protection of civilians at all times as well as to provide safe, sustained and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need of it. The priority in Idlib now is to broker a ceasefire, compel all parties to exercise restraint and create an environment conducive to achieving calm pursuant to the understandings that are still valid. We call upon the guarantor parties to work together in order to create an environment conducive to restoringcalm in the de-escalation zone and to preventing renewed clashes, so as to ensure the restoration of security and stability throughout Syria. We believe that understandings reached on the issue of achieving calm in Idlib, although importance, are merely temporary solutions if they do not result in a joint practical solution that excludes the terrorist groups in Idlib and ensures the end of their presence in the region. The political process cannot move forward without creating the proper conditions for calm and stability throughout Syria and for promoting confidence among the parties. We recall once again that resolution 2254 (2015) noted the close relation between a ceasefire and the political process in Syria. In that regard, we support the efforts of the Special Envoy for Syria and those of all other actors working to move forward the political process in Geneva. My country's delegation stresses anew that there can be no military solution to the crisis in Syria. The only way to end the humanitarian suffering of the Syrian people is to make progress towards a political settlement, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The settlement must be Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, under the auspices of the United Nations, through an agreement among Syrian political and civilian parties on anew constitution that ensures free and fair elections under United Nations supervision. Those elections must meet the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people to a life of freedom and dignity and uphold Syria's unity, independence and territorial integrity, while also contributing to the promotion of security and stability in the region.
