Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to express my thanks to the Danish presidency for
organizing this very important, timely and thought-
provoking discussion. This is the right opportunity to
reaffirm our commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law as the indispensable foundation of a
more peaceful, prosperous and just world. We also
thank Mr. Michel and Judge Higgins for their valuable
and inspiring statements and observations.

Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement
to be made later this morning by the representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union. For that
reason, I will limit my statement to several points we
wish to underline.

We all can agree that justice and the rule of law,
including respect for human rights at the national and
international levels, are of key importance to the
promotion and maintenance of international peace,
stability and development. The focus of today's
discussion is the role of the Security Council in the
promotion and strengthening of international law. That
role should be viewed from the perspective of the
functions of the United Nations body primarily
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security and of its competencies under the Charter.

In past years the Council has had to face many
new challenges, especially in the fight against
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors. We commend and
support the significant emphasis that the Council has
placed on setting out and strengthening the
international legal framework and norms for addressing
those issues in an effective and comprehensive manner.
We believe that the Council must continue to define the
best ways and means of helping and encouraging
Member States to secure full implementation of such
norms and obligations.

In that regard, we believe that it is also necessary
to evaluate the tools that the Security Council has at its
disposal to secure the full implementation of all its
resolutions and decisions in a more efficient manner so
as to further strengthen its credibility and
effectiveness. We hope that the ongoing discussions on
reform and on the improvement of working methods,
including revision of the mandate of the Security
Council, will be a good opportunity to address those
issues.

Last but not least, the emphasis that the Council
places on the full implementation of and universal
participation in international treaties is an important
step towards promoting the universality of fundamental
international conventions, including anti-terrorist and
human rights conventions.

One of the important areas in which international
law should be strengthened is the promotion of the rule
of law in post-conflict situations. The Council should
take advantage of the lessons already learned and
consider further improvements in the promotion of the
rule of law. The Security Council must include the
necessary rule of law provisions in the mandates of
particular United Nations operations. It is also
indispensable that peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations be regularly mandated to address
transitional justice and rule of law activities. The
creation and development of a trusted, legitimate legal
system, based on generally accepted legal principles
and human rights norms, is crucial for the
establishment of a truly democratic and stable State.

The new Peacebuilding Commission will have
important prerogatives in the field of integrating
elements related to the rule of law and transitional
justice into proposed strategies for post-conflict
peacebuilding and recovery, and in developing best
practices on issues that will require extensive
collaboration among various peacebuilding actors.

Commitment to a strengthened emphasis on
international law issues in the work and functions of
the United Nations goes hand in hand with a
recognition of the importance of ensuring sufficient
capacity within the United Nations itself, including in
the Secretariat. Due consideration should be given to
the establishment of a rule of law assistance unit within
the Secretariat.
Ending impunity is another essential issue on
which the Council should focus its efforts. Coming to
terms with past abuses is the only way of preventing
future ones. The main challenge in ending impunity is
to ensure a balance between lasting peace and the
creation of an effective justice system. We agree with
Mr. Michel that there is an interdependence between
peace and justice. To achieve one without the other
would leave the issue of post-conflict reconciliation
unresolved.

The fight against impunity should be an essential
part of any post-conflict reconciliation process. The
bringing to justice of those responsible for the most
serious crimes and violations of human rights
committed during a conflict should form part of the
overall considerations of the Council in its discussions
or decisions on conflict resolution or post-conflict
arrangements.

In that regard, I should like to emphasize the fact
that the International Criminal Court (ICC) is the only
permanent criminal tribunal that is competent and able
to handle the prosecution of the most serious crimes,
such as genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, where national judicial institutions have
failed or are unable or unwilling to bring the
perpetrators to justice.

The adoption of resolution 1593 (2005) has
shown, for the first time, the potential of cooperation
between the Security Council and the ICC in the quest
to end impunity. We encourage all Member States that
are not yet parties to the ICC to sign and ratify the
Rome Statute.

In that context, we should not forget the role of
other international, regional and national criminal
tribunals or of truth and reconciliation commissions,
which have already contributed enormously to
preventing impunity and ensuring just, lasting and
peaceful solutions, and succeeded in bringing to justice
the perpetrators of international crimes and other
widespread, systematic violations of human rights.

Sanctions under the United Nations Charter are
an efficient tool at the Council's disposal in conflict
management and in addressing and preventing
violations of international law. Such coercive measures
can affect not only the parties to a conflict but also
large segments of the civilian population or even whole
societies. Therefore it is of the utmost importance that
sanctions be adopted in accordance with the provisions
of the Charter and have a high degree of legitimacy.
The Council must improve the efficiency and
credibility of sanctions regimes. The way to achieve
that goal is to focus on targeted sanctions.

The transparency and effectiveness of listing and
delisting procedures are becoming a yardstick for the
work of numerous sanctions committees. We note with
satisfaction that several proposals made by individual
Member States provide an opportunity to enhance trust
and overall satisfaction regarding due process. It would
seem reasonable for individuals and entities to be able
to address their applications to not only one Member
State but to any member of the Security Council.

The role of the focal point should be discussed in
depth. In that context, there is a need for increased
communication, and additional Secretariat assistance
would be vital. An external review process might be
another tool to ensure that the right decisions are made
by sanctions committees.

We would like to emphasize the complexity of
the issues involved in sanctions regimes. Ongoing
attention to all related aspects is imperative, keeping in
mind the financial support necessary for monitoring
and expert teams, along with support for developing
countries to enable them to build up their own
capacities to implement sanctions regimes within their
territory.

Let me conclude by underlining once again the
fact that the promotion of the rule of law and the
strengthening of international law in the maintenance
of international peace and security is an important part
of the Council's agenda. Today's discussion shows the
many challenges in this regard that can be resolved
only through concerted efforts, bearing in mind the
rules and principles of international law together with
the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter.

Finally, my delegation fully supports the draft
presidential statement prepared and submitted by the
presidency.

