Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itselfwith
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union (EU).

At the outset, allow me to thank the Chinese
presidency of the Security Council for this month for
convening today's very timely open debate. Today,
half of all United Nations peacekeeping missions are
on the African continent, including the largest and the
most complex ones. That makes improving the overall
performance and safety of peacekeeping operations in
Africa of paramount importance.

The importance of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and
the report authored by former United Nations Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos
Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security of United
Nations peacekeepers, cannot be overstated. Estonia
fully supports striving towards more realistic, robust
and tailored mandates for peacekeeping operations. In
addition, it is important to enable closer coordination
among United Nations mission commanders that
would help set up achievable tasks for the successful
fulfilment ofmandates. In order to build truly successful
peacekeeping operations, we need better-prepared
troops. Providing sufficient training that is suitable to
the conditions on the ground, the right equipment and
interoperability of forces is the responsibility of all of
us. Fully trained forces with greater capabilities and
fewer caveats are critical to ensuring that our troops are
prepared and able to carry out the tasks we ask of them.

Estonia commends the work of the Security Council
in mainstreaming the gender aspects in the mandates
of the United Nations peacekeeping missions. We also
strive to ensure gender parity in our own peacekeeping
troops. The greater inclusion of women peacekeepers
is crucial to raising awareness and improving the
implementation of gender aspects in peace operations.
The importance of including the question of women and
children in the context of peace and security cannot be
overemphasized. It goes without saying that the zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse must
be fully implemented, and all perpetrators must be
held accountable.

In discussing peace and security in Africa, I want
to underline the importance of addressing the root
causes of conflict. Agenda 2063 of the African Union
highlights the fact that forging synergies between
governance and peace and security is crucial for
addressing conflicts in a holistic manner. We very much
welcome African efforts on concrete structural conflict
prevention initiatives, early warning, mediation and
preventive diplomacy, and encourage further efforts
to those ends. Furthermore, Estonia fully supports
the Secretary-General's prevention agenda and all his
efforts in that regard.

None of us will be able to resolve the conflicts of
this world alone. Forging synergies between partners
and taking the most of what the multilateral system
has to offer will bring us closer to lasting peace and
economic well-being. For our part, Estonia will
continue contributing to Africa's peace and security.
Our troops remain on the ground in Mali as part
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the French-led
Operation Barkhane. We fully stand by the EU-United
Nations strategic partnership on peace operations and
crisis management and strive for deeper trilateral
cooperation between the United Nations, EU and the
African Union on peace operations, conflict prevention
and crisis management.
In conclusion, in order to strengthen peacekeeping
operations - be they in Africa or elsewhere in the
world - we need tailored country- and region-specific
mandates and better-prepared forces with greater
capabilities and fewer caveats. We need to focus on
prevention and address the root causes of conflict. We
need to involve all stakeholders on the ground, starting
from larger regional organizations and ending with the
local communities in conflict areas. On our side, Estonia
will continue to promote these ideas throughout our bid
for a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for
the period 2020-2021.

