Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): My delegation, at the
outset, would like to register its sincere appreciation for
the succinct and useful report of the Secretary-General

 

contained in document S/l995/9 of 6 January 1995, the
eighth in the series of progress reports on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL).

We also commend and express appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his former Special Representative,
Mr. Trevor Gordon-Somers, for the untiring efforts to bring
about peace in Liberia. We welcome the appointment of
Mr. Anthony Nyakyi as the Secretary-General's new
Special Representative for Liberia; we hope that he will
enjoy success in carrying out his new duties.

We pay tribute to the members of the high-level
mission dispatched to the Member States of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in order to
find ways for reviving the peace process and achieving
reconciliation among the Liberian factions. The mission, led
by Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs Mr.
Lansana Kouyate, carried out extensive consultations
throughout West Africa to facilitate a new political
accommodation among Liberians, an accommodation which
would be possible only if it was supported by a common
policy of the neighbouring States directly involved with
Liberia.

My delegation is pleased to note that all the Liberian
parties succeeded in signing an agreement on 21 December
1994 in Accra. Since this Accra Agreement has been signed
by all the factions currently involved in the conflict, we
think it appropriate to extend our appreciation to the
Chairman of ECOWAS, President Jerry Rawlings of Ghana,
for his success in carrying out the principal negotiations
among the parties concerned. His initiatives substantially
helped in overcoming the parties' differences; this
subsequently led to the signing of the Agreement. In this
regard, we also commend the positive role played by the
Foreign Ministers of the ECOWAS Committee of Nine on
Liberia.

As pointed out by the Secretary-General in his report,
the Liberian parties have signed many peace agreements but
have failed to implement them. Hence, we hope that all
Liberian parties will now begin to adhere to the Accra
Agreement and substantially demonstrate their readiness to
implement it fully. We believe that the observance of a
cease-fire as of 28 December 1994 could lead to the
holding of the free and fair elections which are now
scheduled for 14 November 1995, and also to the
installation of the elected government on 1 January 1996.
We are also in a position to support the Secretary-General's
recommendation for the convening of a summit of
ECOWAS leaders to coordinate and harmonize their
policies on Liberia and promote implementation of the
Accra Agreement.

The political future of Liberia depends on the
Liberians. Therefore, they must strive to demonstrate
further their political will and sustained commitment to
peace and stability in their country. This would entail
their actively facilitating the safe delivery of international
humanitarian assistance throughout the country. In this
regard, my delegation calls upon all Liberians to
cooperate fully with the activities undertaken by the
ECOWAS Military Observer Group (ECOMOG) and the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL).

Since the peace process in Liberia is now entering a
crucial moment, by voting for the resolution the Council
has just adopted my delegation has indicated its support
for UNOMIL's continued presence in Liberia.

The resolution that has just been adopted by the
Council extends the mandate of UNOMIL for another
three months beginning on 13 January 1995 . This reflects
the unanimous determination of the international
community and the commitment it has undertaken in
favour of an early and peaceful solution to the conflict on
the basis of the Accra Agreement, including its timetable
for implementation of its provisions - and this process
has already dragged on for far too long.

We hope that the talks on the composition of the
Council of State, as referred to in the Accra Agreement,
can be resumed immediately and that agreement can be
reached as soon as possible.

The extension of the mandate ought to be seen as an
opportunity for the parties to the conflict to respect the
cease-fire and implement all the relevant agreements. It is
our hope that within this period the Liberian parties will
be afforded a significant opportunity to demonstrate their
willingness to solve their own problems and to respect the
role of international, regional and subregional
organizations.

