The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Tajikistan in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kaynmov
(Tajikistan) took a place at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/1995/225, letter
dated 27 March 1995 from the Permanent Representative of
Tajikistan to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General; and S/1995/283, letter dated 10 April 1995 from
the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its deep concern
at the escalation of military activities on the Tajik-
Afghan border which resulted in grave loss of life. In
this context, the Council reminds the parties of their
obligations to ensure the safety of the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy and all other United
Nations personnel.

"The Council strongly believes that armed
activities by the T ajik opposition in violation of the
cease-fire Agreement of 17 September 1994
(S/I994/1102, Annex I) jeopardize the inter-Tajik
dialogue and the process of national reconciliation as
a whole. Noting also recent violations of the
17 September 1994 Agreement by Government
forces, the Council calls on the Tajik opposition and
the Government of Tajikistan to comply strictly with
the obligations they have assumed under that
Agreement and calls on the Tajik opposition in
particular to extend it for a substantial period beyond
26 April 1995.

"The Council fully supports the appeal of the
Secretary-General to the Tajik parties and other
countries concerned to exercise restraint, to do their
utmost to continue the political dialogue and to hold
the next round of talks as soon as possible. It
welcomes the agreement by the Government of
Tajikistan and the Tajik opposition to the proposal
of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy to hold an
urgent high-level meeting of their representatives in
Moscow. It calls upon the countries of the region to
discourage any activities that could complicate or
hinder the peace process in Tajikistan.

"Reaffirming its resolution 968 (1994) of
16 December 1994, the Council once again urges the
parties to reconfirm through concrete steps their
commitment to resolve the conflict only through
political means. The Council reiterates its call on the
parties to hold the fourth round of the inter-Tajik
talks without delay on the basis as agreed during the
previous rounds of consultations."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/ 16.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m.

