Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) Group.

Allow me at the outset to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe
for his comprehensive briefing. I should also like also
to praise your able presidency, Sir, and the successful
presidency of our colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Gabon, last month.

I would like to extend our deepest condolences to
the Permanent Representative of China and, through
him, to his Government and people.

For the umpteenth time since the inception of the
United Nations in 1945, we meet in the Security
Council to discuss the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, which is being
endangered again by irresponsible and illegal Israeli
acts that could lead the region as a whole into another
war, with great potential to spread uncontrollably
through the region and beyond. Once again, Israel has
turned its back on the increased efforts of international
community aimed at resuming the peace talks, and has
failed to respond accordingly to its requirements,
foremost among which is the implementation of the
international resolutions calling for its full withdrawal
from all occupied Arab territories to the lines of 4 June,
1967. In effect, the Israeli Government continues to
perpetrate illegal actions aimed at forcibly and
aggressively imposing a fait accompli on the
Palestinian people through its military might. It is
obvious that the continuation of such unlawful and
provocative Israeli behaviour will endanger the
achievement of a just and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East.

These illegal Israeli measures include the
unbridled and unlawful escalation of settlement
activities, dealing a critical blow to the Middle East
peace process; the ongoing three-year blockade of the
Gaza Strip, slowly choking off the essentials of life;
the irresponsible and aggressive decision to add the
Ibrahimi mosque and the mosque of Bilal ibn Rabah to
a list of so-called Israeli heritage sites; the shameful
approval issued by the Israeli Supreme Court to
construct a so-called museum of tolerance by
destroying and building over one of the oldest Islamic
cemeteries in Jerusalem; the continued construction of
the separation wall; the revocation of Palestinian
residency rights in the city; the eviction of Palestinian
families from the city; the imposition of severe
restrictions to movement, which have already isolated
the city from the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territory; the issuance just two days ago of an
extremely dangerous new Israeli order that gives the
occupying forces power to detain, imprison and deport
Palestinians in the West Bank; and the dangerous
continued digging and excavation work in and around
Al-Aqsa mosque and its vicinity.

These violations are the most prominent evidence
of the policy of ethnic cleansing and aggression being
pursued by Israel, the occupying Power, and of the
intention of Israeli decision-makers to wage a fatal war
on the peace process and to undermine international
efforts to bring a just and comprehensive peace to the
region. The OIC strongly condemns these Israeli
violations and calls for the immediate cessation of all
such activities, in accordance with the occupying
Power's obligations under international law, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and the many
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions.

In this regard, the OIC recalls, inter alia, Security
Council Resolutions 446 (1979), 465 (1980) and 478
(1980), which all remain valid and must be
implemented. The OIC Group demands that Israel also
abide by resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003) and withdraw from the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem
to the lines of4 June 1967.

Despite the unanimous international rejection of
Israel's de facto annexation of A1-Quds Al-Sharif in
1980, and despite the strong calls for Israel's
immediate cessation of all colonization measures,
Israel, the occupying Power, continues its illegal
campaign geared to changing the Palestinian Arab
identity of the holy city of Al-Quds. The OIC members
reaffirmed, at the thirty-sixth ministerial meeting held
in Damascus, that all Israeli colonial settlement
measures and practices in Al-Quds and the rest of the
occupied Palestinian territory are null and void, and
requests urgently the Security Council to revive the
International Supervision and Monitoring Committee
to Prevent and Prohibit Colonial Settlement in Al-Quds
and the Occupied Arab Territories.

We strongly condemn the attacks by the Israeli
occupying forces perpetrated against Palestinian
worshippers at Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Al-Haram
Al-Sharif compound in Al-Quds Al-Sharif. Any
provocative or illegal, unilateral actions against the
holy mosque of Al-Aqsa will have very serious
repercussions for the Islamic world and could incite
another cycle of violence likely to destabilize the
region and the rest of the world.

The OIC Group strongly condemns the Israeli
Government's decision to usurp illegally Al-Haram
Al-Ibrahimi in the occupied Palestinian city of
Al-Khalil and Masjid Bilal in the occupied city of
Bethlehem. The OIC Group stresses the illegality of
the Israeli Government's decision and considers it as
null and void and without any effect whatsoever.

The OIC Group calls on the United Nations,
including the Security Council, to shoulder its
responsibilities in taking the urgent necessary measures
to compel the Israeli Government to revoke its
irresponsible decisions and to refrain from any further
provocative acts aimed at undermining the chances to
achieve a just and comprehensive peace settlement.

The Israeli Government, as all know, continues to
ignore the international community's demands to lift
the unlawful blockade it has imposed on the Gaza Strip
for the past three years. The OIC condemns this
inhumane blockade and expresses serious concern
about the grave deterioration of socio-economic
conditions and the deepening of the humanitarian crisis
of Palestinian civilians. The OIC calls on Israel to end
its collective punitive measures imposed on the civilian
population in Gaza and calls for the immediate lifting
by Israel of the unjust Israeli blockade and for the
opening of all crossing points with Gaza, in accordance
with international law and United Nations resolutions.

This is the first time in human history that people
are being prevented from leaving a war zone, seeking
safety. The OIC welcomes the adoption by the General
Assembly of its resolution 64/254, of 26 February
2010, on the second follow-up to the report of the
United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on Gaza Conflict.
The Group is of the view that that resolution
constitutes an important step in pursuing accountability
for these Israeli violations, which were confirmed in
the Goldstone report (A/HRC/ 12/48). Thus, more
actions should be taken by the relevant United Nations
bodies, including the Security Council, to bring the
Israeli perpetrators of these crimes to justice and to put
an end to Israel's impunity and above-the-law
mentality.

The OIC remains deeply concerned by Israel's
ongoing air and land violations of Lebanon's
sovereignty, in breach of Security Council resolution
1701 (2006), and calls on Israel to withdraw fully from
the remaining Lebanese occupied land in the Shab'a
farms, the Kafr Shuba hills and the northern part of the
village of Ghajar.

The OIC also joins the international community's
stance in reaffirming that all measures and actions
taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the occupying Power,
to alter the legal, physical or demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan and its institutional structure, as
well as the Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect. The OIC demands that Israel abide fully
and immediately by Security Council resolution 497
(1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967, in implementation
also of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).

The OIC calls for the intensification of efforts by
the international community, including by the Security
Council in line with its Charter responsibilities, aimed
at accelerating the process of achieving a just and
comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East on
the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference, including the principle of
land for peace, and the Arab Peace Initiative.

The OIC reiterates, in this regard, its firm and
unwavering support for the establishment of the State
of Palestine based on a commitment to the right of
sovereignty over the Palestinian territory occupied in
1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, and a just
solution for the plight of the Palestine refugees on the
basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

(spoke in Arabic)

Allow me now to speak in my national capacity.
Today, we have had the pleasure of hearing statements
by the members of the Council that condemned Israel's
actions and the unilateral measures it has adopted. It
has done so in contravention of its commitments as
occupying Power, as set out in the Geneva Conventions
of 1949, the laws of war and The Hague Convention of
1907. These Israeli actions contravene the international
community's will to establish a comprehensive, just
peace in the region, with the creation of a Palestinian
State within the 4 June 1967 borders.

It would seem that the Israeli representative and
her Government do not recognize the agreements
commonly known as the Geneva Conventions, the laws
of war, the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly or the 38 resolutions adopted by the Security
Council. Allow me to reiterate that the number of
international resolutions adopted by the Council, the
General Assembly and the United Nations specialized
agencies against Israel are more numerous than the
resolutions adopted by the membership on any other
subject since the creation of our Organization.

A great many Israeli political leaders, both
military and civilian, can no longer travel freely
because they are accused of having committed war
crimes. This is a reality, and a truth that needs to be
borne in mind constantly, both here in the Council and
in other United Nations forums.

It is high time to set up a commission of inquiry
to examine all resolutions adopted by the United
Nations since 1948. The result, it will be seen, would
be striking. We also have to consider the option of
setting up a committee that would produce a register in
which we could record all the terrorist crimes
committed by Israel since its creation. We recently
witnessed the actions taken by the Mossad in Dubai.
Paragraph 39 of the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/ 105) on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) states that
the Lebanese Government "has not reported any breach
of the arms embargo imposed by resolution 1701
(2006)". There are two reports, and neither makes
reference to the transfer of arms and weapons across
the Syria-Lebanon border, something that Israel claims.
Israel's allegations have a single, precise objective: to
divert the attention focused on Israel's primary
responsibility for the exacerbation of tensions in the
Middle East and to divert attention from Israel's threats
against its neighbours and the entire region.

Yesterday, Israel prevented a Mediterranean-
European conference from reaching agreement on the
issue of the water shortage in the Middle East. The
reason for the failure of the conference is quite simple:
the European and Arab States referred to the occupied
Palestinian territories in the conference's final
document, and Israel simply does not recognize the
existence of occupied territories. It continues to flout
the Geneva Conventions and the norms of international
law. The very mention of the occupied territories in
that document was rejected by Israel in Paris yesterday.

As for nuclear weapons, it is an outrage; it is
scandalous. A11 of us are aware of the situation - and
incidentally, the source of the information is not Syrian
but Swedish. All are familiar with this book, an
international benchmark in nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. Over 15 pages therein concern
Israeli nuclear weapons. Israel possesses a nuclear
arsenal made up of over 300 nuclear bombs, and
nuclear missiles with a range of over 7,000 kilometres
that can strike Europe, China and America.

Israel is the only country in the Middle East that
has not yet joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. It has obstructed the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East, an initiative launched by Syria in 2003
when it was a member of the Security Council. This
initiative was not successful for reasons with which all
present are familiar.

