Mr. Dayri (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin, Sir, by extending my congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We also thank you for choosing this
important issue for today's debate.

I would like to emphasize the position of the
legitimate authorities of Libya with regard to our
commitment to a national dialogue as sponsored by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to agree on the formation of a Government of national
accord, whose priorities will include restoring peace
and stability and combating terrorism. Along with the
people of Libya, the legitimate authorities seek further
support to combat terrorism alongside pursuing the
political track in the Libyan crisis.

I wish to reiterate what I said here in the Chamber
on 19 December 2014 (see S/PV.7351) during the special
meeting convened by the Chadian presidency on the
issue of terrorism.

First, there is a need to conclude a comprehensive
strategy against Daesh. All morning we have heard
about the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and
other terrorist organizations in those countries. I also
heard a reference to ISIS in Libya, without specific
mention of what is to be done in Libya. Everyone agrees
on the need to form a Government of national accord,
and we are committed to that as a national priority and,
as I just said, as being crucial to face the numerous
challenges we are confronting in Libya today. However,
that is not enough. We in fact want a comprehensive
strategy against ISIS, not just in Syria and Iraq but in
Libya, Tunisia and other places in the region plagued
by terrorism. Since October, when a group announced
its affiliation in ISIS in Derna, eastern Libya, ISIS has
been expanding and receiving the support of hundreds
of terrorist fighters flooding into that city and into
Benghazi and Sirte. As I said last December, I reiterate
today that ISIS is expanding and that there has been no
effective action to support the army and the people of
Libya in facing up to terrorism.

Secondly, we condemn the heinous
crimes - respectively, in February and April - that
targeted our 21 brothers from Egypt and our 28 brothers
from Ethiopia. However, I want to emphasize that
40 Libyans were also killed as a result of terrorist acts
in the eastern part of our country on 20 February. That
is in addition to the beheading of 12 Libyan citizens
and the burning of a Salafist cleric after exhuming his
remains from the grave where he was buried 12 days
earlier. That took place on Friday, 14 August. Before
that and since, scores of innocent Libyans have been
killed by ISIS in Derna, Benghazi and Tripoli.

Yet there are no resources for the Libyan army
to fend off the increasing threats to our country and
our people. I would like to emphasize that we are
grateful to the Council for its adoption of resolution
2214 (2015), on 27 March. However, we have seen no
active implementation of the resolution thus far - not
just in terms of removing restrictions on the supply of
weapons to the Libyan army, but also with regard to
building up the capacity ofthe army and supporting the
ability of the Government to implement paragraphs 7
and 10 of the resolution.

Thirdly, also last December, given the failure of the
international community to act, I said that we feared
ISIS would expand further in Libya and that it could
have a similar presence as it has in Syria and Iraq.

Fourthly, the concerns of our African brothers and
our partners and friends in Europe are legitimate. We
share the concerns of our Arab and African friends
about the expansion of terrorism in Libya and its
negative repercussions on their countries' domestic
situations. That includes our European partners, who
aim to combat human traffickers who are sending
thousands Africans and Arabs to their deaths in the
Mediterranean Sea. We, too, would like to eradicate
this scourge, which is a gross violation of human
rights. As Libyans, Africans, Arabs and Europeans, it
is incumbent upon us to combat infiltration into Libya
by the many groups of terrorists. Again, as I have said,
that requires a multipronged strategy and plan of action
in which all our partners participate.

