Mrs. Papadopoulou (Greece): Today's open
debate is, for once, about a case with a happy ending.
The mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET) is coming to a successful
close. We wish to express our deep appreciation to the
Mission in general and to its personnel, and more
particularly to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa. Their
dedication, efficiency and professionalism have been
exemplary. Thanks to UNMISET, Timor-Leste has
managed to achieve a level of stability that will allow
it, from now on, to focus on building its institutions
and improving the well-being of its people.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
to be made later by the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.

Timor-Leste has travelled a long way since
independence, in May 2002, due mainly to the
determination and efforts of its citizens and the
steadfast commitment of the international community.
UNMISET has provided critical support in that long
journey. The establishment of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) constitutes a
reaffirmation of our commitment to seeing this journey
fully completed.

There is still work to do. We are pleased to see
the continuous strengthening of relations between
Timor-Leste and Indonesia, proof of which was the
recent visit of the Indonesian President to Timor-Leste.
We are also pleased to see other encouraging
developments, such as progress in establishing Timor-
Leste's legal framework. But dealing with the difficult
problems of the past, especially human rights abuses
and the issue of fighting impunity, is still an open
chapter.

Greece has supported the Secretary-General's
proposals regarding the reaction of the international
community to the request of the Timorese authorities
for help. At the same time, we strongly believe in the
value of the Security Council's unanimity. The decision
to establish UNOTIL was adopted unanimously.
Therefore, we must now shift our focus onto UNOTIL
and the fulfilment of its mandate: to actively support
critical democratic institution-building, particularly
with respect to the police, and to provide training in the
fields of democratic governance, the rule of law and
human rights. Building a stable and secure democracy
to foster economic development and social progress is
a goal the international community shares with the
Timorese people.

As Timor-Leste moves to the next chapter, the
challenge is to consolidate the progress achieved so far
and pave the way towards a better future of peace,
stability and prosperity for the people of the country
and for the region as a whole. In that respect,
UNOTIL's role is very important, and we stand ready
to provide it with all the necessary means and support.

