We thank South Africa for organizing today's open debate on an important topic. We also thank His Excellency Judge Abdulqawi A. Yusuf for his insightful briefing. The Charter of the United Nations is of irreplaceable importance to a rules- based international order. It has created a system of values, legal principles and political tools that help to stabilize the world. The Charter provides a framework for multilateral negotiations, conflict prevention and conflict resolution. It carried forward a valuable system for the settlement of disputes. The International Court of Justice contributes significantly to multilateralism by upholding and promoting the rule of law at the international level. Estonia remains a strong supporter of the role of the International Court of Justice in the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. We recognize that, while the Court's judgments are binding upon the parties concerned, its jurisprudence has a broader impact, including as guidance in the interpretation of international law. The seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter, and the United Nations system more broadly, offers us the momentum to consider the role that the Security Council plays, and could play, in the peaceful settlement of disputes - a role that is complementary to the role of the International Court of Justice. The mandate of the Security Council in relation to the International Court of Justice is manifold. In accordance with the Charter, and as has repeatedly been mentioned, the Security Council can request the International Court of Justice to provide an advisory opinion, may recommend that parties to a legal dispute refer it to the International Court of Justice and can proactively take measures to ensure compliance with a judgment of the Court. It is also not hard to see that those comprehensive tools have been far too rarely used by the Security Council during the past 75 years of its existence. There is indeed scope for improvement and further cooperation between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice and among Member States. Estonia believes that more frequent recourse to the International Court of Justice by the Council could provide a useful avenue for the clarification of legal issues that contribute to resolving disputes and thereby promote international peace and security. We hope that the exchange today will contribute to further consideration of a stricter application of paragraph 3 of Article 36 of the Charter of the United Nations, namely, that legal disputes should, as a general rule, be referred to the International Court of Justice. At the same time, in order to enhance the upholding of the rule of law and a rules-based international order, we emphasize the need for members of the Council to apply initiatives that seek to deter the use of the veto in cases related to the commission of atrocity crimes. Another crucial step would be for a party to a dispute to recuse itself from voting in the Council, in accordance with the Charter. We also echo the plea not to use the votes of other members to block any recommendations regarding the judicial settlement of disputes by the Council. Estonia would also like to take this opportunity to call on all Member States that have not yet done so to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court. Currently, only five countries out of the Security Council's membership of 15 States, including Estonia, and a total of only 74 States Members of the United Nations have accepted that jurisdiction. Finally, while the coronavirus disease pandemic continues to put our societies and economies under exceptional strain, it is clear that multilateralism and respect for democracy, human rights and the rule of law remain essential to coming out of the crisis stronger. Estonia is ready to support creating more space for the International Court of Justice and the Security Council to work more closely in striving towards those aims.
