Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and
the noteworthy briefings by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Monseigneur Marcel Utembi and Ms. Solange
Lwashiga Furaha. We would also like to express our
gratitude for the important work they undertake in their
respective domains.

Peru is closely monitoring progress against the
electoral calendar in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo under the leadership of the Government and
the Independent National Electoral Commission. We
underscore the need to ensure that December's electoral
process is legitimate, democratic, credible, inclusive
and peaceful. In this regard, we welcome the decision
of President Joseph Kabila not to seek re-election. We
believe that it is vital that the international community,
and the Security Council in particular, be kept informed
about the process so as to support the Congolese
Government and citizens in their efforts to ensure that
the process is a success and to build sustainable peace.

The process clearly involves a number of
significant challenges that must be overcome. In our
view, a deadline must urgently be set for an audit of
the voting machines and to devise alternative plans
developed in case the machines do not function
correctly or difficulties arise in their use. To that
end, we appreciate the proposal put forward by the
Conference episcopale nationale du Congo that a team
of independent technical experts could ensure that the
machines work correctly. Likewise, the Government
could detail the logistical support it may require from
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
for the timely transfer of electoral material. We also
view as valid the recommendation of the International
Organization of la Francophonie regarding the need for
the prompt publication of the list of voters so as to allow
for its verification and amendment if necessary, thereby
ensuring the necessary climate of trust in the process.

All of this should take place in the context of strict
respect by the Government for the free exercise of the
political rights of all political groups and citizens in
general, and pursuant to the electoral code of conduct.
In this regard, we are particularly concerned about
the fact that draft legislation on confidence-building
measures has not been considered, including the draft
amendments to the 2015 law on public demonstrations.
In this regard, we encourage the Congolese authorities
and all political actors to step up efforts to promote the
broad participation of women in the electoral process
as candidates and as voters, and in the political life
of the country in general. Evidence shows that the
participation of women and young people makes a
decisive contribution to building sustainable peace
based on a shared vision of the future.

I conclude by highlighting the important support
role played by MONUSCO, the African Union,
subregional organizations and neighbouring countries
in ensuring that the electoral process can be a turning
point towards peace, progress and development in
this country.

