Mr. Tuomioja (Finland): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Finland. As
staunch supporters of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), we wish to congratulate you, Sir, and Guatemala
for its recent ratification of the Rome Statute and to
express our thanks for the convening of this debate.
We also wish to thank the Secretary-General, President
Song and Mr. Mochochoko of the Office of the
Prosecutor for their contributions.

This is a fitting moment to take stock of the
relationship between the ICC and the Security Council.
We also wish to recognize the increasing number of
ICC-related decisions and actions by the Security
Council and encourage further interplay between the
two institutions.

The ICC has come a long way since its establishment.
The number of States arties to the Statute is currently
121 and the number of country situations has grown
to seven. The number of judicial proceedings is also
rapidly increasing. The Security Council has twice
referred a situation to the Court. That confirms that the
ICC has become the centrepiece of our international
criminal justice efforts and a key actor in fighting
impunity for the most serious crimes.

The resolve of the negotiators of the Rome Statute
stemmed from the grim reality of the twentieth century,
during which millions of children, women and men had
been made the victims of unimaginable atrocities. In
this century, too, we continue to face such crimes that,
in the words of the Statute's preamble, deeply shock the
conscience of humanity.

The victims of such crimes are entitled to justice.
In situations where effective and genuine national
trials are not possible for various reasons, the ICC
plays a central role in ensuring accountability. The
Rome Statute system, which includes the Trust Fund
for Victims, also provides for an important restorative
function. Fair administration of justice complemented
by a comprehensive transitional justice strategy is
an essential element in peace efforts. There will be
no lasting peace without justice and due attention to
victims.

The goals of preventing conflict and protecting
populations who are at risk of mass atrocities unite the
Security Council and the ICC. We signed onto the Rome
Statute of the ICC - and I quote from the preamble -

"determined to put an end to impunity for the
perpetrators ofthese crimes and thus to contribute to
the prevention of such crimes [and] recognizing
that such grave crimes threaten the peace, security
and well-being of the world".

The Security Council can, through a referral to
the ICC, send a strong message that crime does not
pay. Justice will be done. Security Council referrals
show that, while the ICC is an independent judicial
institution, it is not alone on the international scene. It
needs to interact with other actors, and it needs support
from them. The Statute contains important provisions
on the relationship between the Court and the Security
Council, ranging from the power of referring situations
to the Court to that of temporarily deferring investigation
or prosecution by the ICC and addressing instances of
non-cooperation. In due course, the provisions on the
crime of aggression will also become operational. We
urge the Council to approach all of those provisions in a
consistent manner and with due regard to their purpose
and intent.

We also urge the Council to assist the Court in
fulfilling its tasks in situations referred to it by the
Council. The mandate of the Court is limited and does
not extend to issues such as the execution of arrest
warrants or taking action in cases of non-cooperation.
Several arrest warrants have been outstanding for
a number of years. Non-essential contacts with
individuals subject to an arrest warrant issued by the
Court should be avoided. Arrest warrants must be
executed. In that context, we welcome the Council's
action earlier this year, reminding the international
community of the obligations stemming from the
relevant Council resolutions.

Meeting the budget demands of the Court, including
those arising from referred situations, is a real concern.
Ensuring the necessary resources should be a shared
responsibility for all United Nations Member States.

The Nordic countries have time and again repeated
that impunity for the most serious international crimes
must not be tolerated. We welcome that the world
leaders came together recently to affirm the Declaration
adopted at the General Assembly High-level Meeting
on the Rule of Law at the national and international
levels.

We are horrified by the continuous atrocities in
Syria and urge the Council to take decisive steps to
secure the accountability of those most responsible in
that serious situation.

The High-level Meeting of the General Assembly
also recognized the role of the ICC in a multilateral
system that seeks to establish the rule of law. The ICC
not only plays an important role in ensuring that those
who have committed the gravest crimes cannot escape
justice; the ICC and the Rome Statute system also have
a role to play in the broader framework of fostering the
rule of law and thus in building sustainable peace.

That is because the Rome Statute recognizes that
States bear the primary responsibility to investigate and
prosecute even the most serious international crimes.
That is the essence of the principle of complementarity,
which governs the Court's jurisdiction. The ICC only
steps in when and if a State is unable or unwilling to
exercise that responsibility. In order to assist States with
their responsibility, other actors - including the Court,
the United Nations and regional organizations - can
also play an important role. Progress in that area of
positive complementarity leads to the strengthening
of the rule of law and in turn the prevention of new
conflicts.

It is our firm conviction that only a just peace is a
lasting peace.

