Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his
briefing and particularly for his work. I also thank the
Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
and our colleague Ambassador Saikal for his statement.

Allow me to express particular appreciation to the
delegation of Spain for its work in preparing resolution
2274 (2016), which was submitted to the members well
ahead of time, and for its participation in a broad and
fruitful process of consultations. The outstanding work
of the delegation of Spain stands out all the more when
compared to certain recent resolutions of the Security
Council, concerning which the delays and consultations
were not exactly encouraging.

Afghanistan continues to face major political,
economic and security challenges. We are therefore
pleased that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and the Government of Afghanistan
continue to maintain close relations, which is
key to ensuring lasting peace and security in the
country. It is also crucial that the United Nations
and the international community continue to provide
their support and assistance to the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan, in strict compliance with
the principles of national leadership and ownership,
taking into account that major challenges still lie ahead
in the country's reconstruction. Uruguay encourages
the Afghan authorities to continue their efforts and to
continue on the same path, drawing on the principles
of sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity.

It is important that Afghanistan be able to continue
the ongoing electoral reform process, so as to ensure
that the parliamentary elections scheduled for this year
take place in a democratic, transparent atmosphere and
with the necessary guarantees.

Uruguay welcomes the initiatives undertaken to
revive the peace process, as well as the agreement
reached by the Quadrilateral Coordination Group on
Afghan Peace and Reconciliation for the peace talks
held in December 2015.

Uruguay is concerned by the deteriorating security
situation in Afghanistan, and in particular by the
impact this situation has on civilians, who continue to

be the most affected by the conflict, especially women
and children. We are horrified by the over 11,000
civilian casualties in just 2015. In that respect, the
grave violations of human rights makes it essential that
the international community commit to the effective
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and 1612 (2005), on children
and armed conflict. Afghan civilians continue to
be those most affected by the conflict, with an ever-
increasing number of civilian casualties and numerous
human rights abuses.

Uruguay believes it imperative that the parties
respect the obligations of international humanitarian
law and the prohibition of targeted attacks against
civilians. In the midst of this veritable calamity, we
once again extend our thanks to the staff members of
the United Nations and humanitarian organizations for
their relief efforts and dedication in difficult security
conditions. We encourage them to continue that work.

Another point of particular urgency is the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism, especially the
Taliban and groups associated with the Islamic State.
Uruguay believes it is essential that the international
communityjoin forces against the financing ofterrorist
groups operating in the region, which are closely
linked to the high volume of illegal drug trafficking
documented in the country.

