Mr. Abdallah (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
fully supports the international trend towards building
an international community free from the use or threat
of use force, under the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and based on stability,
peace and equality. We reaffirm our readiness to
participate in any genuine, serious international effort
of good will to achieve that objective, particularly
with regard to preventing terrorists from possessing
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear materials.

Based on its conviction that the use of weapons
of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons, is
unethical and to be rejected and condemned; on its
firm support for efforts to declare the Middle East a
zone free of all weapons of mass destruction, first and
foremost nuclear weapons; and its desire to prove to the
world at large that it is committed to standing up against
any use of chemical weapons, the Syrian Arab Republic
has acceded to the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction. In 2003,
when we were a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, we sponsored a draft resolution declaring
the Middle East free of weapons of mass destruction,
especially nuclear weapons. However, all our efforts at
the time were met by the threat of a United States veto.

Ever since it acceded to membership of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), the Syrian Arab Republic has
been committed to all accession requirements and all
resolutions of the OPCW Executive Council. We have
met all our obligations, often prior to their deadlines.
We have cooperated in all the joint work affiliated
with the OPCW and the United Nations, as has been
commended repeatedly by both organizations and
public opinion worldwide.

Some countries have sought today to fish in
troubled waters by referring to the two reports of
the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM). We would
like to raise a question in that regard: Have those
delegations paid sufficient attention and thoroughly
read and analysed both reports, or did they simply
skip to the pages of conclusions in order to serve their
politicization of this file and attempts to use it in the
context of their exploitation of the United Nations to
attack the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.

As we have previously reaffirmed - and here we
wish to address those delegations that heed only their
own biased views and narrow minds - my country
has extensive comments on the structural gaps in the
JIM. reports, which we have submitted to the Security
Council in two formal documents. Among those
comments, to name only a few, is the fact that neither
report presents any real evidence that chemical weapons
were actually used in the incidents in which my country
was referred to.

My country calls upon the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibility to prevent weapons of mass
destruction from falling into the hands of the armed
terrorist groups in Syria, which have in many incidents
used toxic chemical materials against civilians as
well as the army of the Syrian Arab Republic. Those
toxic materials had been infiltrated into Syria through
the borders of neighbouring countries, particularly
Turkey. We have informed the Security Council and its
specialized committees about those and other incidents
on many occasions. However, no real measures have
been taken against those countries that have actually
been party to transporting such toxic materials to the
armed terrorist groups.

The meeting rose at 5.50 pm.
