Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks Ms. Ursula Mueller,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator in the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
for her briefing. We again reiterate our firm support as
she conducts her duties.

Bolivia would like to highlight the efforts made
by Russia, Iran and Turkey as the guarantor countries
of the ceasefire in Syria. We also highlight the Astana
meeting held on 4 May as a step forward, through the
establishment of four de-escalation zones to prevent
further incidents, put an immediate end to armed
clashes and allow for improved and unconditional
provision of humanitarian aid. We call for the Astana
agreement and resolution 2336 (2016) of 30 December
2016 to be fully implemented, as long as dangerous and
hard-to reach areas exist.

According to the International Committee of
the Red Cross and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, 13.5 million people already
have been forced to leave their homes in search of
security. Many of them are minors and therefore are in
need of urgent humanitarian assistance. According to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Committee of the
Red Cross, 6.6 million people have been displaced
internally, 4.6 million live in areas that are difficult to
access and are constantly being attacked, not to mention
that after six years of ongoing violence approximately
5 million people have had to take refuge in neighbouring
countries. To date, more than half of the population has
been forced to leave their homes. We emphasize, as
Ms. Mueller did, our thanks to the countries that are
hosting refugees.

Despite the ceasefire agreements, ongoing attacks
have resulted in the deaths of a considerable number of
civilians, and women and children are always the most
affected. We are alarmed that these attacks are also
being directed at civilian infrastructure, such as homes,
schools and hospitals where lives can be saved. Bolivia,
a peace-loving country, insists that the ceasefire
agreements must be implemented and respected. We
reiterate, at the same time, the obligation that all parties
that are involved have to guarantee the security and
integrity ofthose who are trapped in the conflict. In this
regard, we once again remind the parties involved in the
conflict that they must provide unconditional access for
humanitarian assistance and guarantee and protect the
security and integrity of that assistance and not identify
the humanitarian assistance convoys as military targets.
We also call for the intensification of efforts to ensure
access to areas that are besieged and hard to access in
line with international humanitarian law.

As long as military tactics are given priority over
politics, there can be no lasting peace and civilians,
in particular women and children, will continue to be
exposed to violence, the lack of humanitarian access
and the lack of basic services. We reiterate our most
heartfelt thanks to the work being done by the staff at
the various humanitarian agencies, whose personnel are
putting their own lives on the line to provide food and
nutrition and medical supplies as well as assistance to
alleviate the crisis undergone by the Syrian people. We
call on the parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law and the risky work being carried out
by the staff on the ground.

We commend the work being carried out by the
Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides
in the Syrian Arab Republic both to ensure security
in the deployment of humanitarian assistance and in
evacuating people from areas where armed clashes
have broken out.

We express, once again, our vigorous condemnation
of all terrorism. It is criminal and unjustifiable
regardless of the reason for it or where or when or
by whom it is carried out. We reaffirm that all States
must fight this scourge using all peaceful means at
our disposal and the Charter of the United Nations and
other international instruments.

In that regard, we condemn the terrorist attacks
against the Russian Embassy in Damascus on 24 and
25 June. The Plurinational State of Bolivia firmly
believes that the creation of more de-escalation zones
should continue to be pursued so that humanitarian
assistance for the civilian population can be extended.
In this regard, we welcome the ceasefire in the south-
west of Syria, agreed on the 7 July, between Russia, the
United States and Jordan, as well as the work carried
out in Cairo and Moscow forums.

Finally, the only way to resolve this conflict is
through an inclusive and orderly political process
that is led by and for the Syrian people. We therefore
reaffirm our support for the advances made at the
Astana and Geneva meetings. We have high hopes that
this dialogue will lead to a lasting peace.

