Ms. Power (United States of America): I would
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing and for his efforts to secure peace and protect
civilians in the Middle East.

My remarks today will address two areas, Israel
and Gaza, and Syria.

First, in Gaza, the United States is working
intensively to secure an immediate cessation of
hostilities based on the return to the November 2012
ceasefire agreement between Israel and Hamas. That
is the message President Obama gave in his public
remarks yesterday. It is the purpose of United States
Secretary of State Kerry's trip to Cairo, where he met
with Egyptian leaders and the Secretary-General, and
is conferring regularly with other allies and partners.
It is a goal that the President of the Security Council
embraced on behalf of all of the Council's members
when we met this past Sunday.

We also recognize that, as we work towards the
short-term goal of a ceasefire, we also have to resolve
the underlying issues that led to this conflict and
ultimately build long-term peace through a two-State
solution. Throughout the hostilities we have consistently
recognized Israel's right to defend itself against attacks
by rockets overhead or through tunnels below. No
country in the world would tolerate a relentless of
barrage of attacks on its citizens. Yesterday, in a single
day, militants fired 155 rockets into Israel. In the two
weeks of fighting more than 2,000 rockets have been
launched at Israel. On Sunday, Israel foiled another
attempt by armed militants to use tunnels to sneak into
the country and launch an attack. Again yesterday,
militants from Gaza entered Israel and killed four
Israeli soldiers.

In Gaza the toll of the violence has been devastating.
More than 600 Palestinian people have been killed, the
large majority civilians, including at least 59 women
and more than 121 children. More than 3,700 more have
been injured. Thousands of homes have been damaged,
many totally destroyed, and more than 100,000 people
have been displaced. As the destruction mounts, some
35,000 Palestinians who need food have not yet been
reached, and 1.2 million people have little or no access
to water and sanitation. Behind every number is a real
person, perhaps even a child. The suffering is immense.

Yet even the most determined efforts to reach
those in need have fallen short. The United Nations
is near its capacity to take in those without shelter.
Relief services are overwhelmed. In short, the situation
is unsustainable. That is why a ceasefire, as soon as
possible, is essential, as both Secretary Kerry and
Secretary-General Ban have emphasized from Cairo.

When we convened on Sunday, the President
expressed our shared concern about the growing
number of casualties and underscored the need to
protect civilians. Yet the violence continues to rise, as
does the number of people who suffer from it. Yesterday,
Secretary Kerry announced that the United States is
providing $47 million to help address the immediate
humanitarian emergency in Gaza. Those funds will
provide critical humanitarian aid, including shelter,
food and medical supplies for Palestinians in Gaza.
We encourage all of our partners in the international
community to respond to the humanitarian needs of
the people in Gaza and the appeal issued by the United
Nations.

All parties to the conflict must comply with
international humanitarian law; that means respecting
and protecting civilians and humanitarian and medical
facilities. By the most recent tally, 77 United Nations
structures have been damaged so far in the fighting.
Militants in Gaza have repeatedly used civilian
facilities for military purposes. Yesterday, a hospital in
Gaza was struck by a tank shell, killing at least four
people inside.

The humanitarian ceasefires brokered by the
United Nations and the International Committee of
the Red Cross on 18 and 20 July had the potential to
provide a reprieve from the violence and enable those in
need of food, water and medicine to receive assistance.
And yet, given a chance to help alleviate the suffering
of Palestinian civilians, Hamas balked. During both
ceasefires, rockets and mortars were launched from
Gaza at Israel, and Hamas has so far refused to agree
to an Egyptian-brokered ceasefire that could halt the
fighting and ease the suffering of innocent people on
both sides.

The United Nations supports Egypt's initiative.
As grave as the situation is now - and it is indeed
grave - it can get worse. Ifthe fighting persists, it will.
Humanitarian conditions will continue to deteriorate,
more civilians will suffer, and more innocent lives will
be lost. The only solution is an immediate ceasefire.
This could not be more urgent or more important,
given the devastating consequences of the violence for
civilian populations. That is why the United States will
not rest until a ceasefire is achieved and the underlying
issues fueling the conflict are addressed.

On Syria, last week the Council adopted resolution
2165 (2014) in an effort to address the humanitarian
devastation and suffering of the Syrian people. United
Nations humanitarian agencies will be delivering
humanitarian assistance through four additional border
crossings and across conflict lines, without the approval
of the Syrian regime. United Nations agencies have to
be able to reach people in desperate need of assistance
in all parts of the country - including those controlled
by the opposition - as the Al-Assad regime denies
such basic assistance in order to further its military and
political goals. We hope that it will make a difference
in the lives of several million Syrians who have been
without food, medicine and other forms of assistance
for more than a year.

As the Council is well aware, the resolution
was necessary because of the regime's cynical use
of starve-or-surrender tactics and other deliberate
strategies to deprive and punish people, particularly
those living in contested and opposition-controlled
areas. The denial of basic humanitarian aid continues to
be one of the deadly weapons in the Al-Assad regime's
deadly arsenal. Among the others are chemical and
conventional weapons, including air power, tanks,
mines and snipers.

We have seen the devastation inflicted when the
regime unleashes this arsenal on innocent civilians, as
it did in Homs. In recent weeks, we have once again
watched in horror as the Al-Assad regime has exercised
a stranglehold on the people of Aleppo. Roughly half
a million Syrians remain in the city, which has been
encircled and slowly asphyxiated by Al-Assad's forces,
which have obstructed the flow of basic humanitarian
assistance such as food, water and medicine. In addition,
the regime has dropped roughly 15 to 20 barrel bombs
a day on the city and a similar number on a suburb
surrounding it.

As disturbing as the absolute number of bombs
dropped is when and where they have been dropped.
People in the Aleppo provincial council report that the
regime has increasingly concentrated its bombings at
the time of day when Muslims are breaking their daily
fast - the iftar - and that they have chosen to target
the places Where people are most likely to congregate.
This is obscene. The Al-Assad regime has taken Islam's
holiest month and used it to calibrate its bombing runs.
It has taken advantage of people's rituals of faith to
maximize suffering.

Even by the horrific bar that this regime has set,
the malevolence of that pattern is shocking. And
Aleppo is not the only place where Al-Assad is using
that tactic. In Yarmouk, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East was only recently allowed to resume distributing
food and other aid to Palestinian refugees after several
months of being denied access by the regime. Anyone
who has seen photos of the Yarmouk refugees knows
that this population's survival hangs by a thread. We
are monitoring the situation there, in Aleppo and in
other sites closely, and we call on the regime to fully
implement resolution 2139 (2014) and to comply with
its obligations under resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165
(2014), as well as its basic obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

This is a snapshot of two places in the home of
the worst humanitarian crisis in the world. Yet as the
cases of Aleppo and Yarmouk demonstrate, these
humanitarian problems arise from a political crisis
and the barbaric tactics of a regime that has lost the
legitimacy to lead. Fixing that crisis will ultimately
demand a political solution that Syrians can embrace.
To that end, we welcome newly appointed Special Envoy
for Syria Staffan de Mistura and Deputy Special Envoy
for Syria Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy. They have agreed
to take on the daunting task of providing good offices
towards bringing an end to the violence and human
rights violations that plague Syria and promoting a
peaceful solution to that longstanding crisis. They have
our full support.

