Mr. Bakhtyar (Pakistan): I would like to warmly
felicitate the Spanish presidency for organizing today's
debate on the civilian aspects of conflict management
and peace-building. Your presence here, Sir, to preside
over this ministerial meeting testifies to the importance
of this theme.

I also wish to thank Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, as well as Mr. Javier Solana, Mr. Amre Moussa
and Mr. Said Djinnit for their important contributions
to the debate.

The Security Council in recent months has
reflected on various dimensions of conflict
management and post-conflict peace-building. The
Council's debates on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, complex crises and United Nations
response, peacekeeping operations, justice and the rule
of law, and post-conflict stabilization have contributed
richly to our collective thinking on developing a
coherent and effective response to these challenges.
Today's discussion complements that ongoing
discourse.

In the discharge of its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council is frequently called upon to intervene
in complex crisis situations. Those situations are often
characterized by inter-linked military and security
dimensions, as well as political, economic, social and
humanitarian facets. The wide range of issues involved
requires a comprehensive, multidimensional approach
based on increased system-wide coordination.

Broadly speaking, there are three basic conditions
for a successful transformation from conflict to
sustainable peace: the restoration of security, a viable
political process, and development and reconstruction.
Effective coordination between military forces and
civilian actors is required to meet those conditions.

Peacekeeping operations represent the most
effective and widely used instrument for conflict
management, but a peacekeeping operation is usually
established when there is peace to keep. In the pre-
conflict stage, there is always scope for civilian
involvement through preventive diplomatic action.
Early warning and early engagement, including
through the Secretary-General's good offices and the
United Nations system at large, could at times prevent
conflicts from erupting. Early diplomatic engagement
could also help contain the conflict if it indeed erupts.
Conflict prevention must therefore be a priority goal.

During the conflict phase, the increasingly
complex, multidimensional peacekeeping operations
are instrumental in managing crises and creating an
enabling environment for a smooth transition to the
post-conflict or peace-building phase. However, the
civilian aspects are important in several respects, such
as humanitarian assistance, conflict resolution and
dispute settlement, and implementation of the peace
process. Access, the protection of the humanitarian
community and adequate resources are crucial for an
effective humanitarian response. Peaceful resolution of
the conflict through the provisions of Chapter VI of the
United Nations Charter should remain a priority
throughout.

The post-conflict phase relies more heavily on the
civilian role when there is only a residual military
presence, if required. The civilian component helps in
the maintenance of public order, the reintegration of
ex-combatants, the development of functioning public
institutions, the protection and promotion of human
rights, justice and the rule of law, electoral processes,
and economic reconstruction and development. The
diversity of challenges in this phase requires the
involvement of multiple actors, both within and outside
the United Nations system.

A comprehensive policy response must, in our
view, place the greatest premium at all stages of
conflict on addressing the root causes. That is essential
to preventing a relapse of conflict, with its attendant
consequences. Equally, recognition of the inextricable
link between peace and development would help us to
develop strategies for longer-term stability and self-
sustaining peace and security.

It is important to recognize that civilian conflict
management and peace-building are a complex task,
the nature and requirements of which vary from
situation to situation. National and regional capacities
also vary significantly. Accordingly, there can be no
"one-size-fits-all" solution. Endeavours to develop any
overarching guidelines must take those factors into
account.

We support the emphasis on strengthening
national civilian crisis management instruments and
capabilities. If those are unavailable or inadequate at
the national level, the logical first recourse to fill the
capacity gaps should be the subregional or regional
resources, where possible. The role of the regional and
subregional organizations and their cooperation with
the United Nations under Chapter VIII of the Charter
are important as regards civilian and military
capacities, both of which should be developed. Internal
and external resources are required to develop those
capacities. States and regional organizations in a
position to do so should provide adequate assistance.

Increased system-wide coordination is essential
to successfully integrating civilian aspects into the
United Nations strategies to deal with complex crisis
situations. Civilian elements are being progressively
incorporated into the planning and operations of
multidimensional peacekeeping missions. Steps are
also under way to achieve better coordination of the
civilian and military aspects, but solutions do not lie
only in increasing the number or size of the civilian
components of the peacekeeping missions.
Corresponding steps should be taken at Headquarters
to ensure an integrated and coherent response at the
organizational level.

The crucial issue of resources must also receive
due attention. Civilian aspects - particularly those
relating to humanitarian relief - are often dependent
on voluntary contributions and therefore prone to
perennial shortfalls. Consideration should be given to
provide resources from assessed contributions, as is the
case for the peacekeeping missions.

The multidimensional tasks in the post-conflict
phase are not primarily the domain of the Security
Council. Many lie within the purview of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. The
involvement and support of international financial
institutions is equally important in effective conflict
management and peace-building. A comprehensive
approach presupposes a dynamic interface among the
relevant United Nations organs and the broad range of
national, regional and international actors and
stakeholders, all working in synergy.

We believe that ideas on better coordinating
mechanisms within the United Nations must be
explored. Today's debate would go a long way in this
search. Pakistan's proposal for establishing ad hoc
composite committees of the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council deserves careful consideration in this context.

