Ms. Mushikiwabo (Rwanda): Let me begin by
thanking the United States and, you, Sir, for having
convened this most important debate in support of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, and
for the presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/11) just
adopted.

Allow me also to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his informative briefing, and the
President of the World Bank, Mr. Jim Yong Kim, and
the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region ofAfrica,
Ms. Mary Robinson, for their valued contributions
and statements this morning. Taken together, their
extraordinary efforts, exhausting travel schedules
and financial commitments to regional development
priorities amply demonstrate their sincere commitment
to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
that we are discussing this morning. It is a visionary,
comprehensive and inclusive strategy to end decades
of conflict and instability in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I also thank African Union
Commissioner Ramtane Lamamra for his revealing
briefing on regional efforts undertaken towards finding
peace in the Great Lakes region.

I also acknowledge the presence of honourable
Ministers from countries of our region and from fellow
Council members.
Rwanda warmly welcomes the new United States
Special Representative for the African Great Lakes
Region and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Mr. Russ Feingold, and the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and new Force Commander of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO).
I wish to assure all of them, as a team, of Rwanda's
full cooperation in the common pursuit of peace for our
region.

While Rwanda is very pleased to support the
presidential statement, we nonetheless would have loved
to see efforts of the region included in it, in particular
in support of the Kampala peace talks established under
the auspices of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region. Indeed, we would like the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Ms. Mary Robinson, to
play an active role in seeing through the Kampala talks
without any further delay so that we can move quickly
to pacify the Kivu region. Her engagement would be a
welcome and helpful contribution to moving forward.

We have gathered today out of a shared
determination to make peace in the Great Lakes region
a lasting reality. Having endured devastating conflict
within our own borders nearly two decades ago, the
people of Rwanda have worked tirelessly to rebuild
a peaceful and thriving nation, but we are also very
aware that our destiny is inextricably tied to that of our
neighbours. Let me put it in the clearest possible terms:
in order to secure long-term peace and prosperity for
Rwanda well into the future, we need a peaceful and
prosperous Democratic Republic of the Congo. As
long as conditions persist that allow more than 30 rebel
groups to roam in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo with impunity, or as long as men and boys
see nothing in their futures beyond crime, violence
and conflict, such a transformation will remain beyond
reach.

The Framework of hope, along with regional peace
efforts, opens a special door to the kind of profound
and necessary change that is needed for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for the region as whole.
Rwanda is eager to do its part and to live up to our
commitments as a neighbour and regional partner, as
well as through the Framework of hope.

Allow me to lay out some concrete actions that
my Government has taken so far in implementing the
Framework.

We have disarmed, interned and relocated away
from our border with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo more than 600 combatants of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) who had crossed into Rwanda
as a result of infighting in March. In his report
dated 28 June (S/2013/387), the Secretary-General
commended Rwanda for the positive role it played in
that regard. We have asked the United Nations to take
responsibility for those combatants. It is important
to note that Rwanda cannot bear that burden alone.
We invite the international community to devise and
implement a long-term solution for that group of former
combatants.

Rwanda has also worked with the United Nations
to accommodate approximately 70,000 Congolese
nationals who have sought refuge in Rwanda for more
than 13 years now, and to take the necessary steps to
ensure their safe return home as soon as possible. In
addition, as the Secretary-General mentioned in his
report on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, the Government of
Rwanda reported the presence of several high-ranking
M-23 members who had crossed the border from
the Democratic Republic of Congo to seek refuge in
Rwanda, including individuals sanctioned by the United
Nations. When M-23 leader General Bosco Ntaganda
surrendered to the Embassy of the United States in
Kigali on 18 March, Rwandan authorities offered to
facilitate his transfer to The Hague through the United
States and Dutch Embassies in Kigali.

We can all agree that the economic components
of the Framework must be implemented alongside its
political and security aspects. To that end, Rwanda
is working to boost regional cooperation through
enhanced economic integration and close collaboration
on cross-border trade with the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and our other neighbours in the Great Lakes
region. Just last month, Rwandan mining authorities
seized 8.4 metric tons of smuggled minerals. They are
now in the process of returning them to the authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as has been our
practice in the past. We are also exploring several other
opportunities for economic cooperation, including a
strategic bilateral project with the Democratic Republic
of the Congo on our shared Lake Kivu.

Finally, Rwanda supported and has been facilitating
the deployment of the Intervention Brigade. We have
done so because we believe that it could help pacify
the region and serve as a strong deterrent against the
multiple armed groups in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, thereby allowing MONUSCO
to carry out its responsibility to protect civilians and,
critically, create the space necessary to implement
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
facilitate other regional peace efforts.

As Special Envoy Robinson has stressed in the past,
the Framework is a shared endeavour, and its success
depends very much on each party living up to its
respective commitments. I would take the opportunity
afforded by today's meeting in this Chamber to reiterate
Rwanda's commitment to the Framework. Rwanda is
one of the 11 countries that makes up the expanded
joint verification mechanism, by which developments
in conflict-affected areas are examined thoroughly and
with transparency and accountability. We therefore
urge the Security Council to attach value to the work
of the mechanism, so that its findings can inform the
decisions we reach and the resolutions we agree to.

On the recent collusion between the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) and
the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo (FARDC), Rwanda remains seriously concerned.
The Security Council has received a letter from my
Government that includes details on that issue, so I will
not repeat the specifics here today. I would simply like
to say that it is a concern that needs to be addressed.
However, while Rwanda views any alliance between the
FDLR and FARDC as a threat to regional security, we
will not allow those disturbing developments to derail
our commitments to peace, as we have done in the past.

I cannot stress enough Rwanda's goodwill
and ongoing support for the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. We believe it offers a realistic
path to lasting peace and security for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region at large. But we must not veer off course and
we must understand that that vision is only achievable
alongside regional peace initiatives and a showing of
genuine political will on the part of all affected States.

Furthermore, the international peacekeeping force
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is entering
unchartered territory with the deployment of an
Intervention Brigade and unmanned aerial vehicles.
United Nations peacekeepers must take great care to
respect all the relevant international laws and adhere
strictly to their mandate.

Since the consequences of instability in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo fall so heavily on
Rwanda, as has been the case during almost the whole
of the past 20 years, we are eager to take full advantage
of the historic opportunity for peace and security before
us. Despite the serious risks I have outlined, we can see
early and unmistakable signs of progress.

A plan without action is just words, and when it
comes to the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, there have been enough words. There have been
enough speeches made and reports written. And there
has been more than enough grandstanding, especially
by unaccountable actors who seek profit and publicity
from the region's misery. It is time for such forces to
move aside and allow the Framework of hope to move
forward. This is the time for accountable parties to
stand up and step forward. Now is the time for action.

