Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative Salame and Ambassador
Schulz for their briefings.

At present, international attention is focused on
the Libyan situation. The Libyan crisis has undermined
the country's stability and development in political,
security, economic, social and other dimensions. Its
negative impact has spilled over into the Sahel, areas
along the Mediterranean coast and other places, thereby
threatening the security and humanitarian situation
in the surrounding region. The military clashes that
erupted around Tripoli in early April this year are
continuing today, resulting in increasing casualties,
including of civilians. The international community
should step up concerted efforts towards an early
settlement of relevant issues.

First, all Libyan parties should stay committed
to the overarching objective of a political settlement.
The Libyan issue must be resolved through political
means. Parties to the Libyan conflict should focus on
the interests of their country and people and respond
to the calls of the international community by way
of an immediate cessation of hostilities in order to
ease tensions and return to the track of peace talks
and consultations.

Secondly, the international community should
play a constructive role in the settlement of the Libyan
issue. The future of Libya should be determined by its
people. Its political process should be a Libyan-led and
-owned. The international community should respect
Libya's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. Countries that have influence on the ground
should push the Libyan parties to seek consensus and
provide constructive assistance for the parties to reach
a ceasefire and resume political dialogue.

Thirdly, the various mediation mechanisms should
be better coordinated and mutually reinforcing. The
international community should support the good
offices of Secretary-General Guterres and Special
Representative Salame, the United Nations-facilitated
Libyan political settlement process and the continued
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya. At the same time, we hope
that the African Union, the League of Arab States and
other regional organizations will leverage their unique
advantages in order to play an active role. All the
relevant mechanisms should enhance their coordination
so as to create synergies.

Fourthly, the issue of sanctions should be properly
handled. Sanctions must always serve the political
settlement of relevant issues. Under the current
circumstances, the arms embargo on Libya should be
strictly enforced. Caution should be taken to prevent
other sanctions from negatively impacting Libyan
civilians or any third countries. Nor should sanctions
compromise the overall national interests of Libya or
the normal lives of Libyans and their humanitarian
needs. The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
its secretariat and the Panel of Experts should all carry
out their work in strict accordance with the relevant
Council resolutions. China always takes an impartial
stance on the Libyan question and will continue to play
a constructive role in promoting a political settlement
of the Libyan issue.

