Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru): I have the honour
to report to the Security Council on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014), pursuant to paragraph 19 (e) thereof. The last
such briefing took place on 31 January in informal
consultations of the Council; this briefing will therefore
cover the period from 1 February to date. I would like
to focus my remarks on my visit to Amman, Riyadh,
Muscat and Tehran from 30 March to 5 April, together
with most Committee members. Two members of the
Panel ofExperts also accompanied the delegation. It was
the first such visit by a Chair ofthe 2140 Committee. My
written report on the visit was shared with Committee
members on 25 April, and we had an opportunity to
discuss the report in a Committee meeting on 10 May. I
will therefore present only some highlights of the visit.

Generally, I believe that the visit was an important
exercise in raising awareness ofthe purpose and scope of
the sanctions measures concerning Yemen and obtaining
first-hand information on their implementation. It was
also helpful to encourage further interaction, dialogue
and cooperation among the 2140 Committee, its Panel
of Experts and countries in the region, and to become
acquainted with the latest political, security and
humanitarian developments in Yemen, as related to the
mandate of the Committee.

We received general briefings in Amman on
the political process and the implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah agreement from Mr. Griffiths and
Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard, respectively.
We also held a discussion with international
non-governmental organizations on ways to advance
the formal participation of women in the political
process. Concerning the targeted arms embargo, in a
field visit to the Al-Kharj military base, on the outskirts
of Riyadh, we viewed the remnants of arms and related
materials, including unmanned aerial vehicles. As
described by the coalition authorities, those were either
seized in Yemen or used in attacks launched against
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia by the Houthis. The field
Visit was followed by an oral and Visual presentation
in Riyadh. The Government authorities in Muscat
described the efforts they made to prevent the transfer
of illicit items from their borders into Yemen. The
Government authorities in Tehran stated that they were
implementing resolution 2216 (2015).

Concerning the humanitarian situation in Yemen,
the United Nations Resident and Humanitarian
Coordinator, Ms. Lise Grande, and representatives of
the United Nations country team in Amman provided
a general overview. Humanitarian access and respect
for international humanitarian law were also key
components of the discussions held in Riyadh with
coalition authorities and President Hadi Mansour.
During discussions in Amman and Riyadh, the issue
of strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism also arose.

In all the meetings with interlocutors and
Government authorities, I emphasized the importance
of continuing the dialogue and engagement with the
Committee, as well as extending full cooperation to
the Panel of Experts, which was affirmed by all parties
at each meeting. Information-sharing between United
Nations actors and the Panel, as deemed relevant
and in accordance with the respective mandates, was
also encouraged.

In Muscat, Government authorities noted that the
outreach by the Committee to Ansar Allah was very
important. Unfortunately, the Committee was unable to
meet, or otherwise directly communicate, with Ansar
Allah representatives, despite all the efforts made by
the Committee to set up the requested meeting.

My overarching observation is that the engagement
we initiated, as a Committee delegation, with the various
Government interlocutors in the region on sanctions
issues should not be a one-off event, but should continue
through their representatives in New York.

The visit was also useful to convey a strong political
message that the Security Council and its respective
subsidiary organ prioritize the situation in Yemen and
follow closely the events on the ground. I appreciate the
level of engagement of our interlocutors, the depth of
the discussions and the wide support for the political
solution promoted by the United Nations.

Moving on to other Committee activities during
the reporting period, I would like to note that, to date,
the Committee has taken action on three of the six
recommendations addressed to it in the final report (see S/2019/83) ofthe Panel of Experts under resolution 2402
(2018). The remaining three recommendations were
agreed to by the Committee, and I will be undertaking
follow-up accordingly.

Finally, following the adoption of resolution 2456
(2019), by which the Security Council extended the
mandate of the Panel of Experts until 28 March 2020,
the Committee met on 10 May to hear a briefing by the
Panel on its programme of work for the present mandate.
The Panel's midterm update is due to the Committee
no later than 28 July, and I envisage convening a
meeting of the Committee to discuss the update in the
following month.

