Mr. Vieira de Mello: It is an honour to report to
the Council under your presidency this morning, Sir.

It is a pleasure to sit before the Council and the
Prime Minister, together with my friend and colleague,
Jose Ramos-Horta, to provide a briefing on the
situation in East Timor as its transition to independence
rapidly - indeed, it is now only 110 days away -
comes to pass.

With the approach of independence comes the
end of a quite remarkable chapter in the history of the
United Nations, one marked by an extraordinary
collaborative effort. That effort reflected is here, and
for this I must thank the Permanent Representative of
Mauritius and yourself, Mr. Minister, for the Council's
decision to devote so much attention today to the
situation in East Timor. The presence here today also of
Prime Minister John Howard of Australia is yet a
further sign of the depth of support enjoyed by East
Timor.

On 20 May - independence day - East Timor's
dogged and inspiring quest for self-determination will
have been completed. Our happiness, however, should
be and is tempered by the reality that independence
does not mark the end of East Timor's struggles. Far
from it. As members know, the Constituent Assembly
began its work in September 2001. Today, after 20
weeks of active participation and intense debate, the
Assembly has achieved a mammoth task by reviewing
and approving most of the draft constitution.

Just before I left for New York I was invited to an
exchange of views with the Constituent Assembly. I
briefed them on the debate that we will have here
today, and on our hopes for its outcome - hopes that I
shall go into in some detail in just a moment. It will not
surprise the Council to hear that they raised with me
their concerns over border security, the future of
serious crimes prosecution, the ongoing downsizing of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and our plans for a successor
mission. I also approved the Constituent Assembly's
request for a further extension of its mandate until 9
March. I wholeheartedly encouraged, welcomed and
accepted that suggestion. It is in East Timor's best
interest that the members of the Constituent Assembly
be given time to absorb the various internal and
external submissions they have received from different
sources. The additional time will also allow the
members of the Assembly to undertake a more
effective public consultation process.

Although the draft constitution is nearing
completion, the transfer of power from the United
Nations to the East Timorese people requires one final
institutional development: the election of the President.
On 14 April the people of East Timor will elect their
first President in a free and fair election with universal
suffrage, in a secret ballot, and on the basis of a single
national constituency. This time, the Timorese will be
playing a dominant role in implementing the elections.
There will be five electoral commissioners, three of
them East Timorese and two of them international. East
Timorese will head and staff all 13 district electoral
offices, assisted by international electoral officers in
logistics and other supervisory capacities. A few days
ago I issued invitations for international observers to
be present throughout the electoral process.

On 17 April the results will be announced, and
East Timor's new President will be inaugurated just
after midnight on 20 May.
On the international front, foundations continue
to be laid for strong relations between East Timor and
Indonesia. As mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report, last November for the first time we hosted a
meeting of the Joint Border Committee, the third time
that body had met. I am sure that my colleague Jose'
Ramos-Horta will give the Council more details on that
process.

Towards the end of February, Indonesia and East
Timor will also be holding high-level talks at Denpasar,
to be immediately followed by trilateral talks when
East Timor's other immediate neighbour, Australia,
joins the table. The meeting will review progress made
on all bilateral issues that have been the subject of
negotiations between UNTAET and the East Timorese
leadership on the one hand and the Government of
Indonesia on the other over the past two years, and
some new issues, such as maritime delimitation, will be
discussed. We also hope to Sign a number of
arrangements strengthening cooperation between
Indonesia and East Timor in areas such as postal
services and police cooperation. The trilateral talks will
likely discuss regional cooperation, including the
possible establishment of a South-West Pacific forum,
and regional security arrangements, economic
cooperation and development matters.

In addition, East Timor has also been invited to
participate in a ministerial-level regional conference,
co-chaired by Australia and Indonesia, on people
smuggling, trafficking in persons and related
transnational crime; that conference will involve
ministers from up to 40 countries in the region.

Key among the outstanding bilateral issues
requiring resolution at the Denpasar talks is the need to
normalize the land border between East Timor and
West Timor. We have already taken the first steps
towards delimitation of the border. A joint work plan
has been agreed upon, and the first joint
reconnaissance survey will be undertaken next month.
We are also working towards finalizing an arrangement
that will permit movement of people across the border
for customary and traditional purposes and for trade at
markets in the vicinity of the border.

I am happy to report that the security situation in
East Timor remains stable. The border with Indonesia
continues to be secure. There have been few sightings
of militia along the Tactical Coordination Line,
although unregulated markets are increasingly a
problem. Crime rates in East Timor are not increasing,
and the East Timor Police Service is growing into its
duties admirably. Nonetheless, hard-line militia
elements may still pose a long-term threat and, until
there is substantial progress in the establishment of an
operational East Timor Defence Force, the presence of
an appropriate military component will be necessary.
Likewise, until the national police force is fully
deployed, United Nations civilian police will need to
remain in East Timor to assist in training and in actual
enforcement.

Long-term peace and stability will depend on the
degree to which we can overcome the legacy of the
September 1999 violence through progress on the
return of the remaining refugees, by fostering and
facilitating reconciliation and by the effective
prosecution of serious crimes. Those efforts should be
viewed as interdependent.

In a boost to the reconciliation process, on 21
January I swore into office the seven National
Commissioners of the Commission on Reception, Truth
and Reconciliation. That was a major achievement -
and an arduous one, coming some 18 months after the
selection process began. As members know, the
Commission has three main functions: to seek the truth
about human rights violations in East Timor
perpetrated between April 1974 and October 1999;
secondly, to facilitate community reconciliation; and
thirdly, to report to the Government on its work. It is
not a substitute for justice, as serious crimes must
continue to be dealt with by the courts. Rather, it will
complement that process and avoid unduly burdening a
strained court system by dealing with lesser offences
through a community reconciliation process. In the
coming weeks the Commissioners will need to appoint
regional commissioners and their own senior staff.
Securing further donor support will also be critical to
the ability of the Commission to function as intended.

The sensitive task of reconciliation between East
Timorese on both sides of the border is progressing
through a unified reconciliation team on behalf of the
second transitional Government, with the full backing
of Chief Minister Mari Alkatiri, of Xanana Gusmao,
and of my own office. This important process was led,
until recently, by my former chief of staff, who has
now been replaced by the head of our Political Unit.

The justice system is still in a nascent state and
needs continued close attention. I know only too well
that this is an area in which we have faced particularly
significant problems, to an understandable extent since
there was nothing - nothing - left of a justice system
or its infrastructure in September 1999. Today, there
are only 25 East Timorese judges and 13 prosecutors,
the majority of whom have had only secondary
education and less than two years of training and
experience. On occasion, inappropriate sentences have
been handed down, leading to retrials. Cases of
intimidation during trials have occurred, in one
instance resulting in the closure of the Baucau
courthouse. The lack of resources, including
interpreters and court staff, has led to delayed hearings
and unduly prolonged detention of suspects.

Members of the Council themselves identified
shortcomings in the administration of justice in East
Timor, particularly in the area of the prosecution of
serious crimes, in their report of November 2000
following the Council's mission to East Timor
(S/2000/1105). In line with our overall strategy, day-to-
day management of justice has been devolved onto the
Government. Nonetheless, I still bear ultimate
responsibility for the administration of justice under
the UNTAET mandate. I have made and am making a
concerted effort to ensure that UNTAET cooperates
closely with the public administration to address the
problems faced within this sector and to ensure that by
independence we will be able to leave behind strong
institutions within the justice sector; these will be
critical for the stability of the new country.

To establish a balanced approach ensuring
equality between prosecution and defence, as well as
appropriate capacity for the courts to adjudicate, we are
looking particularly at the establishment of a legal aid
service, as well as at support for court administration. I
have proposed a set of immediate action points that
support both the Special Panels for Serious Crimes and
court administration more generally. They include
immediate recruitment of international judges,
recruitment of a Special Panels administrative
coordinator and a judges' associate for the national
judges, as well as enhancement of the capacity of the
courts for simultaneous translation. We are proposing a
plan for the mobilization of external resources, which
will support the courts, particularly in the areas of
transcription services and equipment, witness expenses,
Internet access and library and research materials. An
action plan is to be developed to ensure a coordinated
approach to court listing, prison liaison, the publication
of court documents and resource mobilization.

I have also endorsed a plan to ensure the
establishment of a legal aid service. This has been
outstanding for too long and is particularly important
in the view of the current resource disparity between
the prosecution service and the office of the public
defenders. The establishment of the service will allow
for the creation of an independent statutory body,
which, although funded through appropriations from
the East Timor Public Administration, will also be able
to receive independent funding, human resource
support and other types of support.

Considerable improvements have been made in
the area of serious crimes prosecution in terms of
management of human and other resources. The Office
of the General Prosecutor, now headed by an East
Timorese prosecutor, is supported by an East Timorese
Deputy Prosecutor for Ordinary Crimes and a new
international Deputy Prosecutor for Serious Crimes.
The selection and management of staffing and
resources provided to the Serious Crimes Unit has been
enhanced in order to meet key goals for 2002 and, as of
this month, teams of investigators are being based in
several districts to promote greater efficiency and to
create a closer relationship with the communities in
which the investigations are undertaken. It is
anticipated that, over the course of 2002, these changes
should permit an increase in the number of indictments
over and above the 10 priority cases of crimes against
humanity. These tasks can be accomplished only with
the full funding of approved positions from the
assessed budget, as well as continued support from
donors for additional specialized expertise and
resources in such areas as forensic and investigation
experts, translators and transport.

In October 2001 my deputy met with the newly
appointed Attorney-General of Indonesia. At that
meeting it was agreed that regular monthly meetings on
justice should be held with a view to maintaining a
dialogue on issues of mutual concern. Following that
visit the new East Timorese General Prosecutor paid a
courtesy call on the Attorney-General of Indonesia, in
November. The first of the monthly meetings was
finally held in Denpasar in mid-January.
I very much welcome President Megawati's
selection of 18 judges for the Ad Hoc Human Rights
Court. We are now keen to see the judges and
prosecutors sworn in, court staff recruited and a date
set for the commencement of the trials of the first
group of suspects, who were publicly identified in
early September 2000 by the then Attorney-General of
Indonesia, Marzuki Darusman. This is all the more
important given that it is now well over two years since
the destruction of 1999.

The recent Supreme Court decision in Jakarta to
increase, to between five and seven years, the
sentences of three of the men convicted of murdering
our colleagues from the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
Atambua in September 2000 is a welcome move, going
some way towards demonstrating, in Indonesia, as in
the rest of the world, the opprobrium felt over those
foul acts.

Finally, progress has been reached in cooperation
on investigations into the killing of Private Manning of
New Zealand, with several accused now standing trial
in Jakarta for his murder. A similar model of
cooperation has been agreed on for the investigation
into the killing of Private Devi Ram Jaisi of Nepal.

Real momentum on cooperation with Indonesia in
the area of serious crimes remains elusive, however. It
is of the utmost concern that we have been unable to
ensure that the Memorandum of Understanding on
legal, judicial and human rights related matters, which
I signed with the Attorney-General of Indonesia in
April 2000, becomes fully operational.

In the remaining four months before
independence, UNTAET, together with the Prosecutor-
General's Office, will continue to meet with the
Indonesian authorities to push for further progress on
serious crimes; these working-level meetings must
become a reality and take place on a regular basis. For
the people of East Timor, peace and reconciliation
efforts will mean little if the principal perpetrators of
atrocities committed in 1999 are not brought to justice.

Finally, I should say that we welcomed the visit
to East Timor and Indonesia of Ambassador Leandro
Despouy, the Chairman of the Commission on Human
Rights, who was effectively able to refocus the
spotlight onto the outstanding need for justice in the
area of serious crimes, whether that justice is to be
served in Dili or Jakarta. I hope that his efforts help us
attain concrete results.

Moving to the question of refugees, returns
increased during this reporting period, reaching a total
of some 192,000. This still leaves perhaps up to 60,000
refugees in West Timor. We will redouble our efforts,
in partnership with the second transitional government
and UNHCR, together with the civil and military
authorities in Indonesia, to encourage as many of the
remaining refugees to return to East Timor before
independence. Cross-border visits, such as the highly
successful visit of Xanana Gusmao to West Timor last
November, appear to be one of the most effective ways
of countering misinformation and fostering
reconciliation and repatriation. At the same time, we
have increased our efforts to provide clear, objective
information to refugees on the newly established
reconciliation commission. As for those responsible for
past criminal acts, we will ensure that they will be
treated fairly within the developing justice system of
East Timor.

While security and militia intimidation continue
to be factors inhibiting refugee returns, economic
factors, including lack of shelter and access to
pensions, are also significant deterrents. I have been
looking into ways to improve the shelter for returnees,
and I would like to highlight here that more resources
are needed to improve this aspect of life for the East
Timorese and for returning refugees, particularly
during the current rainy season.

It is also important that the arrangements entered
into between East Timor and Indonesia on pensions and
termination payments to former East Timorese
employees of the Government of Indonesia begin to
bear fruit. Just before I left Dili, we handed a further
20,000 registration forms to the Indonesian authorities,
and I am hopeful that the first pension and termination
payments in East Timor will be made in March 2002.

Those former Indonesian government employees
and pensioners who opt for East Timorese citizenship
will, however, stop receiving their benefits at
independence. That is why a special fund is being
established to offset those lost pensions. The special
fund was launched in Jakarta on 27 November 2001 as
part of the Joint Appeal of the United Nations and the
Government of Indonesia. I would like to thank the
Governments of Indonesia and Portugal, as well as the
European Community, which have pledged about $4.5
million for the fund thus far. The fund will, however,
require substantially more capital if we hope to
generate meaningful benefits for its 30,000 intended
beneficiaries. It will prove difficult to encourage the
9,000 remaining former government employees and
pensioners to return to East Timor, together with their
families, without this alternative. Support for the
special fund is thus another key priority over the next
60 days.

In December, a major breakthrough was reached
between East Timor and UNTAET officials, led by
Chief Minister Alkatiri, with industry currently
developing a major petroleum field in the Timor Sea. A
tax and fiscal package was agreed and will maximize
petroleum revenues to East Timor by allowing gas
development in the Timor Sea to go forward. This
development will proceed under the terms of the treaty
negotiated last year with Australia, which will enter
into force upon East Timor's independence.

Overall revenues to East Timor from the
combined gas and liquids phases of Bayu-Undan - the
field under development - will be much larger than
previously forecast. However, revenues from this field
in the first few years may not be as high as initially
predicted because of the revised fiscal terms and also
because production is now more conservatively
estimated.

I should now like to turn to the successor
mission, a subject that continues to occupy much time
within UNTAET and the Second Transitional
Government. Our unprecedented advance planning has
resulted in a framework for the successor mission,
which is attached to the report of the Secretary-
General. In this simple proposal, the Secretary-General
delimits the scope of action for the future peace
operation, and, maybe more importantly, bases its
scope on the needs articulated by the future host
Government and current UNTAET managers. In other
words, it is a consensus document on which all parties
at the operational level are in agreement. The hope is
that such an exercise allows for a better synergy and
sense of a common goal in the successor mission. I am
confident that this is being achieved, and I commend it
to the Council for its consideration and approval.

Briefly, let me summarize the main contents of
the framework. First and foremost, the mission will be
guided by the principle identified in the Council's
presidential statement of 31 October last, namely, to
ensure that all operational responsibilities are fully
devolved to the East Timorese authorities as soon as
this is feasible without jeopardizing stability and
progress made. The mission is expected to achieve its
core mandate in around two years from independence,
provided the fundamental conditions for
implementation continue to prevail.

In this regard, I would like to reiterate here an
important observation in the Secretary-General's
report: that funding of the East Timor Police Service
and the East Timor Defence Force will be essential to
the achievement of the core mandate. As members
know, both are highly under-resourced and will require
bilateral and other voluntary assistance to be able to
function effectively.

The civilian activities of the mission will focus
on providing international civilian assistance for core
functions in public administration. As members know,
the civilian experts would provide crucial support to
the emergent East Timorese Administration. The
concept for this was extensively discussed at the last
Council meeting. Other civilian activities will include
providing assistance in serious crimes investigations,
as well as human rights mainstreaming.

On the police side, as I understand it, there is no
precedent for nationwide United Nations executive
policing responsibility in an independent State. In
short, overall command of the East Timorese police,
together with the United Nations civilian police
(CIVPOL), will rest with the international police
Commissioner. It has been clearly agreed, at a meeting
that I attended with Chief Minister Alkatiri just before
coming to New York, that once a unit is handed over to
an East Timorese officer, he or she will continue to
report up a single chain of command that, as I said, will
be led by the United Nations civilian police.

We - the Government and UNTAET both -
believe this is absolutely essential to ensure
coordination of police response in the field. During this
period, shadowing the international police
Commissioner will be the East Timorese
Commissioner-in-training, whom I appointed in
October last year. We are working together with the
Government to ensure that on independence the
Government concludes with the United Nations an
agreement which will addresses the role of the police
component and its relationship with the new East
Timorese police force.

CIVPOL activities in the future mission will
focus on finishing the job of developing the East
Timorese police, which will be at a little more than half
its target strength on the day of independence. The East
Timor Police Service is expected to reach full capacity
by January 2004. A gradual handover of individual
police activities to the national units and districts,
under unified command, will begin in May this year
and likely end in January 2004. The handover will be
contingent upon a positive assessment of personnel and
institutional realities, and we are currently identifying
the specific criteria for appropriate United Nations
certification and accreditation.

Subject to the timely achievement of certification,
CIVPOL will start with a force of 1,250 at
independence and be reduced by an average of 5 per
cent every month, leaving about 100 officers by
January 2004 working in a purely advisory role. As
CIVPOL reduces its size, it will be increasingly
important for police-contributing nations to provide
senior police officers with capacity-building and
advisory skills. This will be absolutely critical to the
success of this component of the successor mission.

On the military side, the mission will continue
providing support for external security and territorial
integrity, initially with a force of 5,000. Once the
border areas are delimited and national border-control
structures are in place, the size of the military
component will be reduced, subject, needless to say, to
the overriding caveat of prevailing security conditions.

Furthermore, it will be vital for the mission to
ensure timely handover of responsibilities from the
military component to the East Timor Defence Force
and relevant Public Administration departments. As
with the police, UNTAET is working together with the
Public Administration of East Timor to ensure that
immediately upon independence a formal
understanding is in place to address clearly and
unambiguously the role of the United Nations military
and its relationship with the East Timor Defence Force.

The Secretary-General has recommended that,
before wrapping up UNTAET, our mandate be
extended until the date of independence, on 20 May.
This would allow UNTAET to make the necessary
preparations for the presidential elections and events
leading up to independence day, as well as going some
way to completing the priority tasks that I have just
outlined. I very much hope that you concur and make
such a decision in the coming 48 hours.

Nonetheless, we are continuing - and
determinedly so - with a simultaneous wind-down of
the mission to ensure we minimize trauma caused by
the end of UNTAET and the commencement of a
smaller, more limited mission. I am confident that we
will meet the Secretary-General's commitment to a 75
per cent cut of international personnel in the Public
Administration by the end of our mandate. Following a
reduction of 35 per cent by November last year, we
will be reducing our staff by an additional 10 per cent
each month over four months starting tomorrow, 31
January - when 140 international staff members will
be leaving the mission - and continuing through the
end of April. This will ensure that our 75 per cent
reduction is achieved, leaving around 200 international
staff and 50 United Nations Volunteers in government
at the end of the mandate.

This downsizing process has been particularly
difficult, as the government bodies and ministries are
in dire need of international staff everywhere. Indeed, I
believe it was the Council's support, in principle, for a
continued post-independence provision of critical
assistance to the East Timorese Government that
encouraged the ministries to make these difficult cuts,
these extremely difficult choices. As you know, the
resultant list of 100 posts falls within the areas of
finance and central services, justice, internal systems
and essential services.

Meanwhile, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and UNTAET, together with the
Government, have also agreed on job descriptions and
specifications for the posts, and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has prepared the United
Nations vacancy announcements, which can now be
viewed on the United Nations web site.

In addition, a recruitment process for the 100
functions is being designed. It is our goal to have
experts arrive in theatre early enough to overlap with
their international predecessors, unless current
incumbents are selected. In this context, I appeal for
continued support by the Council to ensure timely
action and an early mandate of the successor mission,
since this would allow our collective early planning
and preparations to bear fruit.

The East Timorese Government will also require
international assistance in support of social and
economic development and poverty-reduction
programmes. The ongoing UNDP study has identified
some 200 such functions as crucial for that purpose,
and voluntary arrangements are being sought to meet
these requirements. Members of the Constituent
Assembly are rightly anxious to ensure that the
development of East Timor's health and education
sectors, in particular, continues beyond independence,
and it is through these positions that we will be able to
help assuage these concerns.

To ensure the division of responsibility among
principal players who will assist East Timor in these
areas, I have been consulting with the United Nations
agencies and other entities, seeking their support in
principle to help fill the 200 civilian technical
assistance posts. These will also be circulated to
Member States.

We have also been reducing the number of
international posts outside the Public Administration.

Starting with my own extended office - which
includes public information, legal affairs, political
affairs, human rights and others - the reduction will

be in monthly tranches, resulting in an overall
reduction of 40 per cent by the end of April. Similarly,
our division of the UNTAET administration is cutting
back by 40 per cent.

Another element that is key to a smooth transition
is the incorporation within the Government of essential
common services and the transfer of United Nations
assets to the East Timorese Government in support of
those services. A preliminary list of assets for potential
disposal has undergone a financial-sustainability
review, and the final list of desired assets will be
presented to the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions next month
for its consideration.

Finally, in the home stretch to independence, the
Government and I have asked for East Timor to be
deleted from the list of non-self-governing territories. I
expect the Government immediately to seek
membership in the United Nations. This territory,
which was an orphan of the United Nations, will then
become a full-grown member of our family.

As we approach the conclusion of this remarkable
exercise, I, on behalf of the East Timorese Transitional
Government and on behalf of Jose Ramos-Horta, invite
members of the Council to attend the Independence
Day celebrations. You visited once before, providing
welcome support in a most sombre time. We now very
much hope that you can visit in altogether more
uplifting circumstances. You will have good reason to
be proud.

