Mr. Tsui: In pursuance of Security Council
resolution 1343 (2001), the Secretary-General, in his
report contained in document S/2001/939, provides a
preliminary assessment of the potential economic,
humanitarian and social impact on the Liberian
population of possible follow-up sanctions by the
Council. The report focuses on three possible areas: the
timber industry, rubber production and export, and the
ship register. The methodology that we used in putting
together the report first established a baseline of
current economic, social and humanitarian situations
and trends against which potential impacts of possible
future sanctions are assessed.

Secondly, we gathered sector-specific information
relating to these three areas. In addition to available
reports, interviews were conducted with sector leaders,
Government representatives and United Nations
agencies working with those industries, and
information was obtained from field observations. An
analysis was then made of each of these sectors
regarding direct and indirect employment generated by
industry and Government revenues.

I wish to say a few words about the present
situation in Liberia. The civil war between 1989 and
1996 took a heavy toll on the economy, with disastrous
consequences for the social fabric of the country. The
widespread destruction and looting of both the
country's physical infrastructures and economic assets
have further worsened the economic situation of
Liberia. Today Liberia is one of the least developed
countries in the world, due to its low average per capita
gross domestic product, which in 2000 was $177 -
less than half its 1980 value. The country also suffers
from a lack of economic diversification and poor
prospects for sustained economic development.

As far as the humanitarian situation is concerned,
most of the country's population is severely affected by
high levels of unemployment and lack of access to
basic services such as food, water, health care and
education. What was once the country's breadbasket,
the Lofa County, also suffers from occasional fighting.
This has resulted in a large-scale humanitarian and
human rights crisis, with acute implications for the
subregion.

This rather fragile humanitarian situation could
worsen if further sanctions are not accompanied by an
increase in the response of donors. Donor support for
the 2000 Consolidated Appeal has been quite
disappointing so far. Only 5 per cent of the amount
appealed for - $7.2 million - has been provided by
donors. We take this opportunity to reiterate our
request to Member States to take the necessary
measures to encourage and sustain financial support for
the humanitarian agencies operating in Liberia.

I would like to say a few words about the
potential impact of possible future sanctions on
Liberia, starting with the timber industry. A ban on
Liberian timber exports would probably cause the loss
of up to 10,000 relatively well-paid jobs. With an
average of 9 dependants for each employed person, it is
estimated that 90,000 to 95,000 people may lose their
primary means of support. The shortfall of an estimated
$10 million annually in salaries to timber workers
would also have carry-over effects in other sectors,
including supplies for the community of timber
workers and shipping-related and plywood factories.
Moreover, the Liberian timber industry provides $7.7
million in fees, taxes and royalties to the Government,
representing about 9 per cent of the Liberian national
budget.

The rubber industry employs 20,000 people, who
would lose their jobs, as well as the 5,000 to 10,000
independent owners of small-scale rubber holdings.
Including their dependants, a total of 225,000 persons
would be directly affected by restrictions on Liberian
rubber.

As for the Liberian ship registry, the Liberian
Bureau of Maritime Affairs is a register for 1,600
commercial ships, generating $18 million in 2000 for
the Government of Liberia, which is 20 per cent of the
Liberian national budget. The Bureau employs less
than a hundred Liberians, and most of the registry's
work is carried out in offices abroad. Therefore, little
direct impact on the Liberian population is anticipated
from possible restrictions on the ship register. The
revenues from it, however, would be seriously affected,
and they represent the Government's largest and most
stable financial source.

In conclusion, the Liberian economy is highly
dependent on the export of primary products and is
highly vulnerable to ongoing political and economic
instability. Any additional burden imposed on this
already weakened economy would have a negative
impact on employment, social services and
Government revenues, as well as further negative
effects on the financial environment. These additional
aggravating factors and their implications would
particularly affect the most vulnerable in the Liberian
population, given that their resilience and coping
capacities are next to exhausted.

Should the Council consider additional sanctions,
it may also wish to consider establishing mechanisms
to regularly monitor their impact on the humanitarian
and economic situation of Liberia and the unintended
negative effects on its population.

