Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): First of
all, I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov
for his briefing. I welcome the new Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, Ambassador
Pierce, to the Security Council.

The question of Palestine is at the core of the
Middle East issue and fundamental to peace in that
region. Only when the Palestinian question is fully
resolved will the crisis in the Middle East be eased for
good. The situation in Palestine and Israel is tense at
present. Settlement construction continues. Violence is
increasing incrementally. The humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip is dire. China is worried about all of
these things.

We call on the Security Council and the international
community to remain united in an effort to advance
the political settlement of the question of Palestine.
We believe that the two-State solution is the right way
to resolve the question of Palestine. The international
community should uphold the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative, and on that basis redouble its efforts
to relaunch the negotiations, faithfully implement
resolution 2334 (2016), put an end to settlement activities
in the occupied territories and prevent violence against
civilians. All parties should remain calm, exercise
restraint and meet each other halfway. That will help
foster the conditions necessary for the resumption of
dialogue. Parties with major influence in the Middle
East should also play a constructive role in that regard.

China remains committed to supporting and
facilitating the Middle East peace process. We support
the establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State on the basis of the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. China will continue
to actively promote the four-point proposal put
forward by Chinese President Xi Jinping to promote
the resolution of the question of Palestine, calling for
the advancement of the political process on the basis
of the two-State solution; adherence to the philosophy
of shared, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security; greater coordination of international efforts
to maximize synergy for peace; and a holistic approach
to achieving peace through development. China will
continue to play a constructive role in the Middle East
peace process. China remains open to any initiative
or effort aimed at achieving a political settlement of
the Palestinian question, easing the tensions between
Palestine and Israel, and facilitating the achievement of
the two-State solution.
The question of Jerusalem is complex and delicate
and must be addressed as a fundamental issue within the
broader Palestinian question. All parties should respect
its multifaceted history, uphold fairness and justice,
implement international consensus, strive for peaceful
coexistence and act in accordance with relevant United
Nations resolutions so as to reach a solution that
accommodates all the interests of all parties through
final-status negotiations. Palestine and Israel should
respect each other's right to existence and avoid any
action that may aggravate the current situation.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
PalestineRefugeesintheNearEast(UNRWA) hasplayed
an indispensable role in alleviating the humanitarian
crisis in the occupied territories. China welcomes the
success of the UNRWA Extraordinary Ministerial
Conference on financing, which was recently held in
Rome. We call on all parties to scale up their support
for UNRWA and countries hosting Palestinian refugees
so as to steadily improve the humanitarian conditions
in which the refugees are living.

The meeting rose at 11 a.m.
