Mr. Heumann (Israel): We meet here to discuss the
impact of war and conflict on our most valuable and
precious resource: our children. We are at a time when
the plight of these children is more desperate than ever.
Approximately 250 million children, one out of every
nine boys and girls on the planet, are forced to grow up
in a war zone. In 2015, when the number of displaced
persons worldwide reached an all-time high, 50 per
cent were under the age of 18.

The ongoing violence in so many parts of the
world has destroyed families, leaving the youngest to
struggle to escape the devastation of war on their own.
Nearly 100,000 asylum-seekers across 78 countries
are unaccompanied or separated minors, facing their
difficult fates vulnerable and alone - 100,000.

The stories emerging from those who managed
to escape are horrifying and alarming. These figures
are staggering, but we must not allow ourselves to be
overwhelmed by the enormity of the challenges before
us. Each and every child deserves a future free of war
and violence.

All the trend lines show an increase in the most
horrific forms of violence and oppression, directed
at the most helpless among us. Children are used as
suicide bombers and exploited as sex slaves, and girls
and boys not old enough to drive a car are being forced
to operate weapons of war.

It is difficult to find the words to describe the
scale of the atrocities we have seen in the past few
years - acts of sustained barbarism and cruelty that
shock the conscience of the civilized world. Thousands
and thousands ofchildren have been killed in Al-Assad's
brutal campaign against the people of Syria, while tens
of thousands live in constant fear for their lives. Torture
in State prisons, barrel bombs exploding in the streets
and shells landing in their homes: the worst atrocities
have not spared the children of Syria.

In Yemen, widespread and systematic attacks by
the Saudi-led coalition against civilian targets such
as hospitals, schools, and mosques continue. Almost
2,000 children were killed or maimed last year. The
Saudi-led coalition alone is responsible for the deaths
of and injuries to about 1,200 children.

Across West Africa, 44 suicide bombings were
carried out by children in 2015, three quarters of them
by young girls. This is the devastating reality of child
sacrifice in the twenty-first century. And these are the
unimaginable circumstances faced by young girls like
Fati, one of the hundreds of young girls kidnapped,
imprisoned and forcibly married by Boko Haram. Fati
described how the captive girls would volunteer as
suicide bombers, offering to strap bombs to themselves,
in the desperate hope of escaping from a life filled with
constant fear, terrible hunger and daily sexual violence.
Fati escaped with her life, but an untold number of
children still live this daily nightmare. Such brutality
and cruelty against children not only tear at our hearts;
they unravel entire communities and destroy the fabric
of a society.

In Israel, we know all too well what it means to
face enemies who systematically exploit children
as weapons of war. In the north, the internationally
recognized terrorist group Hizbullah has transformed
the villages of southern Lebanon into terror outposts.
They place rocket launchers next to kindergartens where
youngsters play and store missiles under the homes to
which children return after school. For years, Israel
has warned the Council of the dangers of the illegal
smuggling and the continued build-up in southern
Lebanon, but our warnings have fallen on deaf cars.

In Gaza, the terrorist group Hamas uses young
boys to dig their terror tunnels and uses children
of all ages, along with their mothers and fathers and
brothers and sisters, to serve as human shields. Hamas
deliberately embeds their terror infrastructure in the
schools, hospitals and civilian neighbourhoods of
Gaza, knowingly placing their own children in harm's
way. No child should play in a schoolyard that doubles
as a rocket-launching site, and no child should spend
his or her summer being drilled on how to make and
engage in war.

Contrary to all of the basic international legal
rights of children, Hamas conducts annual military
camps and recruits thousands of children. Instead of
learning how to swim or play soccer there, the children
of Gaza are taught how to assemble automatic weapons
and operate shoulder-fired missiles. But Hamas is not
only exploiting their own children, it is also teaching
them to see every Israeli child as a potential target. We
were reminded of this all too clearly when, just last
month, a rocket fired from Gaza hit a preschool in the
Israeli town of Sderot. Fortunately, this time no one

was hurt, as the rocket exploded just a short time after
the schoolchildren had left the building. Unfortunately,
we know that Hamas will continue to target our homes
and schools, to make our children live in constant fear
of the next attack.

It is the responsibility of leaders everywhere to
protect children at all costs from the ravages of war and
to shelter them in a protective environment where they
can thrive. Unfortunately, the Palestinians are failing at
this most critical responsibility. Instead of nourishing
their youth with the dreams of a bright future,
Palestinian children are fed a steady diet of hatred for
Israel and glorification of violence in the lessons they
learn in school, in the sermons they hear in the mosque,
and in streets that are named after terrorists.

As the recently published Quartet report states,

"Palestinians who commit terrorist attacks
are often glorified publicly as 'heroic martyrs'.
Many widely circulated images depict individuals
committing terrorist acts with slogans encouraging
violence and [this] is particularly affecting young
people." (S/2016/595, annex, p. 4)

We are paying the price ofthis glorification ofterror
on the streets of Israel today. Since October, Israel has
faced a tide of terror. Forty people have been killed and
more than 500 injured as Israelis continue to endure
attack after attack, day after day, week after week, and
month after month. In this wave of ongoing violence,
47 of those acts of terror - stabbings, shootings and
car rammings - have been carried out by Palestinian
youth under the age of 18. They have attacked, injured
and killed men and women of all ages, including 22
Israeli children.

Just last month, a 17-year-old Palestinian stabbed a
13-year-old Israeli girl to death, in her bed, as she slept,
in her family's home. Imagine a young girl sleeping
comfortably in her bed stabbed over and over in cold
blood by a child just a few years older than she is.
Children killing children: this is the direct result of the
venomous hatred preached to children in Palestinian
society. For the sake ofpeace, for the sake ofthe children
on both sides, the international community must send
a clear message to the Palestinian leadership. Children
are our most precious gift. They deserve to grow up in
a society that fosters a vision of hope and promotes an
education that preaches peace instead of hate, tolerance
instead of violence and mutual understanding instead
of martyrdom.

Before concluding, let me say that earlier this
month, the world lost a true man of conscience and
a voice for humanity. Elie Wiesel lived through the
horrors of the Holocaust as a child, and throughout his
adult life he warned of the dangers of failing to stand
up to evil. Wiesel famously said, "The opposite of love
is not hate. It is indifference".

The voices of children around the world are crying
out to us for a sign that they have not been forgotten.
We dare not be indifferent to these cries.

