Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for me to participate in this
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in the
Sudan, while just steps away from this chamber, 106
States Members of the United Nations are
simultaneously meeting as an assembly of States
parties of the International Criminal Court. In effect,
just steps away from this chamber, there is a firm
commitment to eradicating impunity for the most
atrocious crimes perpetrated by evil. Just steps away
from this chamber, there is a firm commitment to fight
the banalization of evil.

Thus far, Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo of the
International Criminal Court has submitted seven
reports to the Security Council. Seven times, the
Prosecutor has come to enumerate the atrocities that
have occurred and are occurring in Darfur -
coordinated and planned atrocities carried out against
civilians who were not participants in any conflict. In
the report he has submitted today, the Prosecutor has
laid out the facts with absolute clarity. These are not an
incidental by-product of war; they are a calculated
crime. Seven times he has shared with the Council the
degree of cooperation - or, to be more precise,
non-cooperation - that the Government of the Sudan
has offered. Seven times, pursuant to a mandate of this
Council under resolution 1593 (2005), the Prosecutor
has thoroughly fulfilled his responsibility.

We would like to be able to say the same of this
Council. The actions of the Council, and thus of the
member States gathered around this table that give life
to it, have clearly been inadequate to the situation in
Darfur. Internal differences and political calculations
have thus far impeded effective action by the Council.
What we can agree on, although it is not of much
comfort, is that the Council has complied with the final
paragraph of resolution 1593 (2005), in that it has
remained seized of the matter. However, the
perpetuation of the situation is in and of itself part of
the problem, because as time passes, the Council runs
the risk of accommodating evil as the graves continue
to be filled in Darfur.

I exhort the Council to find a solution that
adequately addresses the imperatives of both peace and
justice. It certainly cannot continue with what, as time
passes, seems to be a policy of appeasement of
Khartoum and of indifference to the atrocities that are
occurring in Darfur. The Council must stop delaying
and subordinating the imperatives of justice to political
calculations, or, to cite the Prosecutor, thinking that
political negotiations will solve everything. Just as, in
adopting resolution 1593 (2005), the Security Council
had the political will to refer the situation in Darfur to
the International Criminal Court, it must now act
accordingly and demand surrender by Khartoum of the
accused, Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb. By blatantly
and repeatedly failing to comply with its obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005), the Government of the
Sudan is not only affronting the Court, but openly
defying the authority of the Council and the binding
nature of resolutions adopted under Chapter VII.

The Government of the Sudan is toying with us,
toying with human dignity, toying with the authority of
this Council. The appointment of Ahmad Harun as
Minister of State for Humanitarian Affairs, as a
member of the negotiating committee of the National
Congress Party-Sudan People's Liberation Movement/
Army and as supervisor of the population census in
South Darfur, among other responsibilities, is concrete
evidence of the cynicism of the authorities in
Khartoum. We can no longer afford to appease such
cynicism.

The facts speak for themselves. We cannot plead
ignorance. If, through indifference or for the sake of
political convenience, this Council does not make its
best effort to enforce the cooperation of Khartoum with
the International Criminal Court and its surrender
without further delay of Ahmad Harun and Ali
Kushayb in conformity with resolution 1593 (2005), in
the not-too-distant future we will once again be
invoking our promise of "never again". We, the
civilized world, made that same promise following the

Holocaust, and more recently following events in
Kampuchea, Bosnia, Rwanda or Kosovo, and are
currently putting it to the test in the Sudan.

It may be uncomfortable to raise the failures and
ghosts of the past, but at times we must recall them in
order to avoid making the same mistakes. I therefore
take the liberty of quoting some of the conclusions
contained in the landmark independent reports
prepared by the United Nations in response to previous
situations in which the Security Council, above all, had
the opportunity and responsibility to act.

Because of the limited time available, I will refer
only to two reports and two previous situations, and
make abbreviated references to some of the lessons
learned from a past that we do not have the luxury of
forgetting, no matter how uncomfortable it may be. I
turn to those independent reports not only because
Costa Rica endorses their conclusions and believes in
their full applicability to the situation now before us,
but also because we believe that they are the result of a
dispassionate and detailed analysis of the errors of the
past. We do so because we believe that, despite the
specificities of each case, the lessons of Srebrenica and
Rwanda, for example, should resonate with full force
within this chamber. The ghosts of Srebrenica and
Rwanda should awaken us to the fact that in the Sudan
there are some who believe that the graves in Darfur
are not yet sufficiently full.

Here is the first ghost. The Security Council
should recall the contents of the report of the
Secretary-General on Srebrenica of 15 November
1999. I would like to quote the conclusion of the
report:

"The cardinal lesson of Srebrenica is that a
deliberate and systematic attempt to terrorize,
expel or murder an entire people must be met
decisively with all necessary means, and with the
political will to carry the policy through to its
logical conclusion." (A/54/549, para. 502)

Allow me also to refer to the following words of
repentance contained in the report, which accurately
describe what I hope many of us here think of the
situation in Darfur:

"Through error, misjudgement and an inability to
recognize the scope of the evil confronting us, we
failed to do our part to help save the people from
the Serb campaign of mass murder. No one
regrets more than we the opportunities for
achieving peace and justice that were missed. No
one laments more than we the failure of the
international community to take decisive action
to halt the suffering Srebrenica crystallized a
truth understood only too late by the United
Nations and the world at large: that Bosnia was as
much a moral cause as a military conflict." (ibid., para. 503)

Lastly, fearing that we are heading towards a
repetition of the past, allow me to highlight the
following paragraph of the report of the Secretary-
General on Srebrenica:

"In the end, the only meaningful and lasting
amends we can make to the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina who put their faith in the
international community is to do our utmost not
to allow such horrors to recur. When the
international community makes a solemn promise
to safeguard and protect innocent civilians from
massacre, then it must be willing to back its
promise with the necessary means. Otherwise, it
is surely better not to raise hopes and
expectations in the first place." (ibia'., para. 504)

Second ghost. History repeats itself. The report of
the Independent Inquiry commission of 16 December
1999 on the genocide in Rwanda clearly attributes the
failure of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda to "a lack of resources and a lack of will to
take the commitment which would have been necessary
to prevent or to stop the genocide" (S/1999/1257, p. 30). Although, since in the specific case of the
Sudan we have budgeted some $2.126 billion for the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
peacekeeping operations, no lack of resources seems to
apply, we still need, starting yesterday, to muster
within the Security Council the political will needed to
face up to the responsibilities that the tragedy in Darfur
calls for. As the report also demonstrated - and I
believe this to be particularly pertinent in light of the
mission that has taken some Council members to
Khartoum - it is a cause for concern that more
"emphasis [was placed] on a cease-fire, more than the
moral outrage against the massacres, which was
growing in the international community" (ibid, p. 41).

Similarly, the report of the Independent Inquiry
commission emphasized the dilemma that we are once

again facing as to whether to negotiate with those in
control, irrespective of the acts they may have
committed. The commission did not doubt that, in its
view,

"the United Nations had an obligation to make
absolutely clear to the members of the
Government the individual responsibility which
accompanies the commission of genocide and war
crimes" (ibid., p. 39).

Finally, in a situation that is painfully similar to the
one before us, the commission considered that "[t]he
Security Council bears a responsibility for its lack of
political will to do more to stop the killing" (ibid., 
p. 32.

In Costa Rica, currently a non-permanent member
of the Council, we refuse to believe that we, the
international community, are inevitably heading
towards a new "never again". We are worried,
however, by the apparently boundless capacity of some
to face shame. We are likewise worried that the
inability of the Council to respond to evil with dignity,
promptly and with the full moral authority of the
Charter of the United Nations could also be boundless
in this specific instance. The Council knows of the
evidence of the crimes committed; it knows that the
guilty parties have been identified; and it knows which
Government authorities protect and shelter them. All
we need is for the States members of the Security
Council to have the decency to muster the political will
necessary to enforce the full compliance of resolution
1593 (2005) by the authorities in Khartoum. Enough
appeasement - the time has passed to continue
accommodating evil.

Allow me to end by highlighting the final
paragraph of the report of the Secretary-General on
Srebrenica, as it explicitly establishes that the
imperatives of peace and justice are mutually
supporting.

"The men who have been charged with this crime
against humanity reminded the world and, in
particular, the United Nations, that evil exists in
the world. They taught us also that the United
Nations global commitment to ending conflict
does not preclude moral judgements, but makes
them necessary." (A/54/549, para. 506)

Costa Rica trusts in the International Criminal
Court and would also like to trust in the capacity of the

Security Council to address this complex situation.
That, however, will depend on the States members of
the Council. As they know, Costa Rica is coordinating
the drafting of a presidential statement on the issue
before us. We hope that all - and I stress, all - States
members of the Council will cooperate with us in
sending a forceful message commensurate with the
tragic events unfolding. The confidence that Costa Rica
would like to have in the Security Council's
effectiveness in this specific case will depend on
whether or not we muster the decency to acknowledge
the facts, to enforce full compliance with resolution
1593 (2005) and not to appease those who still feel that
the graves in Darfur are not sufficiently full.

