Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mr. Zahir Tanin for his briefing. I also welcome
Mr. Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. and thank him for his
statement. I also listened carefully to the statement of
Ms. Citaku.

Resolution 1244 (1999) sets an important legal
basis for the settlement of the Kosovo issue. China has
always maintained that the way to resolve the Kosovo
issue is for the parties concerned to reach a mutually
acceptable solution through dialogue and consultation
in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions.

China respects Serbia's sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We understand its legitimate concerns with
regard to the Kosovo issue and commend its efforts
to find a political solution to it. We hope that Kosovo
will demonstrate the necessary political will, rescind
its unilateral tariff increases, commit to implementing
the Brussels Agreement and make efforts towards
resuming the dialogue between the two parties.

Achieving inclusion, reconciliation and harmonious
coexistence across all ethnicities in Kosovo is in the
fundamental interests of peoples from all communities
and of meeting their development needs. China hopes
that all parties concerned will refrain from any rhetoric
or actions that could complicate or escalate the situation
and that they will create conditions for the proper
settlement ofthe Kosovo issue, so as tojointly safeguard
peace, stability and development in the Balkans.

It is important at this juncture for the Security
Council to remain seized of the Kosovo issue. China
commends Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Tanin and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for the
important role they are playing in bringing about a
definitive solution to the issue of Kosovo and firmly
supports the Mission in the diligent implementation of
its mandate and its important role.

China is gravely concerned about the obstruction
encountered by UNMIK personnel in the normal
course of mandate delivery. Relevant independent
investigations have shown that UNMIK personnel have
been threatened and the performance of their duties
obstructed. The Council should express grave concern
at incidents of that nature and call on the relevant
parties to fully respect the privileges and immunities of
United Nations personnel and effectively ensure their
safety and security, so as to create conditions conducive
to enabling UNMIK to implement its mandate within
agreed parameters. That will be conducive to upholding
the Council's authority and, more importantly, to
bringing about a political settlement to the issue
of Kosovo.

