Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): This
open debate provides us an opportunity to express our
serious concern at a time when the situation in the
Middle East continues to deteriorate and the peace
process is experiencing a severe crisis.

We have recently seen that the path to peace has
been undermined by terrorist acts - the killing of
innocent civilians, the re-occupation of Palestinian
territories, settlement activities, humiliating treatment
of civilians, the blockade and destruction of economic
infrastructure and homes. Continuing along that path
can only lead to greater suffering to both peoples.

In August and September, attacks by Palestinian
terrorist groups in Israeli territory have continued,
causing the death of dozens of innocent civilians.
Argentina, which is familiar with terrorism on its own
territory, energetically condemns these acts, which are
crimes against humanity and cannot be justified in any
way.

Israel has to respect the provisions of
international law, particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention. The deportation of persons, not to mention
their physical elimination, is a grave violation of
international law. That is why we join those who spoke
before us to express concern about the decision in
principle of the Israeli Cabinet to "remove" President
Arafat. We agree that that could be dangerous and
counterproductive and that it would further aggravate
the tension already prevailing in the region. That is
why we appeal to Israel not to implement the decision,
but rather to file it way.

We believe that the path to peace is based on
mutual concessions and on compromise. The Quartet
drafted the road map on that basis, which is today the
only alternative to violence and destruction. On the
basis of that document, both Israel and the Palestine
Authority must, in our opinion, simultaneously carry
out parallel activities in the political, economic,
humanitarian and security areas.

First, Israel must put an end to illegal settlements,
withdraw from the occupied territories and put an end
to any type of activity that erodes confidence between
the parties, such as the building of the separation wall
on Palestinian land.

For its part, the Palestine Authority must stop and
dismantle the terrorist organizations. To that end, as is
established by the road map, the Palestinian security
forces must be restructured and should focus on
achieving that goal. We hope that the next Palestinian
Prime Minister will have the required authority to
undertake that indispensable task.

The alternatives before the parties are clear. They
can continue on the path of confrontation and mutual
rejection, avoiding all compromise and pretending
erroneously to find a solution through force. This is the
path of suffering for both peoples and can only
aggravate the violence.

The other option, which we strongly support and
encourage the parties to adopt, is to reaffirm the
commitments that were undertaken in Oslo, and which
became a reality 10 years ago in gardens of the White
House, with the return to the path of compromise and
mutual concessions, which will reconcile the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinians to their real
independence and personal dignity with the legitimate
aspirations of the Israelis to recognition and security.

Argentina calls on the leaders of both countries to
reaffirm their commitment to peace and to work
together to make reality the vision of two democratic,
sovereign and viable States, Israel and Palestine, living
in peace and security in the Middle East.

