Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General's Envoy on
Youth, Ms. Wickramanayake, and the other briefers for
their views.

We fully share the opinions that have been presented
today about the need to pay due attention to the topic
of youth in the United Nations system and to resolve
acute problems related to their socialization, which is
what Ms. Wickramanayake is successfully doing. We
must all help her. However, the following question
arises: Are we indeed helping Ms. Wickramanayake by
discussing today's topic in the Security Council for a
third time? In accordance with its mandate, the Security
Council is supposed to deal with matters related to the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Security Council's consideration of issues that are not
related to that task can hardly improve the effectiveness
of its activities or have any added value for resolving
pressing issues for young people.

At the same time, we understand and recognize
the importance of including youth-related issues in the
discussions of country-specific topics on the Security
Council agenda, in particular taking into account
the specific situations of African States, in which
young people constitute a substantial proportion of
the population. The famous German poet and thinker
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe once said, "The fate of
any nation at any time depends on the opinions of its
young people under the age of 25". However, discussing
such issues in isolation of their context can only
distract the Council from resolving the urgent problems
it is supposed to address. It seems particularly strange
that a choice has been made to discuss such general
matters against the backdrop of blocking subjects that
are of immediate concern to the Security Council, as
occurs periodically.

It is probable that, following this statement, some
will try to suggest that youth issues are not a priority
for Russia, but that is not the case. We are taking
active measures at the national level to interact with
young people. In 2014, the Government of the Russian
Federation adopted the basis for the State youth policy
to 2025, which is being implemented at the federal,
regional and municipal levels. A key part of the strategy
involves the State creating basic conditions for the full
self-fulfilment and integration of young people into
the social and political spheres and improving their
socioeconomic situation.

We fully support the development of youth civil
society, and we attach great importance to holding
seminars and forums at the national and international
levels, which helps to strengthen the peaceful and
constructive potential of young people. In particular,
in October 2017 we were pleased to host the nineteenth
World Youth Festival in Sochi, which brought together
over 20,000 people from more than 180 countries. We
also advocate peaceful youth organizations and the
development of intercultural and interreligious dialogue
among the youth population. The important role that
young people need to play in modern society, including
through constructive participation in building and
sustaining peace, is also reflected in resolutions 2250
(2015) and 2419 (2018).

The independent study prepared by Mr. Graeme
Simpson (see S/2018/86) gave us additional food
for thought about the role of young people in efforts
to prevent and resolve conflicts, and emphasized the
importance of advancing their positive image. At the
same time, practically speaking and aside from those
conclusions, we believe that there is a need for States
in conflict to pay due attention to fighting poverty,
illiteracy and unemployment, which are the fundamental
barriers to young people realizing their potential.

As an example, let us look at the situation in
Palestine, in particular the Gaza Strip, where the
unemployment rate among young people is approaching
50 per cent. Against that backdrop, and given the
stagnation of the Middle East peace process, a breeding
ground is forming for the spread of extremist ideas and
the radicalization of society. If we consider the subject
of young people in the context of the Security Council
agenda, while taking its mandate into account, work
should focus on combating the challenges of extremism
and terrorism.

All ages are undoubtedly exposed to those
phenomena. However, young people, with their nascent
world view and search for self-identification, are more
vulnerable to radical ideology. That factor, alongside
young people's lack of life experience, education
and other prospects for self-fulfilment in countries
with unfavourable socioeconomic environments or in
conflict situations, is adeptly exploited by extremist
groups to involve young people in unlawful activity.

As part of their attempts to attract young
people, extremists increasingly use information and
communication technologies, which requires us to
bolster our collective efforts in the sphere of international
information security. Regional organizations with the
necessary country-specific expertise play an important
role in countering the radicalization of young people.
We note the fruitful work being done in this area by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization.

Special attention should be paid to the phenomenon
of using radicalized young people to achieve domestic
political goals, in particular externally orchestrated
processes that aim to overthrow legitimate authorities
under the guise of democracy and human rights. It
is important that the proclaimed support for young
leaders not result in external players organizing
anti-Government movements in States that they
disfavour. Unfortunately, such situations are far
too frequent.

In conclusion, let me once again highlight that we
are by no means seeking to diminish the relevance of
youth issues. We are convinced of the value of in-depth
discussions on youth-related issues in the specialized
forums of the United Nations system designed to
address issues of education, employment, sustainable
development and other important subjects. The most
comprehensive road map in the area of youth policy is
the World Programme of Action for Youth, the separate
aspects of which are considered within the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council and
their relevant subsidiary bodies.

We believe that the decision whether or not to raise
a subject in the Security Council is not a reflection of
its relevance to the international community. It is far
more important, however, to strictly uphold the existing
division of labour within the United Nations system,
which benefits both the Security Council and young
people. As was quite rightly pointed out by Mr. Heusgen,
those who are more advanced in age will always find a
way to discuss the problems of young people, and for
that they do not need the Security Council.

