Lieutenant General Ngondi: It is humbling to
make this presentation on cooperation with host States.

The Republic of the Sudan has been going through
a difficult political time since mid-December of last
year. We have seen a revolution that has led to the
dissolution of the Government and its militarization, as
well as the subsequent deposition of the President and
his replacement with the Transitional Military Council
in April. Negotiations for a transitional arrangement to
transfer power to a civilian-led Government collapsed
following the events of 3 June. The Transitional
Military Council announced elections to be held in
nine months' time. The African Union suspended the
Sudan from participating in the organization's affairs
on 6 June. Efforts to bring negotiations back on track
are ongoing. The situation has impacted the operations
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID).

The importance of cooperation between
peacekeeping missions and host States for the successful
implementation of mandates cannot be over emphasized.
For better communication and coordination, the
Government of the Sudan has in place a UNAMID
unit within the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, while
UNAMID maintains its Khartoum Liaison Office,
from which the Head of Mission operates.

This presentation will cover the cooperation and
relations between UNAMID and the Republic of the
Sudan with regard to mandate implementation, as
provided for in resolution 2429 (2018) and the status of
forces agreement, respectively.

UNAMID's mandate includes four main pillars.
The first entails the closure and handover of team sites
for civilian use, the drawdown of the peacekeepers
and the eventual exit by June 2020. The previous and
current Governments of the Sudan assured UNAMID
of their cooperation and facilitation of the mission's
operations and smooth exit. As part of the transition
process, UNAMID - jointly with United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes - is implementing
state liaison functions in four states of Darfur, covering
four priorities areas of the rule of law, durable solutions
for displaced populations and host communities,
human rights, capacity-building and immediate service
delivery to displaced people. These interventions are
aimed at addressing challenges facing the four Darfur
states, where UNAMID and the United Nations country
team have the comparative advantages to work together
based on analysis. These include land, enhanced
dispute-resolution mechanisms and awareness of tenure
rights, intercommunal conflict over water and other
scarce resources, and the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees.

The drawdown, closure of team sites and handover
to the Government have been proceeding in a timely
manner. However, not all team sites are being used
for civilian purposes, and authorities cite institutional
incapacities and the need for protecting the facilities.
Recently, the Transitional Military Council issued a
decree to the effect that in future team sites must be
handed over to the Rapid Support Forces, which are
part of the military wing. This led to the suspension of
the further closure and handover of sites until further
clarity is obtained.

The second pillar is the protection of civilians
and humanitarian personnel and the facilitation of the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. The Government
of the Sudan has largely cooperated with the Mission
in the implementation of this pillar, especially in areas
under its control. However, there has been access denial
in the limited area controlled by the armed movements,
in particular the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid,
except on one occasion in September 2018, when ajoint
humanitarian mission was successful in visiting and
assisting victims ofa landslide incident in eastern Jebel
Marra. The Government cited its inability to guarantee
security to the peacekeepers as the reason for the denial.

The third pillar is about mediation between the
Government of the Sudan and the non-signatory armed
movements. Under the previous regime, two of the
non- signatory movements and the Government signed a
pre-negotiation agreement, while one armed movement
remained uncommitted. It is important to note that
the Transitional Military Council called on all armed
movements to join the national negotiations. However,
the current political situation has caused the process
to stall.

The last pillar is support for mediation of
intercommunal conflict, including measures to address
the root causes. While there has been tremendous effort
in promoting peaceful coexistence, the land ownership
problem that is at the heart of the Darfur conflict has
yet to be sufficiently addressed. Indeed, it is among
the main reasons for laxity in the return of internally
displaced persons return, while others are insecurity
and lack of basic services.

I now turn to the status of forces agreement, which
guides the conduct of peacekeepers and relations
between the Mission and the host State. There are
three main areas of cooperation. First is the provision
of premises and facilities for UNAMID to stay in and
operate from. It is commendable that the Government
granted UNAMID large spaces where team sites
and super camps were established. However, in the
recent past local communities have been demanding
compensation for their land from UNAMID instead of
engaging their Government.

Secondly, the status of forces agreement provides
for freedom of movement in the territory in execution of
the mandate. As mentioned earlier, the Government has
generally allowed free movement, including inter-state
flights, in areas under its control but denies UNAMID
access to areas under control of the armed movements,
citing security reasons.

Lastly, the Government is obliged to protect
UNAMID assets and facilities when requested by the
Head of Mission. Recently, fulfilling this obligation
proved challenging when the El Geneina super camp
in West Darfur was looted and vandalized during the
handover. Following that unfortunate incident, the
Mission and the Government are working together to
ensure that such an incident will never recur.

In conclusion, we are of the View that cooperation
between UNAMID and the Republic of the Sudan has
been cordial. The few setbacks that I have highlighted
can be rectified, as long as there is trust and political will.
The Sudanese authorities have assured their cooperation
with and support for UNAMID operations, including
the facilitation of a smooth exit, in accordance with
resolution 2429 (2018). It is reiterated that cooperation
with host States and other partners is crucial for
mandates to be implemented successfully. Trust and
political will are key ingredients of cooperation.

