Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): First, let me begin
by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and for the
excellent work that she and her team are doing on the
ground in Iraq. She has our full support.

We particularly welcome the announcement
of the memorandum of understanding between the
Government of Iraq and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to establish the trust fund
to support the recovery and development efforts of
the Government of Iraq. We also welcome Iraq's own
decision to contribute to the Fund. It will be important
for the new Trust Fund to work in cooperation with the
World Bank's Iraq Reform and Reconstruction Fund,
which will, in turn, support Iraqi-led priorities in
that area.

The Iraq issue is very different from other Middle
East issues on the Council's agenda. The key challenge
for us and for UNAMI is how we can best support Iraq
as it seeks to rebuild and strengthen the State following
the defeat of Da'esh. I agree very much with all of
the priorities that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General set out today in her intervention. I
would like to touch briefly on three of them.

First, the Special Representative highlighted
that 1.6 million internally displaced persons (IDPs)
remain in Iraq, all of whom have complex and acute
needs. Finding a sustainable solution for those people
is a concern for all of us. We welcome the work that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees is doing to support the Government of
Iraq to enable the voluntary return of IDPs. We think
that providing displaced people with basic services
should continue to be a focus of the Government of
Iraq, supported by UNAMI, in the coming months.
We encourage the Government of Iraq to expedite
the provision of identity documents to those people,
especially to those who have no documents at all,
including children.

Secondly, other speakers today have emphasized the
need for a stable and accountable security apparatus in
Iraq - both to prevent the resurgence of terrorism and
to provide greater security for Iraqis who wish to return
home. Like the United States, Peru and others, we very
much welcome Prime Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi's
executive order to bring the popular mobilization
forces under State control. We look forward to the
implementation of that order. UNAMI's focus on
security sector reform should continue to support the
Government of Iraq in ensuring that people feel safe
to return home and that all members of the security
services are held to account by the Government of Iraq.

Thirdly, I want to touch on the importance of
building strong, independent State institutions, which
will be vital to ensuring future stability in Iraq. I
particularly welcome UNAMI's focus on tackling
corruption and, like others, I welcome the fact that the
ministerial positions of defence, justice and the interior
have been filled. That is an important step forward.
However, we share the concerns of almost all the
speakers today about the lack of women represented in
ministerial positions. We hope that will soon change
and that the Government of Iraq will ensure the broadest
possible representation of women and minorities across
ministerial positions.

With regard to strengthening institutions, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General also
touched on the relationship between the Kurdistan
Regional Government and Baghdad. We welcome the
announcement of Mr. Nechirvan Barzani as President
of the Kurdistan region of Iraq and, in particular,
we welcome President Salih's attendance at the
inauguration. We commend the efforts of both President
Salih and Mr. Barzani to tackle outstanding issues, in
particular those relating to oil revenues.

Turning briefly to the question of Kuwaiti missing
persons and property, we very much welcome the
Special Representative's announcement today on the
good news about the confirmation of Kuwaiti missing
persons following DNA testing. We also welcome
UNAMI's support for that work and the decision by the
United States to share the analysis of satellite imagery
with those concerned. We have every confidence that
the Government of Iraq will remain engaged on this
issue. We look forward to the results of the 110th
subcommittee meeting of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, to be held on 25 September on this
vital issue.

In conclusion, Iraq has made great progress in
recent years, especially in the military defeat of Da'esh.
But Iraq continues to face significant challenges - both
domestically and regionally - as it seeks to guard its
stability and independence in an unstable region. It is
therefore vital that the Council and the international
community remain engaged in supporting the
Government of Iraq as it tackles these challenges and
steers the country towards fulfilling its huge potential.

