Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Members
of the Council and others who share our concern about the
situation in Afghanistan: the political and military situation
in Afghanistan has been dramatically altered by events of
the past few weeks. The immediate future is uncertain.
Fighting continues, and it is possible that Kabul itself may
once again be overrun. The result would be more casualties,
more refugees and still more uncertainty.

The position of the United States with respect to this
turmoil has not changed. We call upon all parties to stop
fighting and to begin negotiations aimed at a political
settlement. There can be no lasting military solution to this
conflict. There can be no durable peace in Afghanistan until
a broad-based government is formed which represents and
respects the rights of all of Afghanistan's diverse peoples.

In this connection, we want to express our continued
support for the efforts of the United Nations Special
Mission headed by Mr. Norbert H011 and his team of
political advisers. So far, the parties have not cooperated
actively or fully with the Special Mission in the search for
peace. Nevertheless, the Mission remains prepared and
determined to assist the Afghan parties. The Mission is in
contact with all the groups and is uniquely placed to serve
as an impartial facilitator among them.

The United States reiterates its concern about the
dangers of foreign interference in Afghanistan's internal
affairs and urges all outside parties to refrain from

 

meddling. We urge the regional Powers and all of
Afghanistan's neighbours to work together with the
United Nations to encourage the Afghan parties to move
towards peace. The recent summit in Almaty highlighted
the concerns of neighbouring States about regional
stability and underscored the urgency of an Afghan
political settlement. In particular, this body and the
General Assembly have repeatedly warned against
supplying the belligerents with arms and supplies. We
continue to support an arms embargo; we believe that the
flow of arms to the warring parties only perpetuates the
fighting and makes it less likely that they will come to
the negotiating table.

My Government urges the international community
to continue working together, with the parties, to establish
a process that will unite Afghanistan and that will lead to
a future characterized by stability, economic recovery and
law. Such a future would contribute to stability elsewhere
in the region, reduce the illegal flows of arms and
narcotics and result in a closing of the military training
camps that have supported terrorist activities in the region
and beyond.

In pursuing this outcome, my Government does not
support or favour any particular party, faction, movement
or individual in this conflict. We are interested not in
personalities, but in outcomes. Accordingly, we have
maintained contacts with all of the major groups over the
years, and we will continue to do so.

I want to emphasize that the United States remains
concerned that all parties in Afghanistan respect
international human rights standards. Every Member of
the United Nations is obliged to uphold the provisions of
the Charter, which affirms the principle of equal rights for
men and women. In parts of Afghanistan today, this
principle is being shredded.

We see decrees being issued in the name of stability
that would essentially deprive women of all rights, except
the right to remain silent, indoors, uneducated and
invisible. If the reports we receive are accurate, women
and girls are being denied the chance to work, to go to
school and to participate freely in the day-to-day life of
their communities. Even minor violations can lead to
vicious beatings. This approach to women's rights cannot
be justified or defended. It is medieval.

It will, if continued, doom prospects for economic
and social progress in Afghanistan. It will make it
extremely difficult or impossible for the international

 

community to administer badly needed humanitarian aid
and it should be opposed strongly by the Security Council,
by the United Nations and by all civilized peoples.

Despite the current difficult circumstances, my
Government hopes that international relief agencies will do
all they can, consistent with a requirement to adhere to
international human-rights norms, to maintain the flow of
humanitarian and relief assistance to those in desperate
need in Afghanistan. We urge those in authority to
cooperate with these aid agencies and not to hamper the
flow of assistance.

The years of bitter fighting have deeply divided the
Afghan people. As a result, the process of forming a true
national government will not come easily or be completed
soon. However, we continue to hope that each faction will
come to understand that Afghanistan will be stronger, more
prosperous, more independent and more durable if the
parties now fighting are able to unite, to pool their energies
and resources and to begin pulling the country back
together, rather than continuing senselessly and
inconclusively to tear it apart.

Accordingly, we renew our call to the leaders of each
party to cease pursuing the fool's gold of a military victory
and to turn their efforts towards the real reward of a
political settlement that will last. We urge them to stop
fighting, resume talking, observe international standards of
human rights and act in accordance with the best interests
of all the people of Afghanistan.

