Mr. Vieira de Mello: Fifteen months after the
adoption of resolution 1272 (1999), this is my last
briefing during the current mandate of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). On this occasion, therefore, as we review
where we have come from and where we are heading, I
would like to express my gratitude to the Security
Council for its unflagging attention and support to our
work in East Timor, perhaps most graphically
illustrated in recent months by its decision to dispatch a
mission to review the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 1272 (1999) and 1319 (2000).

I would also like to note with appreciation your
work, Sir, as current President of the Council, in
organizing this important debate and in gathering
together the key players here today, including the
President of the General Assembly, whom we were
fortunate enough to receive in East Timor only a few
weeks ago. We are grateful that East Timor has been
placed at the forefront ofthe Council's busy agenda for
this month. Singapore's preparation for this, including
the sending to Dili of a delegation to investigate
conditions on the ground, is a model we should all
admire. We are particularly grateful for this.

Finally, although he needs no introduction, I
would like nonetheless to say a word about my friend
and colleague who is also here to brief the Council,
East Timor's cabinet member for foreign affairs, Jose'
Ramos-Horta, It is fitting today, as we introduce to the
Council the structural changes we have made to the
mission, most notably through the prefiguration of an
effective government of East Timor, that we have here
with us that country's most dedicated and prominent
spokesman ofthe past 25 years. I thank the Council for
inviting him here to speak.

We knew from the outset that the unique demands
placed on UNTAET meant that our task would not be
easy, although perhaps we failed fully to appreciate just
how complex our task would be. As has often been
noted, through resolution 1272 (1999) the Security
Council gave UNTAET a mandate that was
unprecedented in its breadth, involving not only
peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance, tasks that
are perhaps more traditional than the United Nations
has in the past been asked to perform, but also full
executive and legislative responsibility, including the
administration ofjustice, for governing East Timor and
bringing it to independence.

UNTAET was called on to carry out this mandate
in a country that had just experienced a trauma of a
truly horrific nature. While grateful for the tributes to
UNTAET's accomplishments paid by the Secretary-
General in his report, I am under no illusion that much
still remains to be done to meet the high expectations
that accompanied UNTAET's arrival. Despite the
enormous strides made in the past year, our overall task
is far from complete, even in such critical fields as
infrastructure reconstruction, particularly in the health
and education sectors, where our efforts have so far
fallen worryingly short of that which is required.
Moreover, in other areas, such as capacity-building, our
mandate is only just beginning to be fulfilled and is
many years away from completion. It is this sense of
reality-that East Timor will require the ongoing
commitment of the international community-that I
would like to impress on the Council today.

What can be achieved in the coming year needs to
be put in the context of the fast-moving political
transition towards independence. At the heart of this
process has been the formation of a structure of
government in East Timor, albeit transitional or interim
in nature, through the creation of a predominantly East
Timorese Cabinet and the progressive delegation of
executive authority to that body, as well as the
expansion of consultative mechanisms through the
establishment of the all-Timorese proto-legislature that
we call the National Council. Together with the steady
Timorization of government at all levels, and the
creation of a Timorese judiciary, we are taking what I
believe to be the most effective, most direct, and
perhaps most audacious path towards fulfilling one of
our core tasks, perhaps the central one, which is
preparing East Timor for self-government.

Our initial model for UNTAET-namely, to
Timorize the bureaucracy but to leave the political
transition until elections had been held-has thus
evolved into a more sophisticated model whereby the
East Timorese now share much, if not most, of the
responsibility for the conduct ofthe transition. Only by
allowing institutions to evolve in the direction of
progressively greater East Timorese participation have
we taken the route most likely to produce enduring and
stable governmental structures. The aim is to ensure
that the transition to self-government occurs gradually
throughout the mandate, rather than suddenly at the
moment of independence.
Insofar as this mission has uniquely involved the
creation of a new government, UNTAET should in fact
no longer be seen as an international transitional
administration, but rather as a support structure for the
embryonic government of East Timor and other
institutions of state. These institutions are still in
development, but we should have no doubt that they
exist. As I noted at the beginning of my statement, the
presence here today of East Timor's Foreign Minister,
as it were, serves as eloquent testimony to that reality.
This does not always produce neat or easy results;
Cabinet debates - for example, on the political parties
regulation, which we adopted last week-are often
protracted affairs requiring compromise solutions.
Moreover, as we now have true separation of powers,
there is no guarantee that the National Council and
Cabinet will see eye to eye on all matters. Furthermore,
the judicial sector - non-existent when UNTAET
arrived - continues to face understandable but
significant teething problems. Yet it is only through
practical, and not just theoretical, preparation that the
groundwork for self-government can truly be laid. This
conceptual and structural shift in the manner in which
UNTAET performs its mandate is the cornerstone of
our efforts to implement resolution 1272 (1999).

Another complexity we have faced, and one with
which we have not always been able to deal as
effectively as we would have liked, has been the
systemic problem of needing to adapt traditional
peacekeeping practices to modern, multifaceted
governance missions. Nowhere is this truer than in
financing. I am not going to belabour this point, as it is
already well known, but suffice it to say that I am
grateful to the Security Council mission for having
noted this dilemma in its report last November and for
urging greater flexibility in the way in which United
Nations resources can be used. Likewise, I thank the
Secretary-General for making this same observation in
his latest report, and also the President of the General
Assembly for his support in this regard.

UNTAET is very much an innovative mission. It
illustrates the general point that rules and procedures
must adapt to the changing environment in which we
are operating if the wishes of the Security Council are
to be fulfilled. Many of the key tasks laid out in
resolution 1272 (1999) now fall on the new
governmental structures of East Timor to perform,
rather than on UNTAET, as originally conceived. We
cannot expect that Government to perform those tasks
adequately on what I call a "cruel" annual budget of
$59 million, without being able to tap into UNTAET's
manifoldly larger resources.

The final phase of transition is before us. Key
decisions are about to be made regarding the details of
the political steps which will lead to independence, in
conformity with the general process I outlined to the
Council here in November. I am sure that Jose' will
have more to say on this, but what we do know is that
there will be elections in mid-2001. Indeed, the
political standing committee of the National Council
has been holding hearings on the electoral timetable
and framework, and there appears to be a consensus
forming in favour of elections on 30 August, together
with an electoral system combining both direct district
representation and nationwide proportional
representation. A final decision will be forthcoming
soon after the National Council resumes its session on
12 February. These elections will be for a Constituent
Assembly that will have as its core mandate the
preparation of a constitution but that will, in all
likelihood, also assume legislative functions for the
remainder ofthe transition.

The Assembly's deliberations will be informed by
broad public consultations on the constitution, which
UNTAET will facilitate and support but which will be
conducted by East Timorese. All thereafter is still
relatively blank, with the canvas to be filled in by the
East Timorese themselves on the back of this founding
democratic act, though needless to say, in bringing
down the curtain on resolution 1272 (1999) and its
successor resolutions, consultations with the Council
will indeed intensify. UNTAET, and not the
Government of East Timor, will retain full
responsibility for ensuring that the elections are fully
free and fair, but what follows after - for example,
whether there are presidential elections, or whether the
Constituent Assembly converts itself into the first
legislature of East Timor after independence - are not
decisions for us to make, as they can be appropriately
reached only by the East Timorese themselves.

What is clear, however, is that international
personnel will be needed well beyond independence to
provide technical assistance, capacity-building and
security. It is an inescapable fact that in a whole range
of key high-skill fields it takes a long time to train
personnel. Thus, East Timorese surgeons, of whom
there is just one at present, will, like any other
surgeons, take five to seven years to train. Many other
of the skills required in a modern state also take many
years to acquire. There can be no short cuts or quick-
fix solutions. For example, the Department of
Infrastructure believes that while it will be possible to
develop fully Timorized water and port services
relatively quickly, the skills needed to run a modern
telecommunications system will take longer to learn,
and continued international support will be required in
the interim.

Or take as yet another example, the dearth of
lawyers that has been one of many legacies left East
Timor by its recent history. Efforts to establish a
judicial system have already been significant, but they
still only scratch the surface, as the Security Council
mission itself noted. Or border control. While an East
Timor Border Service has been created, it is still in its
infancy, and East Timor's already meagre coffers
continue to miss out on significant taxes due to
smuggling of goods across the border with West Timor.
Here again, we will need to concentrate our efforts
beyond independence.

In his observations, the Secretary-General laid
out our initial thinking on life after UNTAET and the
need for a seamless transition to its successor mission.
More work is being done to develop a fully fleshed-out
proposal. We intend to have this prepared in time for
the next donors conference in Canberra this coming
June and to be able to discuss this with the Council in
detail at the time of the Secretary-General's next
scheduled report to the Council on East Timor - or at
any other time that the Council may determine.

In preparing for this mission, coordination will be
key if the mission is to be fully integrated and
competition, duplication and confusion avoided.
Coordination will be needed within and between the
United Nations and its agencies; the international
financial institutions; the donors; you, the Security
Council; and, of course, the East Timorese as the major
stakeholders. It is worth highlighting at this juncture -
because I think it is not highlighted enough - that one
of the successes of UNTAET has been the remarkable
level of cooperation and team-playing that has existed
between all of the above, and how through this
cooperation the whole leas been much greater than the
sum of its parts. We are all engaged in trying to achieve
the same objective, and that unity has shone through in
our work. Consequently, it is particularly appropriate
that both the United Nations Development
Programme - on behalf of all the agencies, who have
been so central to reconstruction and rehabilitation in
all sectors - and the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund will be taking the floor here today in
this debate.

However, precise details are not yet possible.
There are a number of reasons for this uncertainty.
First, as I have already pointed out, the political
timetable, including the date of independence, has still
to be finally determined.

Secondly, the level of economic and social
development that can be sustained depends crucially on
the budgetary resources that will be available to an
independent East Timor - particularly those that will
be generated by foreign investment, as well as from oil
and gas resources in the Timor Sea. As regards the
latter, while it is not possible at this stage to make firm
estimates, what we do know is that the petroleum to
which East Timor is entitled will, before not too long,
generate revenues in multiples of East Timor's current
budget. The negotiations on this issue with Australia
are thus of paramount importance in determining the
extent of East Timor's future fiscal independence. I am
optimistic that an agreement may be reached in the not
too distant future on many of the complex issues
involved here.

Thirdly, as will be its prerogative, the elected
Government of an independent East Timor could well
decide on significant changes of policy that will require
a reassessment of the skills and personnel needed by
individual departments and government agencies after
independence.

One area worth highlighting is justice. In my last

briefing to the Security Council - echoing the
concerns of the report of the Security Council
mission- I highlighted the resource constraints

besetting the justice sector, particularly in the key area
of investigations into serious crimes committed in the
period surrounding the popular consultation of August
1999. At that time I made an appeal to the Council for
additional resources - an appeal I make again today.
We continue to endure a parlous situation, in which the
lack of even translators forces delays to trials.

This is not to say that progress has not been made
for prosecutions of defendants charged with serious
crimes; the first indictment for crimes against humanity
was filed on 11 December. As a matter of fact, I even
read this morning that the first sentence was passed, ifI
am not mistaken, by the court in Baucau, also on a
crime against humanity. But this process desperately
needs an urgent injection of additional resources.
Already, the target number of investigations established
by the Serious Crimes Investigation Unit imposes
practical limitations on the number of cases to be tried.
We cannot risk leaving the public demand for justice
dangerously unsatisfied by imposing further cutbacks
on our goals in this area.
The East Timorese skills base is changing fast,
and that is yet another reason why it is difficult to be
precise about East Timor's future needs. There is
already intense competition for the services of the
limited pool of East Timorese. To augment that pool,
we continue to reach out, though with only limited
success, to the diaspora. That pool is also rapidly being
transformed as increasing numbers of East Timorese
rise to the on-the-job challenges posed by Timorization
and by the opening of the University of East Timor and
other tertiary institutions, as well as by the fact that we
have recently recruited civil servants who are now
taking Government training courses and the fact that
hundreds of students are going abroad on scholarships,
particularly to Indonesia.

Two areas where resource gaps can already be
reasonably precisely identified are those of security
and law enforcement. Since I spoke to the Council in
November, just after a defence donors' conference had
taken place in Dili, the process of creating an East
Timor Defence Force has taken several important steps
forward. Draft defence legislation is close to
completion, and recruitment is under way. In the next
few days, possibly on 1 February, the guerrilla force -
Armed Forces for the National Liberation of East
Timor (FALINTIL) - will cease to exist, and will be
replaced by the new Defence Force, of which
FALINTIL will form the core. Training ofthe first 600-
man battalion will then begin, and is expected to be
completed by the end of this year. This is a historic
new beginning.

However, the force is not expected to be at its full
strength of 1,500 regulars and 1,500 reservists until
two to three years hence. At least until then, therefore,
there will have to be a continued-possibly
significant-international peacekeeping presence. In
addition, the security situation, particularly in the
border areas, will also influence the pace of our
downsizing.

There have been a number of hopeful
developments on the security front since the Security
Council's mission in November. There has continued to
be some, although not enough, progress on
reconciliation. Among the various initiatives sponsored
by the Indonesian Government and UNTAET since
November have been further "go-and-see" visits, as we
call them, East Timor by pro-autonomy leaders and
ordinary refugees from the west, as well as a meeting
in Denpasar between the National Council of Timorese
Resistance (CNRT) and other East Timorese, on the
one hand, and the pro-autonomy umbrella group known
as Unit Timor Aswain UNTAS on the other. We hope
that these will eventually produce significant refugee
returns. Nonetheless, one year since we made our first
overture to the pro-integration leaders, we continue to
await true dividends. It is therefore with a sense of
realism that we continue to seek a constructive solution
to this problem.

Some of the recommendations made by the
Security Council mission that visited East Timor and
Indonesia in November have been taken up by the
Indonesian Government. Trials have started in Jakarta
of individuals accused of inciting and perpetrating the
killings in Atambua on 6 September ofthree colleagues
from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Two leading
militia commanders, including the primary suspect in
the killing of two of our soldiers in late July and early
August last year, are now in detention. This coming
February, the Indonesian Attorney-General, Marzuki
Darusman, expects the new Human Rights Court to
begin processing the first cases against members of the
military, as well as against the police, militia members
and the former civil administration of East Timor.
Moreover, militia infiltration from West to East Timor
has fallen off, due largely to the robust actions of cur
military in September, October and November of last
year, and the onset ofthe rainy season.

But the Indonesian military have also been taking
steps on the other side of the border. I personally
welcome the firm stance adopted by the new
Indonesian regional military commander, Major-
General Willem da Costa, with whom I had a
productive meeting two days ago in Denpasar, and I
very much hope that this will lead to drastic and
durable change on the ground, including through the
comprehensive grounding of all remaining militias.
This is a precondition for East Timor's security - and,
consequently, our ability to downsize our peacekeeping
force- as well as for humanitarian and other
international staff to return to West Timor and for the
remaining refugees freely to decide whether or not to
return home.

Moreover, in line with the Security Council
mission's call for steps to be taken to ensure the
effective functioning of bilateral mechanisms,
negotiations on issues arising from the Indonesian
transfer of its control of East Timor and the first full
meeting of the Joint Border Committee are both
scheduled to take place in the next few days - to be
precise, on 30 and 31 January. We hope for and expect
concrete progress in these talks.

I cannot stress enough - and perhaps Jose
Ramos-Horta will have more to say on this point,
because he has just Visited Jakarta - that East Timor's
greatest hope for a stable future is a secure land border
with Indonesia, as well as a framework for lasting and
friendly bilateral relations with that neighbour. Without
these foundations of territorial security, East Timor will
continue to have to divert scarce resources away from
much more critical tasks.

In the area of law enforcement, too, we expect
that international assistance will be required well
beyond the end of this year. Even after having put in
place measures to speed up the training of East
Timorese police, we estimate that this service will not
be able to operate on its own until late 2004. The
international civilian police will therefore need to
continue to carry out their current mandate of
performing law enforcement functions and providing
training to East Timorese law enforcement officers
until that time, albeit in gradually diminishing
numbers.

In this connection, it might perhaps be worth
mentioning concerns over the manner in which we
deploy and use our civilian police resources in
peacekeeping operations of this sort-operations in
which they have executive policing responsibilities.
Based on my experiences in both Kosovo and East
Timor, I am increasingly of the view that the
effectiveness of civilian police in these complex
operations is not being maximized and that the time has
come when we must consider ways to reform current
practice. I know my colleagues in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations are reflecting on this subject.

To conclude, UNTAET will be judged not just on
how many schools it rebuilds or roofs it replaces, on
the calibre of the elections it organizes or on the peace
it maintains, vital though these achievements are.
Rather, judgement will also rest on how successfully
UNTAET is able to assist the East Timorese in fully
realizing their independence as masters of their own
future and their own democratic and independent State.
Independence, of course, is much more than a political
state of being; the East Timorese have shown, more
effectively than many, that they have always been
independent in mind and spirit. But it is also a process,
of which UNTAET is only a part. It is vital that after
UNTAET - after everything that all of us here have
invested in this endeavour-we continue to remain
engaged in nurturing this process for East Timor so that
it will become what we all wish it to be: a factor for
political, social and economic progress and stability in
the region as a whole.

