Allow me to thank the Chairs of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism; and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), on non-proliferation, for the detailed briefings on their work. Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction remain challenges to international peace and security. It is clear that the persistence of terrorist activities throughout the world, their capacity to cause harm and their re-emerge, even when believed to have been destroyed, in addition to their violent nature, remain the primary threat to global peace and security. The skill developed by terrorists enabling them to disregard borders, their ability to recruit followers and even acquire weapons of all kinds, as well as the threat of their use, remain of great concern. As we have seen in the Middle East, the two issues are linked. We know that the main threat comes from jihadists linked to Da'esh, Al-Qaida and their affiliated networks, who stand ready to act and adopt new strategies to sow the seeds of terror. That is why we believe it is essential to strengthen collective tools in order to control weapons of mass destruction, combat terrorism and provide support for, and strengthen the individual capacities of, the most vulnerable States facing the greatest threats. This issue is of the utmost urgency and must be a priority for the international community given the capabilities - dare I say - of terrorists in regions such as the Sahel and East Africa, as we saw earlier today in Somalia. Already facing the proliferation of weapons of war, this region, along with many others in Africa, needs innovative and forward-looking measures now more than ever so as to avoid the worst - that is, the proliferation of chemical weapons. The Niger is therefore very committed to the effective implementation of the mandates of these three subsidiary bodies of the Security Council. We just listened to their Chairs with rapt attention. We appreciate the efforts of the Committees and the groups of experts that assist them in their respective missions. We welcome the dynamic cooperation among these bodies and call for the further strengthening of mechanisms on counter-terrorism, threat assessment and technical assistance needs assessment. Given the many challenges in the fight against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, our action must also be focused on strategies to prevent radicalization and violent extremism by addressing the root causes of these challenges, such as poverty and youth unemployment. The same applies to combating the financing of terrorism and the illicit use of communications technologies and social media for criminal purposes. More than anyone else, we firmly believe in the goal respecting human rights in the fight against terrorism. It is for that reason that, in the context of the Group of Five countries for the Sahel, we joined the compliance framework on respect for human rights. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the commitment of my country, the Niger, to the fight against terrorism and terrorism-related activity and our readiness to cooperate closely with counter-terrorism and non-proliferation bodies.
