Mr. Nishida (Japan): Piracy has been a long-
standing issue for sovereign States over the centuries
and has become a major threat, along with other
outstanding issues such as transnational organized
crime and terrorism. Maritime security in particular is
threatened by piracy and has become of vital concern
for the world economy, since economic and commercial
activities rely on the safe passage of commercial
vessels. Ransoms derived from the kidnapping of
seafarers and vessels serve as resources to fuel even
more transnational crime. Thus it is imperative that the
Security Council address this important issue today in
a regional and global context.

While a number of pirate activities occur in various
parts of the world, piracy off the coast of Somalia
remains the most imminent threat to the international
community. Somalia's piracy attacks total more than
200 cases per year, constituting more than 50 per cent
of all pirate activities in the last three years.
We have been addressing this issue since 2008.
Our experience illustrates the fact that a holistic and
multifaceted approach is effective and is necessary
in tackling this complex issue. Japan believes that
the following measures in particular are mutually
reinforcing and should be further strengthened.

First, Japan emphasizes the need for concerted
efforts by the international community to counter and
prevent pirate attacks at sea. Japan is proud to have
taken part, together with partners, in the concerted
naval operations from the beginning of such operations
in April 2009 by various measures, including the
deployment of two destroyers and two patrol aircraft
in the Gulf of Aden. This year, the number of pirate
attacks is decreasing in the region, but it should be
noted that attacks by pirates are spreading out to the
entire Indian Ocean region. We need to expeditiously
address this new phenomenon.

Secondly, the enhancement of coastal countries'
maritime security is crucial to complementing the
above-mentioned operations. Since most countries
do not have sufficient capacity, support by the
international community is vital. In this regard, Japan
would like to share its anti-piracy experiences in
Asia, which have taken place in the framework of the
Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy
and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia (ReCAAP).
Japan fostered the ReCAAP mechanism as the first
legal framework to tackle the problem of piracy in the
East Asian region, combined with information-sharing
and operational cooperation functions. That framework
contributed to a dramatic decrease in piracy incidents
from 242 in 2000 to 45 in 2009.

Japan finds this regional approach useful for
implementing anti-piracy activities off the coast of
Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden. In this respect, Japan
proactively supports implementation of the Djibouti
Code of Conduct to help establish a similar mechanism,
composed of three information-sharing centres - in
Kenya, Yemen and Tanzania - and a training centre
in Djibouti, through contributions amounting to
approximately $15 million through the International
Maritime Organization.

Thirdly, we cannot forget the legal aspect of
counter-piracy measures, including the apprehension,
prosecution and imprisonment of pirates. We have
explored several options and have now reached a
common understanding that strengthening the Somali
judicial system as a whole, with international assistance,
is the best option. It is all the more encouraging that
the new Somali Government has been formed and is
ready to deal with these outstanding challenges. The
international community should continue its assistance
to enhancing the legal enforcement capacity of Somalia
and its neighbouring countries. Japan commends the
role played by the United Nations and has contributed
a total of $3.5 million to the Trust Fund to Support
Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia.

Finally, Japan commends the pivotal role played by
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
and its working groups and has proactively participated
in the Group since its inception. Japan chaired its
fourth plenary meeting, held in September 2009.
While we acknowledge the importance of that Group
as an information-sharing and policy coordination
mechanism, much improvement is necessary to
enhance the effectiveness of its working methods.
Japan welcomes the adoption of proposals by the
United States, including for a one-year term for the
chairman. Japan does expect more active involvement
by the Secretariat in this regard, particularly by the
Department of Political Affairs, given the fact that the
nexus between the sea and piracy, on the one hand,
and land and peacebuilding, on the other, as well as
the enhanced need for regional cooperation, are the
remaining challenges ahead of us.

