Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to express my appreciation for the
briefings by Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support, and
Ambassador Sylvie Lucas, Chair of the peacebuilding
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for
Guinea and Permanent Representative of Luxembourg.

The Council's analysis today of strategies for
effectively and efficiently addressing problems of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping is very timely. Going
on previous discussions, and given the high risk of
regression in the first few years of peace, we
acknowledge that the identification, development and
use of national capacities should be a post-conflict
priority.

We also agree that national post-conflict activities
to establish and build peace should be supported by
effective and timely civilian efforts, and that the
international community, especially the United
Nations, should provide speedy and effective
specialized civilian capacity and the experience needed
for supporting national stakeholders working to restore
the rule of law, revitalize the economy, relaunch the
provision of basic services to the population and
develop the capacity to make such efforts sustainable.

As the Secretary-General indicated in his report
(8/2009/304), what must be done in the post-conflict
period is to create basic security conditions and
confidence in the political process and to strengthen
national capacity to take the initiative in peacebuilding
activities and create stable living conditions. We
welcome Ambassador Lucas's report on the progress of
countries receiving support from the Peacebuilding
Commission. Support for national authorities has
promoted progress in such areas as security sector
reform, the rule of law, respect for human rights, the
restoration of Government institutions and economic
revitalization.

In this regard, Colombia emphasizes the
importance of ensuring that post-conflict support is
based on the principles proposed by the Senior
Advisory Group: national ownership, more solid
partnerships, experience in supporting national entities
and flexible responses. National ownership is the
guiding principle on which all measures to promote
civilian capacity should be based. In order to
strengthen national ownership, we cannot fail to clarify
and strengthen a Government's basic post-conflict
functions. It is essential not only to build technical
capacity but also to strengthen institutions and rebuild
the confidence of society as a whole, enabling people
to accept the legitimacy of their own Government.

Another peacebuilding priority is the need to
build more solid partnerships with external actors that
can bring innovative approaches to civilian capacity-
building. Our Organization must work to facilitate
improvements on the ground by creating effective,
broader partnerships that take supply and demand from
outside partners into account. Clearly, more adaptable,
timely and cost-effective systems are needed to
enhance the flexibility of the responses required by the
changing environment on the ground. Due
consideration must be given to budget implications and
contributions from States, as well as to the need to
fully comply with the mandates set by the competent
organs of the United Nations.

It is essential to strengthen, by providing
adequate technical assistance, monitoring and
accountability mechanisms for United Nations staff as
part of efforts to guarantee impartiality and
transparency and to restore trust. Moreover, the actors
involved in the process must be able to clearly assess
the progress made in the early stages of national
reconstruction. We commend the Secretary-General on
his efforts to improve the accountability mechanisms
for United Nations senior leadership and assessment
methods, and on his initiatives to increase the number
of vacant posts and enhance training for senior-level
personnel.
As I have said, the United Nations and its
Member States must broadly promote all of the pillars
mentioned, including women's participation in conflict
resolution, not only as experts within the Organization
and in Member States but also as true actors of change.

Colombia once again underscores the need to
formulate sustainable long-term strategies based on a
balance between direct international support and
national efforts. This will help to prevent countries'
prolonged dependence on international resources,
which eventually limits their development. The success
of those processes is a responsibility shared by affected
societies and the international community. We
encourage the Steering Group to pursue the open and
comprehensive consultation process, in which due
attention should be given to the concerns of all States.

In conclusion, what countries want is a competent
Organization that provides cooperation while
respecting national ownership and priorities, and that
supports the democratic processes chosen by a
country's people in peacebuilding.

