Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of today's meeting and the
informative briefings by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix.

Peru deplores and notes with concern the continued
military activity in the ceasefire zone and the escalation
of tensions that the Secretary-General describes in
his most recent report (S/2019/248), especially in
the incidents of 29 November 2018, 20 January and
11 February. We reiterate our call to the parties and those
who have influence on them to refrain from actions
that violate the Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
We welcome recent progress in the gradual return to
the Bravo side, which should continue to be a priority
for the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF). We are pleased that the mission has been
able to consolidate its presence in Camp Faouar and
increase patrols in the area. We would also like to
highlight the positive effects of the gradual opening
of the Quneitra crossing point in terms of increasing
the mobility of personnel and equipment between the
Alpha and Bravo zones. We hope that completing the
refurbishing of the position known as the Charlie gate
will contribute to this momentum and go a long way to
facilitating the mission's work.

We also commend the selfless work being carried
out by the UNDOF contingent against a backdrop of
obvious tension, and emphasize the importance of
ensuring their security and physical integrity, which
requires strengthening their capabilities with new
technologies, vehicles and physical facilities. In that
regard, and with regard to the Golan Heights, Peru
reaffirms its historic position on the inadmissibility
of acquiring territory by force, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, the principles of
international law and in strict compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize Peru's great
appreciation for the presence and stabilizing role of
UNDOF and reiterate our full commitment to this
important mission.

