Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): Allow me first, Mr. President,
to thank Germany for organizing this important event
and for your leadership on this issue, which, significant
as it is now, must also remain high on our agenda in
the future. Slovenia would like to align itself with the
statements made by the observer of the European Union
and on behalf of the Human Security Network and the
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

We would like to thank Secretary-General for his
annual report (A/2012/261). Slovenia strongly supports
the report in its current form, including the two annexes
therein. We welcome the appointment of Ms. Leila
Zerrougui as the new Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, and we extend our full
support for her mandate. At the same time, we would
like to commend the former Special Representative,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for her outstanding work
and dedication to the protection of children affected by
armed conflict in the past six years. We look forward to
the continuation of good cooperation with the Special
Representative and her Office in the future.

Since the establishment of the mandate of the
Special Representative 15 years ago, the protection
of children affected by armed conflict has improved
significantly. Many have contributed to that result,
including the Security Council, with its framework
for the protection of conflict-affected children. We
commend the Security Council for the work done and at
the same time encourage it to continue at the same pace
in the future. It should never be forgotten that children
around the world still suffer from armed conflict and
its consequences in fragile post-conflict situations.
We would like once again to welcome the expansion
of triggers to include attacks or threats of attacks on
schools and hospitals and encourage the Security
Council to consider the two remaining grave violations
against children in conflict as triggers in due time.

Slovenia remains concerned over reports about
the state of protection of children affected by armed
conflict around the world in 2012, which remains
critical, such as the situation in Syria. We will continue
with our efforts in rehabilitation processes for children
affected by armed conflict, performed by Slovenia's
International Trust Fund for Demining and Mine
Victims Assistance, an organization committed to
enhancing human security.

We welcome the signing of action plans in 2011 and
2012. Action plans make an important contribution on
the ground to ending grave violations against children.
In order to complete such initiatives, access by the
United Nations to non-State armed groups, facilitated
by Governments, is crucial.

Due to the vulnerability of children, the issue of
children and armed conflict deserves special attention
and should be considered as an issue per se. However,
the issue should be a part of a larger picture when
addressing a specific country situation. Therefore, we
encourage the Security Council and its Working Group
to continue with regular briefings with the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
including on emerging situations.

Peace negotiations and peace agreements should
include the issues of children affected by armed
conflict. Grave violations committed against children
in armed conflict should be designation criteria in
all relevant sanctions regimes, and in that regard we
encourage the continuation of briefings by the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict to all
relevant sanctions committees.

The Security Council should ensure that specific
provisions for the protection of children continue to
be included in all relevant mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as well as political and
peacebuilding missions, including by the deployment
of child protection advisers. Child protection capacity
should be systematically addressed also in situations
where there is no peacekeeping or political mission.
Furthermore, we believe that the Working Group's
toolkit on children and armed conflict presents an
adequate instrument to address this issue properly, and
encourage the Working Group to make full use of it.

Grave violations committed against children in
armed conflict should be investigated and perpetrators
should be brought to justice. In that regard, Slovenia
welcomes the convictions of Thomas Lubanga at the
International Criminal Court and Charles Taylor at the
Special Court for Sierra Leone. Both create important
jurisprudence for future cases on the issue of child
recruitment in national and international courts.

In conclusion, Slovenia would like to express
concern over the increase in the number of parties
that have been listed in the annexes to the report
of the Secretary-General for more than five years,
which amounts to more than half of the parties listed.
In that regard, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendations to the Security Council addressing
the persistent perpetrators, and welcome the report of
Ambassador De La Sabliere.

Over the years, a wide international network has
been developed by partners from the United Nations
system, regional organizations, Governments and civil
society to protect children affected by armed conflict.
Slovenia is honoured to be a part of it and calls on all
to preserve this network, since armed conflict is no
place for children. It is also for this reason that Slovenia
joined in sponsoring resolution 2068 (2012) .

