Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I would like to thank
the Special Representative for his briefing today. We
join others in commending the work the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
does in facilitating the international community's
engagement in Afghanistan and its close working
relationship with the Government. Also, our thanks to
Executive Director Costa for his update.

One of the core messages of the UNAMA
quarterly report is that Afghanistan needs sustained and
consistent support from the international community.
In this context, I am pleased to advise that last week
New Zealand Prime Minister Helen Clark announced
that New Zealand is extending the following
commitments for a further year to September 2008:
first, the 120 strong Provincial Reconstruction Team
(PRT) based in Bamyan province; second, the two
personnel to help train the Afghan National Army;
third, up to five officers to serve at the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) headquarters; and
fourthly, three police officers to help train the Afghan
National Police.

In addition, we shall have two health personnel at
the Multinational Medical Unit at Kandahar Airfield.
We have also drawn on our close relationship with
Singapore to incorporate a Singapore Armed Forces
contribution in our PRT in Afghanistan to undertake
humanitarian tasks. Further, and alongside our military
commitments in Bamyan, New Zealand is
implementing a three-year NZ$15 million programme
of assistance supporting human rights, governance,
education and sustainable rural livelihoods.

With respect to today's report, we note that the
Secretary-General says that successful completion of
the ongoing reforms, including of the Ministry of
Interior, are a precondition for achieving sustainable
peace in Afghanistan. We fully endorse these
comments and encourage the Government of
Afghanistan to act decisively to build public
confidence in its security institutions and the rule of
law. It is critical that the influence of central structures
is spread to all regions of Afghanistan. Like others, we
are gravely concerned at the threat posed by the
insurgency. We agree that a sustained holistic effort,
including from Afghanistan's neighbours, is required to
address these complex issues.

We note with concern the unmet humanitarian
needs of many Afghans, both those displaced by armed
conflict in the south and those affected by drought in
many parts of the country. We call on all parties to
work toward improving coordination of humanitarian
assistance and ensuring protection.

In closing, it is clear that there are enormous
challenges before us. The last five years have seen
considerable positive progress in Afghanistan. But the
job is not yet done, and international support is still
needed to build a stable and secure Afghanistan. New
Zealand remains committed to helping secure
Afghanistan's future.

