Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): At the outset, Mr. Qin Huasun, let me
congratulate you on the outstanding manner in which you
have guided the work of the Security Council during an
intensely busy month. This is no surprise given your
experience and the prominence of your country in world
affairs.

The draft resolution before the Council today would
renew international assistance in the consolidation of
democracy and institutions in Haiti. As the Secretary-
General notes in his comprehensive report, he received a
letter dated 29 October 1997 from the President of Haiti
requesting continued United Nations support for the
process that is under way. Accordingly, Argentina, which
is committed to the defence of democracy and
institutions, considers it necessary to give its express
support for a continued United Nations presence in Haiti.

We know that to achieve the consolidation of a
State's institutions, international assistance in itself is not
a solution. The determination of all the political forces of
Haiti is a necessary condition, as is the achievement of a
general framework for international assistance that enables
sustainable development to take place.

On this occasion, we once again express our thanks
to all of the members of the Security Council for
continuing to hold to their commitment to institutional
consolidation in Haiti. In particular, we are grateful for
the understanding shown by China and the Russian
Federation in translating into reality a continuing United
Nations presence in Haiti.

The mandate of the Mission that is being established
by the draft resolution to be voted on faces the same
difficulties as the missions previously deployed in Haiti.
For that reason, we attach special importance to the
United Nations capacity for dialogue on the ground.
Accordingly, we believe that maintaining an appropriate

 

level of representation by the United Nations will be
conducive to the success of that mandate.

Finally, we wish to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Enrique ter Horst, for the
dedication and professionalism with which he has carried
out his functions.

