I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their briefings on recent developments in the situation in Yemen. I also thank Mr. David Beasley and Mr. Omer Badokhon for their presentations. On 15 and 16 October, we welcomed with great satisfaction the exchange of more than 1,000 detainees between the parties to the conflict in Yemen, thus translating into reality the agreement reached at the end of September in Switzerland. Those exchanges will be gravened in the memory of many Yemeni families, which until then had been resigned and desperate but that were relieved to welcome their loved ones after a long separation. The Niger welcomes this progress, which represents an important milestone in the process of the political settlement of the conflict in Yemen, and it encourages the parties to maintain this positive momentum in order to take the additional step necessary to lead to the signing of the joint declaration on a national ceasefire. To achieve that objective, it is important that the parties maintain the mutual trust that they have built and, beyond that, that they honour the commitments to which they have previously subscribed. This is, moreover, an essential condition for the continuation of negotiations and the relaunch of the political process, which has been bogged down for several years. The resolution of the crisis - and the parties to the conflict know this full well - will not be achieved by military means but must be sought through dialogue and negotiation; it must be political. That is why my delegation invites the international community, regional actors and those members of the Council with influence on the parties in conflict to redouble their efforts to achieve a rapprochement between the parties and to encourage them to come to the negotiating table in order to lay the foundations for the settlement of the conflict, which has already claimed so many victims. While positive developments have been registered at the political level, the expected improvements in the humanitarian situation have been slow in materializing, making life increasingly difficult for thousands of people. It should be emphasized that the humanitarian crisis in Yemen is primarily human-caused; in particular, the continued military campaigns in the country have contributed to the destruction of basic infrastructure. As the fighting goes on, the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate, assuming intolerable proportions for the population, in particular given the combined effect of factors such as the obstruction of humanitarian aid; the degradation of the health system, destroyed by long years of war; the coronavirus disease pandemic; food insecurity; the fuel crisis; floods; the sharp depreciation of the rial; the depletion of the national reserves; and the international aid deficit. On that last point, my delegation remains concerned about the reduction of services in several health-care facilities, as well as the suspension of certain United Nations assistance programmes on which several million people in Yemen depend. That is why we appeal for greater international generosity to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people. We call on those countries that have announced their contributions, in particular those in the region, to honour their commitments in order to ensure the continuity of assistance programmes and avert any further loss of life. We urge the parties to the conflict to show restraint by putting an end to the fighting, as the humanitarian situation cannot improve significantly without a cessation of hostilities. In conclusion, my delegation would like to express its concern over the situation of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, on which inspection work has been slow to start, even though the vessel's state of advanced decay continues to expose Yemen as well as the countries bordering the Red Sea to the serious threat of an environmental disaster with incalculable consequences. To avert a worst-case scenario, we call on the Houthis to show responsibility and honour their commitments by issuing the necessary clearances to the United Nations team tasked with inspecting the FSO SAFER tanker.
