Mr. Bessho (Japan): I also thank Mr. Zerihoun for
his presentation.

At the outset, Japan thanks Egypt for its initiative
to hold today's briefing. United Nations sanctions are
one of the measures provided for by the Charter of the
United Nations to maintain or restore international
peace and security. Where used properly, they can
be effective, and they should be well integrated into
broader strategies.

Sanctions are tools for the achievement of specific
political objectives. Those objectives are wide-ranging,
including the restoration of peace after civil war, the
prohibition of support for terrorists, the disarmament
of armed groups and denuclearization. Each sanctions
regime should be tailor-made to its specific context.

Sanctions are not imposed for their own sake, and
they are certainly not tools for punishment. They should
have clear goals and exit strategies. Each sanctions
regime generally has its own internal exemption clauses
or mechanisms to minimize unwanted adverse effects.
To that end, the evolution in the way the Security
Council uses smart sanctions, including financial
sanctions, is a welcome one. The periodic review of
sanctions in each sanctions committee could be useful.

Once the Security Council decides to take certain
sanctions measures, they need to be fully implemented
in order to be effective. That can be challenging and
complex, and may require both time and capacity-
building on the part of Member States. Neighbouring
countries have a particularly vital role to play in
ensuring that the sanctions measures are effective.
We must all work together to address the problem of
sanctions evasion and loopholes.

I would also like to emphasize that where
sanctions have been agreed upon and adopted by the
Council, we should first work for their full and faithful
implementation by each Member State before we
discuss their effectiveness. Member States' awareness
and capacity-building are key.

Japan has long been a supporter of capacity-
building efforts aimed at strengthening implementation
and will continue to provide support to that end. We
believe that where sanctions are selected among the
various tools available, the Council must ensure that
they are as effective as possible in achieving their
desired aim.

