The Secretary-General: I thank the German
presidency of the Security Council for having
organized this very important meeting at this juncture.

When the Security Council first took up the issue
of climate change in 2007 (see S/PV.5663), the debate
was preceded by a vigorous exchange about whether
such consideration was appropriate. I argued then, and
do so again today, that it is not only appropriate, it is
essential. I welcome the fact that we have moved
forward and are having the right debate today, about
what the Council and all Member States can do to
confront the double-barrelled challenge of climate
change and international security.

We must make no mistake. The facts are clear.
Climate change is real, and it is accelerating in a
dangerous manner. It not only exacerbates threats to
international peace and security, it is a threat to
international peace and security.

Extreme weather events continue to grow more
frequent and intense, in rich and poor countries alike,
not only devastating lives but also infrastructure,
institutions and budgets - an unholy brew that can
create dangerous security vacuums. Pakistan, the
Pacific islands, Russia, Western Europe, the
Philippines, Colombia, Australia, Brazil, the United
States, China, the Horn of Africa are examples that
should remind us of the urgency of what we face.

Just today, the United Nations declared a state of
famine in two regions of southern Somalia. Around the
world, hundreds of millions of people are in danger of
going short of food and water. That undermines the
most essential foundations of local, national and global
stability. Competition between communities and
countries for scarce resources, especially water, is
increasing, exacerbating old security dilemmas and
creating new ones. Environmental refugees are
reshaping the human geography of the planet, a trend
that will only increase as deserts advance, forests are
felled and sea-levels rise. Mega-crises may well
become the new normal. Those are all threats to human
security, as well as to international peace and security.
11-42259
Since I delivered my report (A/64/350) to the
General Assembly in 2009, the international
community has reached certain agreements, in
Copenhagen and Cancun, in the context of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Those agreements provide an important, but
incomplete, foundation for action on reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and enabling all countries to
adapt. We now need accelerated operationalization of
all the agreements made at Cancun, including on
protecting forests, adaptation and technology.

Climate finance, the sine qua non for progress,
must move from a conceptual discussion to concrete
delivery of fast-start financing and agreement on
sources of long-term financing. The next Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, to be held in Durban
in December, must be decisive in that regard.
Minimalist steps will not do.

Negotiations cannot stop there. We need
ambitious targets that ensure that any increase in global
average temperature remains below 2° C. The Durban
meeting must provide a clear step forward on
mitigation commitments and actions by all parties
according to their responsibilities and capabilities.
Developed countries must lead, while at the same time
emerging economies must shoulder their fair share. We
cannot ignore history. But we must clearly recognize
that there can be no spectators when it comes to
securing the future of our planet.

Given that the first commitment period of the
Kyoto Protocol expires next year, a political formula
must be found without delay to ensure that existing
commitments and needed future commitments and
actions are not delayed by negotiating gamesmanship.

The Security Council can play a vital role in
making clear the link between climate change, peace
and security. The members of the Council bear a
unique responsibility to mobilize national and
international action to confront the very real threat of
climate change and the specific threats to international
peace and security that derive from it. Of course,
nothing would build a more lasting foundation for a
peaceful world than securing sustainable development
for all of our citizens.

In this regard, I urge all United Nations Member
States to fully utilize the opportunity provided by next
year's United Nations Conference on Sustainable
11-42259
Development. In Rio, we need to close the gaps
between energy security, food and nutrition security,
water security, climate security and development so
that all our peoples can enjoy prosperity, peace and
international security.

I thank you again, Sir, for having organized this
debate and for lending the political weight of the
Security Council to raising awareness of this important
issue. I have called climate change the defining issue
of our time. Indeed, we must go even further. We must
make sustainable development for all the defining issue
of our time, because it is only in that broader
framework that we can address climate change and the
needs of our citizens. Rewriting this history falls to us
all.

