Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his report, and we would like to thank Mr. Kouchner
for the briefing he gave us.

On 10 June, one year will have elapsed since the
adoption of resolution 1244 (1999). That decision by
the Security Council, prepared with the very active
participation of Russia, allowed an end to the
aggression against Yugoslavia and brought the process
of the settlement of the Kosovo situation back to the
United Nations.

The Security Council offered a specific way to
deal with the crisis on the basis of the fundamental
principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia while ensuring the
legitimate interests of all of the ethnic groups
constituting the population of this region.

If we assess what has been accomplished in the
year that has passed since the adoption of resolution
1244 (1999), we can say that the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have implemented the
demands made by the Security Council with respect to
halting acts of Violence in the region and fully
withdrawing the Yugoslav army and police from that
region. A security zone has been established along the
administrative border between Kosovo and the rest of
Serbia, and the Yugoslav army, together with the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), is ensuring that there is no
resumption of military activity along that border.

As for other participants in the settlement process
to which the Security Council gave specific
responsibilities, the situation is bad. This relates to the
clear trend to separate Kosovo from the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, which is fraught with very
dangerous possibility of destabilizing the entire Balkan
region. Unfortunately, some actions by the leadership
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) and KFOR provoke and
encourage this dangerous trend. This relates primarily
to the absence of the necessary cooperation of all sides
with Belgrade and even the Security Council.

The demilitarization of the Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA) has been very unsatisfactory, as in the
case of the demilitarization of other armed Kosovar
Albanian groups. No one can explain to us why the
Kosovo Protection Corps is referred to as "troops" in
the Albanian language. That is its name. Why does this
Corps have what is basically a military structure,
which, in a way, is simply a reflection of the old KLA
structure? Why do the weapons of this purely civilian
Corps include firearms, and why does the leadership of
the Corps itself determine who will be given these
weapons?

Basically, what has happened, we believe, is the
legalization of some of the units of the former Kosovo
Liberation Army. The leadership of UNMIK and KFOR
say that when they take people into the Corps they
recruit them very, very carefully, and that criminals
cannot join the Corps. But I would draw attention to
the fact that one of the first persons to join the Corps
was Daut Haradinaj. Unofficially, we would like to
distribute here a copy of his curriculum vitae. We
understand that it was prepared by KFOR. It states that
this former fighter from the KLA is someone who can
kill a person to whom he takes a dislike, and that he is
known as an organizer of armed provocation and
murder.

We believe that UNMIK and KFOR should
immediately draw up a list of all persons who are
admitted to join the Corps. Otherwise, if these kinds of
people are in charge of the Corps, it will not be
possible to curb attempts by the former KLA to
establish virtual control throughout the region under
cover of the supposedly civilian Corps.

So far, UNMIK and KFOR have shown a degree
of patience with such attempts, even though, again,
very disturbing information is available to the United
Nations presence in Kosovo. It is simply unacceptable
that attacks should continue against KFOR personnel,
including the Russian contingent. Such attacks are
being carried out, inter alia, by present and former
members of the Kosovo Protection Corps. We know
that the leadership has responded firmly to such
provocations, but we expect the sternest possible
measures to be taken to curb the extremists and force
them to respect the status of the international presence,
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).

Just in the past few days, the Russian KFOR
contingent camp near Malishevo has been the target of
nine night-time attacks; it has been fired on by
weapons including machine guns and anti-tank
weapons. In that light, how can we talk about the
demilitarization of the KLA? How can we talk about
success in disarming it?

It has been said that former KLA fighters,
including those who have joined the Kosovo Protection
Corps, are able to take action thanks to a very well-
organized system by which they are provided with
information; they are able to coordinate their terrorist
actions extremely well. Moreover, it is well known
that, with increasing frequency, KFOR has been
finding illegal stores of weapons and ammunition in
Kosovo. Some of those stores are of very recent date.

We are particularly disturbed about the situation
in the Presevo valley, where there is ceaseless
provocation aimed at causing the tension to spill over
into southern Serbia, which would trigger another
conflict. KFOR regularly sees activity by Albanian
fighters in the security zone, and in the area of
Dobrosin there have been a great number of shootings,
mine explosions and movements of armed groups. We
believe that KFOR should take strong measures to
ensure law and order along the administrative border
and strengthen its control over actions by illegal units
in the territory of Kosovo.

Unfortunately, Kosovo Albanian extremist
elements feel that they enjoy impunity in Kosovo. They
have also begun receiving support from international
terrorism. This poses a challenge to the security of
many countries, directly including two participants in
the process of seeking a settlement in Kosovo. We
heard today about how they are still trying to drive
Serbs, Roma and other minorities out of Kosovo; those
minorities continue to be attacked and they continue to
be victims of violence and terrorism. They do not enjoy
freedom of movement in the area.

Since the Security Council mission's visit to
Kosovo, there has been an upsurge in anti-Serb
terrorism, which seems to be a planned campaign of
provocation. The Serbian population has protested at
killings of Serbs, including children, in just the last few
days. The delegation of Kosovo Serbs in the Chamber
today has said explicitly that the situation of Serbs in
the area has become intolerable. We note statements by
the Kosovar Albanian leader and the appeal to end the
violence. But words must be followed by deeds. It is
time to realize that one injustice cannot be remedied
with another injustice.

KFOR and UNMIK have a clear mandate from
the Security Council, which gives them the power to
effect radical improvements in the situation. That must
take place. Russia is part of KFOR and part of the
United Nations Mission; we are willing to join our
partners in working in that direction.

I note that the statement adopted at the 24 May
meeting of the NATO-Russia Permanent Joint Council
stressed the determination and resolve of Russia and of
NATO to cooperate closely with a View to the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999), and that
neither Russia nor NATO would tolerate any
provocation or other attempts to undermine the peace
process in Kosovo.

It has been impossible to implement the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) regarding the
return to the region of the 300,000 non-Albanians who
fled to other parts of Yugoslavia and to neighbouring
countries to escape the arbitrary violence. Again, there
is no respect for the principle of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Many facts indicate that this principle is
being violated; everyone knows of these violations, and
we have spoken of them often in the Security Council.

Disturbing new facts include UNMIK's plan to
bring about a full privatization of State property
belonging to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as
indicated in the recent "white book". On this there was
absolutely no consultation with the Belgrade
authorities. We have already warned that unilateral
experiments with property could have highly explosive
consequences. The Security Council's decision on the
return to Kosovo of the agreed contingent of Serb and
Yugoslav troops and police has not been implemented,
which makes it more difficult to implement the
provision of resolution 1244 (1999) on the
establishment of proper control over Kosovo units in
the border areas of Albania, Macedonia, the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Kosovo.

Resolution 1244 clearly states that during the
transitional period UNMIK must implement
administrative management of the region in such a
manner as to ensure that all the inhabitants enjoy
substantial autonomy in making up their part of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This is impossible
unless there is real interaction with the Yugoslav
authorities. Such interaction must occur on all issues
relating to implementation of the resolution. There are
delays in implementing provisions of that resolution
that relate to beginning a political process for
determining the future status of Kosovo. This process
is not possible unless there are talks involving the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. However, so far we
only hear about the idea of some kind of contract
between the United Nations Mission and the population
of Kosovo. We believe that any kind of contract like
that, without the involvement of Belgrade, would be a
violation of resolution 1244 (1999) and would not have
legal credibility.

We would not like to think that the acquiescence
of UNMIK with respect to the status of Kosovo would
mean the desire to protract this transitional period and
prejudge the future of the region. That is in fact what
could happen if the parameters of the future status of
Kosovo are not determined before the municipal
elections. There has been no decision on the
participation of Serbs in the elections and on the
absence of basic conditions for ensuring safe return.
The results of the elections cannot be considered
legitimate without the participation of the Serbs and
the other minorities.

The UNMIK leadership has personal
responsibility for election preparations, which should
not legalize the involvement of political extremists and
isolationists in Kosovo who are hatching plans to
declare ethnically clean independence. We are
convinced that attempts to isolate them from Belgrade
are extremely dangerous to the future of Kosovo,
Yugoslavia and the entire Balkan area.

Unfortunately, the Security Council, because of
the positions of individual members, today has once
again not been able to hear the representative of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia at a meeting devoted to
his country. We noted the short discussion held in this
Chamber about who should participate in Council
meetings devoted to the question of Kosovo. We
believe that in any case participants must include
official representatives of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

We are hearing more talk lately about the missing
or the detainees and that these are Kosovar Albanians.
It is said that without clarification of what happened to
them, there can be no return of Serbs to Kosovo.

This problem is indeed a very painful and
difficult one and the matter must be resolved. First of
all, however, we should not forget that hundreds of
Serbs are also missing in Kosovo and that their fate
must also be investigated. Secondly, we must recall
that Belgrade has not refused to cooperate on the
problem of the missing and the detainees. This problem
was dealt with by the representative of the International
Red Cross and the special rapporteur of the United
Nations Commission on Human Rights, Mr. Jiri
Dienstbier, on their trip to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. They had access to whomever they wished
to meet, and they discussed with representatives of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia about continuing
contacts. We think it is necessary to support the work
which is already being done by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Mr. Dienstbier, and
the leadership of UNMIK itself could more actively
establish contacts with Belgrade on this matter.

Against this backdrop, to us the idea of
establishing yet another post of special representative
on missing persons looks a little artificial and could
only lead to politicization of this purely humanitarian
issue. We are already well familiar with attempts to
politicize humanitarian aspects of the crisis in Kosovo.
I was thinking particularly about attempts such as those
being made through the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. Let me just cite one example. In
the last few days there has been a lot of discussion
about the Amnesty International report citing facts of
violation by NATO of norms of international
humanitarian law during the bombing of Yugoslavia.
Similar assessments were issued earlier by Human
Rights Watch.

We would recall that article 57 of the first
Additional Protocol to the Geneva Conventions
emphasizes the need, in planning and implementing
military actions, to refrain from any attacks that might
be expected to cause collateral loss of life among the
civilian population or the wounding of civilians, or that
might by chance damage civilian infrastructure and
facilities.

Article 52 of the same Protocol establishes that in
the event of any doubt as to whether this facility that is
normally used for civilian purposes might be used for
military purposes, it is necessary to assume that the
facilities are civilian ones. It is perfectly obvious that
those provisions were flagrantly and grossly violated
during the bombing of the Belgrade television centre,
the bridges and the train on the bridge in Gordelitse,
the bombing of buses, refugee columns, convoys and
many other facilities. These facts are very well known.

However, the Prosecutor for the International
Criminal Tribunal, Ms. Del Ponte, at the Security
Council briefing on 2 June, said that she was not going
to continue investigating NATO activities in
Yugoslavia because she did not see the actions as
violations of international humanitarian law. But we
have a question regarding that. Does the Prosecutor for
the Tribunal know about the norms of international
humanitarian law in this connection? What about her
willingness to apply these norms in practice?

In conclusion, all these problems we have been
talking about are interrelated and unless they are
resolved as a whole, it will be difficult to expect any
change in the current extremely disturbing situation.
Unless they are quickly resolved, UNMIK and KFOR
- which have of course done some work to normalize
the situation in Kosovo - will not be implementing
the tasks assigned to them by the Security Council. We
know the very difficult circumstances in which the
personnel of the international presence in Kosovo must
function. We are sincerely interested in providing them
with every possible kind of help and support. But this
can be done only if the leadership of the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo and KFOR indeed ensure
that all their actions are geared towards full and
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). Russia will continue to make a constructive
contribution to finding a political settlement in Kosovo
against this background: full and total implementation
of the resolution.

There is no real alternative to increasing these
efforts in the international community, for we would
not be providing peace, stability and prosperity in the
Balkans in the interests of all peoples who live there.

