Ms. Rice (United States of America): We in the
Security Council welcome the Prime Minister and are
delighted to have him in our presence. We are grateful
for his very helpful and constructive statement. I regret
that our Russian colleague has found it necessary to
raise the old canard yet again in the Security Council
regarding NATO, but since he has, allow me to
respond.

The International Commission of Inquiry into the
human rights situation in Libya concluded that NATO
"conducted a highly precise campaign with a
demonstrable determination to avoid civilian casualties"
(A/HRC/J 9/68, summary). It also recognized that
NATO's objective was to take all necessary precautions
to avoid civilian casualties entirely. In addition, we note
NATO's exceptional cooperation to assist the
Commission of Inquiry in its work.

NATO conducted operations in Libya to a
standard exceeding what was required under
international humanitarian law and in full accordance
with the United Nations mandate to protect civilians
and civilian-populated areas from attacks and the threat
of attacks. The Commission's mandate was to review
all alleged violations of international human rights law.
The Commission found no violation of international
law on the part of NATO.
NATO cooperated fully with the International
Commission of Inquiry on Libya and provided a
significant amount of information, much of which had
to be declassified to assist the Commission in its work.
NATO has looked into every credible allegation of
harm to civilians that had been brought to its attention.
That has involved a thorough assessment of NATO's
record, from target selection to any data gathered after
a strike. The review process has confirmed that the
targets NATO struck were legitimate military targets
consistent with the United Nations mandate and
international humanitarian law, with great care having
been taken in each case to minimize risk to civilians.

No target was approved or attacked if there was
evidence or reason to believe that civilians were at
risk. Hundreds of possible targets were passed up and
others were aborted at the last minute to avoid any risk
to civilians. Ultimately, it is up to the Libyan
authorities to determine a way forward to review
claims of civilian casualties. We will continue to
coordinate with them on these efforts.

