Mr. Abdyldayev (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
1 would first like to sincerely congratulate our brother
country of Kazakhstan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month, and to
express my confidence that the Republic of Kazakhstan
will make a worthy contribution to resolving the
difficult challenges we are facing.

The role and importance of the United Nations
in stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan and
strengthening regional and international cooperation
are invaluable. The subject ofour meeting, which clearly
encompasses the priority areas of our cooperation, our
common challenges and the goals that we are working
towards, is clear proof of that. We are all aware that if
we are to achieve peace in Afghanistan, the desires of
the Afghan people and their Government of National
Unity are clearly not enough. We must, above all, reach
a consensus among the permanent members of the
Security Council.

Time has shown that the only way to ensure peace
and stability in Afghanistan is by resolving its complex
situation by exclusively political means, holding peace
talks and achieving national reconciliation. However,
we have to admit that there has been little tangible
progress in that regard and certainly not as much as
we expected. The bloodshed among the warring parties
continues, as does their insistence on tactics demanding
preconditions, making the start of peace talks almost
impossible. Unfortunately, such a stalemate is liable to
continue indefinitely, resulting in the further suffering
and deaths of Afghan civilians, including women
and children. In our view, therefore, the international
community must come up with a realistic approach to
the problem. In that regard, we support Uzbekistan's
proposal to hold in an international conference in
Tashkent in March on a peaceful settlement of the
situation in Afghanistan, as Foreign Minister Kamilov
of Uzbekistan just outlined. I am convinced that within
the framework of that conference it will be possible to
discuss new mechanisms for a peaceful settlement of
the situation in Afghanistan in detail.

We share the view that the security and
development of Afghanistan and the whole region are
closely interrelated. Without security there can be no
development and without development there can be
no security. We believe that the countries of Central
Asia are ready to engage actively in the process of
building peace and stability in Afghanistan. We
have comparative advantages and the potential for
complementarity in our economies. However, there are
problems related to inadequate transport infrastructure
and limited access to external regions and markets.
All of us, and all of the Central Asian countries above
all, need to genuinely consolidate our cooperation and
efforts on a basis of good-neighbourly relations in the
interests of furthering the sustainable development
of the countries of the region, including Afghanistan.
We are also well aware that the development of major
regional cooperation is chiefly a task for the Central
Asian countries themselves.

I would like to note that since gaining independence,
all the countries of Central Asia have made significant
investments in improving railway and vehicle transport
infrastructure. However, we also have to acknowledge
that at present we have been taking an exclusively
country-specific approach, and because of that, we are
missing opportunities to effectively tackle our common
problems by coordinating efforts at the regional level.
We believe that with a regional approach, these projects
would help to expand trade and have a positive impact on
the social and economic situation in the region. In that
regard, Kyrgyzstan has always supported the further
consolidation of common efforts to develop coordinated
approaches to resolving current issues of regional
cooperation and development, assisting the peaceful
development of Afghanistan and promoting economic
integration at the regional and interregional level.

We commend the efforts made within the
framework of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul process and
the decisions taken following the seventh Ministerial
Conference of Foreign Ministers, on the theme
"Security and Economic Connectivity towards a
Strengthened Heart of Asia Region", held in Baku at
the end of 2017. Kyrgyzstan supports such initiatives
aimed at establishing peace and achieving national
reconciliation in Afghanistan, including strengthening
confidence-building measures among the countries
of the region, the joint implementation of various
projects in Afghanistan, support for alternative ways of
developing Afghanistan, and others.

There can be no question that the production and
export of Afghan opium are two of the main issues
plaguing Afghanistan and countries in the region.
As we see it, all possible support should be given to
the initiative of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime promoting Afghanistan's alternative
development among regional and international
partners. In that context, my country fully supports the
outcomes and decisions of the international conference
held in Ashgabat on 16 and 17 November of last year.
Along with measures to counter the illegal production
and trafficking of drugs and combat terrorism and
radicalism, it is extremely important to pursue joint
efforts to integrate Afghanistan's economy with those
of other countries in the region, including the States of
Central Asia, by expanding cooperation and improving
regional infrastructure, trade, investment, transit
and transport projects. The seventh ministerial-level
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan was held in Ashgabat on 15 November
2017, with the theme of deepening connectivity and
expanding trade through investment in infrastructure
and improved mutual cooperation. Some very important
regional projects were adopted as a result of the forum,
but they can be successfully implemented only if
the international community provides the necessary
financial support.

Kyrgyzstan views the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan as an important economic partner in the
region first and foremost, and we are making every effort
to implement the Central Asia-South Asia Electricity
Transmission and Trade project as soon as possible. We
firmly believe that its successful implementation will
bring peace as well as light and energy to Afghanistan.

I would like to take this opportunity to briefly touch
on Kyrgyzstan's initiatives related to Afghanistan. In
the area of transport infrastructure, we have supported
connecting the road and rail networks of the countries
of the region with those of Afghanistan. On that
front, we are participating in the implementation of
a five-nation project for the construction of a China-
Kyrgyzstan-Uzbekistan railway, and we are supporting
the construction of a railway within the framework
of the Economic Cooperation Organization along the
Iran-Afghanistan-Tajikistan-Kyrgyzstan-China route.
We are building an alternative North-South road in
Kyrgyzstan that will shorten the route connecting
the highways of our northern areas with Afghanistan
and Pakistan. In the field of subregional economic
integration, Kyrgyzstan is promoting an initiative
to establish a tripartite Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan-
Afghanistan agricultural-industrial consortium.

Where establishing peace and stability in
Afghanistan is concerned, we believe that education
will play a major role in restoring peace in the country.
We are ready to consider educating Afghan students in
our country's educational institutions with the financial
support of foreign donors, and we have the potential,
and the scientific and educational foundations, to
make that happen. For example, more than 300 Afghan
students are currently studying at various universities
in Kyrgyzstan.

In conclusion, I would like to note that we support
the commitment of all Central Asian countries to
joint long-term cooperation with Afghanistan, and
together with our international partners, we stand
ready to cooperate fully to meet the challenges we are
facing. Kyrgyzstan acknowledges the importance of
coordinated action and a regional approach on the part
of the international community in creating a zone of
peace, cooperation and prosperity in Central Asia and
Afghanistan. In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-
General's initiative to use the tool of preventive
diplomacy more effectively. We firmly believe that
only through joint efforts can we make progress in
solving Afghanistan's political and economic problems
and ensuring security both in that country and all over
the world.

Lastly, I wish our brother Afghan people peace
and prosperity.

