Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Commissioner
Chergui and UN-Women Executive Director Mlambo-
Ngcuka for their comprehensive briefing. We welcome
the joint visit to South Sudan that took place in October,
and see it as an example of enhanced cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
which can be instrumental to advancing the peace
process in South Sudan.
I visited Juba in June in my capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan, and my observations on
the humanitarian and socioeconomic situation broadly
concur with the information we just received. During
my visit, including in the protection-of-civilians camps,
I witnessed an immense scale of human suffering and
saw with my own eyes the devastating effect of the
conflict in South Sudan on the civilian population,
especially the most vulnerable - women and children.

The major difference between my visit and our
briefers' joint field mission is the political context and
the fact that, in September, South Sudanese parties
signed a revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Poland
welcomes that development and sees it as a significant
step in the peace process. At this point, I would like to
commend the determination of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and its member States to
broker a new peace agreement in South Sudan.

Two months after the singing ofthe new agreement,
we have seen some encouraging events. The peace
process, however, is still fragile, some areas of
concern remain and the civilian population is yet to
experience the dividends of peace. We are seriously
concerned about reports of the deliberate targeting of
civilians, serious human rights violations and abuses,
sexual and gender-based violence, the alarming levels
of food insecurity and the continued impediments to
humanitarian assistance.

The immediate end of violence is a precondition to
the improvement of the situation of the South Sudanese
population. It is therefore critical that all parties
immediately observe the provisions of the Agreement
on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians
and Humanitarian Access of December 2017. We also
believe that the transitional security arrangements need
to be put in place without any further delay.

We are also convinced that no agreements will

be durable without inclusiveness. We welcome the
inclusion in the revitalized agreement of the provisions
on women's representation in the pre-transition,
transitional and other decision-making bodies and
institutions. We stress the importance of putting those
provisions into practice. It is our strong beliefthat South
Sudanese women can play a vital role in peacebuilding
and State-building, as well as reconciliation efforts. In
that context, I would like to emphasize the necessity
of providing a more protective environment for women
and girls in South Sudan.
The people of South Sudan want peace more than
anything else, and after years of suffering they urgently
deserve it. They deserve stability, food security,
education for their children and State institutions that
care for citizens, protect them and provide them with
basic services. With the revitalized peace agreement,
the leaders of South Sudan have a unique opportunity
to rebuild the country. We truly believe that this time
all signatories will demonstrate real commitment and
determination to bring durable peace and stability to
South Sudan.

Last but not least - and as always, when we discuss
the issue ofSouth Sudan in the Council - let me take this
opportunity to express my country's appreciation to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for
its tireless efforts in extremely difficult circumstances.
We thank UNMISS personnel and praise the Mission's
role in the protection of civilians and ensuring an
environment conducive to humanitarian actors to
deliver their assistance.

