Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports the convening of today's open debate on
preventing and combating the financing of terrorism.
China welcomes Foreign Minister Le Drian to New
York to preside over the meeting.

China supports the adoption of resolution 2642
(2019), on preventing and combating the financing of
terrorism. We appreciate the efforts of France. I would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov
and President Billingslea for their briefings. We also
thank Ms. Buku for her briefing.

Preventing and combating the financing of
terrorism is an important part of responding to the threat
of terrorism and conducting international counter-
terrorism cooperation. Terrorism is the common enemy
of humankind. The future of all countries is a shared
one, and no country remain immune from the scourge
of terrorism. In order to completely eliminate terrorism
financing in the international financial system, we
must enhance our awareness of a community of a
shared future for humankind, commit to deepening
international cooperation and effectively implement
the relevant Security Council and other United Nations
resolutions throughout the world and follow the
technical standards, such as those recommended by the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF). China supports
the international community in strengthening the fight
against international terrorism in the light of the trends
and characteristics of terrorism financing, and we
would like to propose the following.

First, we must strictly abide by the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
maximize the central role of the United Nations and
the Security Council. The international fight against
terrorism includes preventing and combating the
financing of terrorism, and in that fight we must follow
international law and the norms governing international
relations and comply with the United Nations Charter
and Council resolutions.

Secondly, we need multiple measures and
integrated policies to address symptoms and root
causes. Eliminating financing for terrorism requires
the coordination and cooperation of political,
security, economic, financial, intelligence, science
and technology, and various other sectors. Special
commitments should be made to eradicate the sources
of, and breeding grounds for, terrorism. Efforts should
be made to assist Member States in poverty reduction
and alleviation and the realization of sustainable
development, and to encourage dialogue on an equal
footing and peace and harmony among different
civilizations and religions.

Thirdly, we must make advances in practical
cooperation in combating the financing of terrorism
and vigorously strengthen the capacity-building of
Member States. The fight against terrorism financing
involves many sectors and complicated issues of
a tactical nature. Developing countries face the
daunting challenge of a lack of capacity in financial
regulation and lack of resources. In order to prevent the
shortcomings of any given country from resulting in
an influx of external risks and thereby forming a gap,
and to prevent any place from becoming a safe haven
for terrorist financing, the international community
should vigorously strengthen its provision of technical
and capacity-building assistance to Member States, in
a joint effort to respond to the threat of the financing
of terrorism.

Fourthly, standards should be unified in order
to resolutely combat all forms of terrorism and
its financing. Terrorism and its financing must be
steadfastly fought against, no matter the location,
pretext or target country. The international community
and Member States should reach consensus and develop
synergies to effectively respond to all sources, ways
and channels of terrorist financing. Special attention
should be given to regulating the Internet, so as to cut
off terrorist organizations' use for their proliferation
and cyberfinancing.

China attaches great importance to preventing and
combating the financing of terrorism, with enhanced
regulatory mechanisms to combat money-laundering,
financing for terrorism and tax evasion as important
ways to participate in global governance and further
open up our financial services. China has been deeply
involved in the work of the FATF and the Eurasian
Group on Combating Money Laundering and Financing
of Terrorism (EAG). On 21 February, the plenary
meeting of the FATF reviewed and approved China's
fourth assessment report, thereby fully recognizing the
sound basis of China's role in countering the financing
of terrorism, as well as the favourable progress it
has made in its work. In 2018, China, in its capacity
as the rotating chairmanship of the EAG, hoste its
first forum on advancing international and domestic
cooperation among Governments and financial and
academic institutions.

Given the still grave situation in countering the
financing of terrorism and with a more stringent
international standard, China will further explore
launching a regulatory mechanism to counter
terrorist financing based on financial intelligence, the
monitoring of funding and shared data - a system
that will meet the needs of national Governments.
At the same time, China will actively participate in
international cooperation, provide capacity-building
assistance to developing countries within our ability
and work together with all other countries in jointly
eliminating the financing of terrorism, combating
terrorism and maintaining world peace and tranquillity.

