Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to start
by commending you, Mr. President, for convening this
briefing on cooperation between the United Nations
and the European Union (EU). I very much welcome the
presence and participation of Ms. Federica Mogherini,
whom I thank for her comprehensive briefing to the
Security Council on the multifaceted cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations.

In a very complex international environment, with
challenges of extreme magnitude, cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations is a crucial
element for the maintenance of international peace and
security and a strategic course of action in dealing with
international issues that are key in meeting the goals
of the United Nations and its Member States and their
peoples aspirations to peace and social development.

Regional challenges - whether security, social
or political in nature - require solutions for which
collective action is vital. That has already been referred
to today by different members ofthe Council. Collective
action enables multilateral approaches to addressing
traditional or emerging threats to regional arrangements,
as outlined in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. Such cooperation strengthens the United
Nations efforts to prevent conflicts, restore peace and
stability, and build and sustain peace in post-conflict
situations, while taking into account the comparative
strengths of regional organizations stemming from their
specific knowledge of regional and local issues and
their better understanding of the underlying causes of
conflict. In that regard, we acknowledge the significant
contribution of the European Union in supporting the
maintenance of international peace and security and its
ongoing commitment to international peacebuilding,
peacekeeping, humanitarian and financial assistance
and logistical support for peacekeeping undertakings.

The long-standing triangular cooperation between
the United Nations, the European Union and the African
Union is a key element in the search for stability on the

African continent. The institutional dialogue between
the Security Council and the Political and Security
Committee of the European Union is a fundamental
prerequisite for enhancing the EU-African partnership.
Angola welcomes the European Union's commitment,
reaffirmed at the most recent EU-Africa Summit, to
Africa's effort to manage its own security, as well as the
EU's tangible support for African Union-led operations
through the Peace Facility for Africa, its support for
the African Peace and Security Architecture and its
practical assistance in enabling the implementation of
the Architecture.

The European Union's participation has been
particularly relevant in three theatres of operation
in Africa under Security Council mandates: in the
Central African Republic, in Mali and in Somalia. In
the Central African Republic, the European Union-led
peacekeeping force made a meaningful contribution
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
towards achieving important improvements to the
situation in the country, despite the continuing presence
of armed groups. In Mali, the EU remains committed
to supporting the stabilization process at the political,
security, humanitarian and development levels through
the implementation of the Sahel strategy framework
in response to the complex challenges in Mali and the
region as a whole. The EU role in combating piracy
off the coast of Somalia through Operation Atalanta
and the European Union Regional Maritime Capacity
Building for the Horn of Africa and the Western Indian
Ocean, its provision of resources for capacity-building
in Somalia and its direct and sustained efforts in
support of the African Union Mission in Somalia have
been instrumental in the fight against terrorism and in
bringing stability and, we hope, sustainable peace to
that country.

The Libyan crisis is a matter of great concern to the
Council and the international community. Its painful
consequences are being felt by the Libyan people and
by people to the South, with the Sahel and West and
Central Africa experiencing a dangerous and deadly
spree of terrorism. The impact is also being felt in the
Mediterranean Sea, which has indeed been transformed
into a cemetery, with the recurrent drownings that we
see happening there.

Terrorism is the main cause of forced migration
of millions of people in search of survival, peace and
a better future. The fight against terrorism is an issue
that requires unity of action and the international
community's determination to extirpate that senseless
expression of extremist violence, hatred and intolerance.
The world coalition and its unity of purpose against
terrorism must be strengthened.

We very much appreciate the outcome of the Valletta
Summit on Migration, held on 11 and 12 November
last year, at which the European and African Heads of
State and Government discussed means to strengthen
cooperation in addressing the causes underlying
irregular migration and forced displacement, enhance
collaboration on legal migration and mobility, reinforce
protections for migrants and asylum-seekers, prevent
irregular migration, smuggling and trafficking in
human beings, and commit to focusing on social,
economic and political issues to revive hope, notably in
Africa and for African youth.

We commend the declared intent to deepen
cooperation among the States members of the EU to
find political and operational solutions in order to
prevent the tragedies we have been witnessing daily
with illegal immigrants. This is an issue that has to
be addressed, within the perspective of international
assistance, crisis management, integration and social
inclusion. In this regard, we value the cooperation the
European Union is providing to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and to the
International Organization for Migration in terms of
addressing the needs of refugees and asylum-seekers.
Angola looks forward to participating again in the
Migration Summit, which will be reconvened later this
year in order to address these issues.

Through a strong partnership, the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union can
strengthen the efforts of the wider international
community to face the challenges and build capacity
to address current threats in a comprehensive and long-
term manner, based on the guiding principles of mutual
respect and respect for human rights and international
law as the key factors in sustaining peace and stability.

Finally, Angola highly values the European Union
as a global player of prime relevance whose influence
worldwide, in working with the United Nations and its
international and regional partners, is crucial to the
collective effort to find lasting solutions to the issues we
continue to face. This effort is a shared responsibility
and a moral duty. We must make our best effort to work
together for solidarity, peace and the well-being of all.

