Mr. Vallini (France) (Spoke in French): I thank the
Japanese presidency for organizing this open debate on
peacebuilding in Africa and for its initiative on behalf
of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/12, which we
have just adopted.

Given its historical ties with the continent, France
cannot remain indifferent towards anything taking
place in Africa. Each time it is needed, France has
assumed its responsibilities in Africa. When Bamako
ran the risk of falling into the hands of terrorists, we
shouldered our responsibility. When the threat of
genocide arose in the Central African Republic, we
assumed our responsibilities. Faced with the ongoing
conflicts in Somalia, the Sudan, South Sudan and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we are also
assuming our responsibilities.

For France, engagement in Africa does not mean
acting on its own or as it alone sees fit. For France, being
engaged in Africa does not mean acting unilaterally;
it means acting first at the request of and with our
African partners, and, of course, acting in accordance
with international law. All of the military interventions
undertaken by President Francois Hollande were
authorized by, and have included the participation of,
the African Union and the United Nations. Moreover,
engaging in Africa does not mean intervening militarily
and then leaving the country and its people to take
care of themselves. It means standing beside them and
supporting them along the path to security, democracy
and human development.

Security in the African continent is our primary
goal. I would mention Operation Barkhane in the
Sahel, particularly in Mali, where the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali is also deployed. I am also thinking about our
continuing presence in the Central African Republic,
alongside the African Union's African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA).

We also support the African peacekeeping
operations, and I would refer in particular of the joint
multinational force in the Lake Chad region, which was
agreed upon at the Paris summit on security in Nigeria,
in connection with the fight against Boko Haram. France
has devoted significant human and logistical resources
to the African countries that have been targeted by that
terrorist group.

The primary responsibility of every State is to
guarantee the safety of its citizens and protect its
population. That requires sufficient numbers of well-
trained and well-equipped police and military forces.
That is why France has been cooperating on security
issues, especially in the Sahel countries, in order
to enable Africans to ensure their own safety to the
greatest extent possible on their own. We have been
training more than 20,000 African soldiers each year
in France and Africa and have also been playing an
active role in deploying European security missions in
Africa - for example, in the Central African Republic.

After security comes democracy. Security should
never be pursued at the expense of respect for the rule
of law. The protecting human rights, strengthening
democratic institutions, combating impunity and
establishing good governance are imperative. In that
context, the holding of fair and transparent elections
is highly important, and France strongly supports
the African Union regulations that oppose late and
non-consensual changes to a country's Constitution,
especially when the purpose of such changes is to
prevent a democratic change.

France has always mobilized in defence of human
rights. We have just renewed and strengthened the
mandate of MINUSCA, which is deployed in the
Central African Republic and which we consider
multidimensional. In fact, our goal is not only the
physical protection of civilians, but also the rule of
law, the fight against impunity, good governance and
strengthening the State's authority throughout the
territory as it seeks to address the threat of armed
groups. In that context, on 26 and 27 October in Paris,
France will organize a ministerial conference on
peacekeeping in the Francophone community.

Finally, after security and democracy, which act to
support peacebuilding, I would like to discuss human
development. In that regard, I would like to focus some
comments on education. Education, as we all know,
is the foundation of development, whether the issue
involves health, the environment, women's rights, the
fight against extremism or democratic governance.
Everything depends on education, everything starts
with education. No country has truly taken off until
80 per cent of its population has completed primary
school. The progress made over the past 15 years is
considerable.

Let us measure it: the number of children not

attending school worldwide has been halved. However,
major challenges remain owing to the crises, the chronic
under-funding and, of course, the population explosion.
Today, 60 million children around the world are totally
deprived of education. By 2030, we will have to enrol
more than 600 million additional children, including
450 million in Africa, and the investment needs are
huge. They amount to $40 billion per year. We must
therefore shift the balance, and the international
community must reinvest substantially and urgently in
quality education, especially in Africa, as it was able to
do in health.

That is why I welcome the work of the commission
led by Gordon Brown, upon the initiative in Ban
Ki-moon, particularly with respect to education in
emergency situations, which is key to maintaining
peace in Africa. Crises disrupt social cohesion and
undermine the ability of States to rebuild. They are
preventing 75 million children today from attending
school normally. The Education Cannot Wait fund,
set up at the Global Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul,
provides a first response.
In conclusion, conflicts are not inevitable in Africa.
Let us see the continent as a whole, bearing in mind not
only the failures but also the successes of Africans and
the international community in many areas, which offer
the promise that Africa will one day be a continent
of peace.

