Mr. Serry (spoke in French): I warmly thank you,
Mr. President, for your kinds words. The past seven
years have been an extraordinary experience for me
that will remain with me for the rest of my life. I humbly
and gratefully acknowledge the unique opportunity
afforded me.

(spoke in English)

I brief the Council today against the backdrop of
another month plagued by the brutality that continues
to cause immense human suffering across the region.
As this will be my last briefing, I intend to focus on
my own mandate, while of course recognizing that the
Arab-Israeli conflict is affected by the dramatic events
in the region.

In any peace agreement Israeli security concerns
will need to be seriously addressed. However, losing
sight of reaching peace between Israel, Palestine and
the wider Arab world altogether - I have repeatedly
warned the Council that we may be heading in that
direction - would be tantamount to pouring more oil
on the regional flames. Conversely, real progress in
achieving a two-State solution and ending the longest
occupation in modern history would go a long way
towards improving regional security and strengthening
moderate forces in the region. In that regard, the Arab
Peace Initiative still holds out the prospect of Israel
normalizing its relations with the Arab and wider
Muslim world, rather than isolating itself.

Let me first briefly update the on significant
events during this reporting, period before sharing
some parting thoughts based on my seven years of
experience, which the Council may wish to consider.

On 17 March, general elections were held in Israel.
We congratulate Prime Minister Netanyahu and the
Likud party on winning the highest number of seats,
and note that President Rivlin has invited him to form
the next Government, a process that may take several
weeks. However, I am frankly concerned by many of
the hard-line statements put forward in the final days of
campaigning, in particular remarks by the Prime Minister
raising serious doubts about Israel's commitment to
the two-State solution. I urge the incoming Israeli
Government to seize the opportunity of a fresh mandate
to quickly demonstrate in words and, more importantly
by actions, that commitment.

Earlierthismonth,thePalestineLiberationOrganization
(PLO) Central Council adopted a series of decisions,
including "to suspend all forms of security coordination
given Israel's systematic and ongoing noncompliance with
its obligations under signed agreements." While noting
that in three months' time the PLO Executive Committee
will report back on the implementation of that decision,
to date security coordination is continuing. That move
may have far-reaching consequences and, along with
the Palestinian accession to the International Criminal
Court effective 1 April, it is yet another powerful sign of
Palestinian determination not to return to the status quo.

We cannot run from reality. There is a genuine
possibility that ending Palestinian security coordination
with Israel may be the final nail in the coffin of the
Oslo Accords. However, there is still time for parties
to end the cycle of counterproductive action and
counteraction.

With the third month of Israel's withholding of
Palestinian tax revenues, now amounting to over
$400 million, the Palestinian Authority's financial
crisis is deepening. We are deeply concerned that,
despite the announcement of an austerity budget
for 2015, that temporary band-aid may not allow the
Palestinian Authority to survive. Israel's action is in
violation of the Paris Protocol of the Oslo Accords. We
again call on Israel to immediately reverse its decision.

In Gaza, an equally destructive financial crisis,
related to the lack of progress on civil service reform,
continues to ratchet up tensions. It has been nearly
five months since the United Nations facilitated a
humanitarian payment to Gaza civil servants. I cannot
help but feel that such a gesture may be needed yet
again to sustain minimum conditions for stability until
the parties have addressed the underlying issue.

In that regard, I welcome Prime Minister Hamdallah's
second Visit to Gaza this week and commend his
continued efforts to find solutions for this and other
critical issues, which will facilitate his Government's
assumption of its rightful responsibility in Gaza. I
also welcome last week's declaration of support by
President Abbas and Hamas for the Swiss road map
pertaining to the reintegration and reform of the public
sector in Gaza. I would like to thank Switzerland for its
committed efforts on that issue and urge the road map's
swift implementation.

While the appalling situation in Gaza endures,
there are some signs of progress. While not enough,
the temporary Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism is
making a difference. As of 23 March, almost 80 per
cent of damaged shelters had been processed through
the Mechanism, with over 61,000 individuals having
procured construction materials to carry out their home
repairs. In addition, the Mechanism is ready to process
large-scale reconstruction. Over 40 international and
private sector projects have been approved, and 5 are
already under way - including Qatar's first major
housing project to construct 1,000 housing units. I
appreciate Israel's willingness to facilitate that process.
I therefore encourage all international partners to take
note that the Mechanism is working and to fully engage
on Gaza reconstruction, in line with their pledges in
Cairo last October.

The situation in the West Bank, including in East
Jerusalem, remains tense. At practically every monthly
briefing during the past seven years we have reported
on negative developments. Those include the loss
of lives and injuries resulting from demonstrations,
inter-communal violence, often involving Israeli
settlers, and Israeli search-and-arrest operations. We
have also reported on security incidents, including,
increasingly, so-called lone-wolf attacks. And the
Secretary-General and I have firmly condemned acts of
terror. I do not need to give the details to report that this
month resembles the average from previous briefings,
including on home demolitions - another disturbing
trend. Numbers sometimes hide the grim reality of
entrenched occupation leading to growing despair.

Neither did we fail to report to the Council
more positive developments, in particular related to
Palestinian State-building and the easing of Israeli
restrictive measures. After a long-standing dispute,
Rawabi has finally been connected to the water
supply, thereby allowing families to begin moving into
that modern Palestinian township near Ramallah. I
also welcome recent Israeli steps to ease some of its
restrictions on the movement of people and goods in
the West Bank and Gaza. I only wish that I could have
reported such positive news on a regular basis, and I
urge Israel to expand upon those important initiatives.

Unsurprisingly, settlement planning and activity
also continued this month, despite unanimous opposition
from the international community. According to the
Israeli non-governmental organization Peace Now,
from January 2008 to January 2014 ~ or six of my
seven years as Special Coordinator - the population in
settlements in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
steadily increased by an estimated 16 per cent to a
total of 551,500 persons - over half a million people.
Some 16,500 new residential units were constructed in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem during that
period.

Illegal settlement activity simply cannot be
reconciled with the objective of a negotiated two-State
solution, and may kill the very possibility of reaching
peace on the paradigm of two States for two peoples.
I frankly do not know if it is already too late. The
minimum conditions of trust cannot be restored without
the new Israeli Government taking credible steps to
freeze settlement activity.

Allow me, in this final briefing, to share my parting
thoughts.

Upon leaving this position, I cannot but express
an overriding feeling that I have been part of a peace
process in which a can is kicked down an endless road.
During the past seven years, three United States-led
peace initiatives remained inconclusive and did not
bring us any closer to the urgently needed political
foundation for a Palestinian State as part of a two-State
solution. That is why the remarkable progress achieved
in Palestinian State-building, pursued vigorously
under the leadership of President Abbas and former
Prime Minister Fayyad, has started to turn into a failed
success. Moreover, all three stalled negotiations were
followed by wars in Gaza, leaving the Strip devastated
seven months after the last war, as I observed during
my last visit.

To seek to prevent yet another descent into conflict,
I have publicly called for a new strategy prioritizing
Gaza. By that, let me be clear: I do not mean "Gaza only."
Neither I nor the United Nations would ever support a
strategy that would seek to divide Gaza from the West
Bank. Focusing support on Gaza must be inextricably
linked to addressing the wider peace process.

Prioritizing Gaza means that we recognize that we
cannot possibly hope to pick up the pieces ofa shattered
Israel-Palestinian peace strategy, leaving Gaza as it is.
It means that we cannot possibly hope to again board
the peace train in the West Bank and arrive in Gaza
as a final stop. It means that we must fix Gaza - or
at least stabilize it - so that we do not reconstruct it
for a third time, only to see it destroyed again, and so
that it does not halt peace efforts that aim to reach the
long-desired two-State vision: Israel living side-by-side
in peace and security with one single, unified State of
Palestine. Prioritizing Gaza means for me achieving
four main objectives urgently.

First, we need a more stable ceasefire under the
umbrella of the Government of national consensus.
I have called for a reconstruction hudna: a freeze of
all military activities above and below ground over at
least a three-to-five-year time frame. That would allow
time and give donors confidence for the large-scale,
accelerated reconstruction that Gaza desperately needs:
major infrastructure projects, including housing; a
gas pipeline, to generate inexpensive energy; and
a desalination plant to address the chronic water
shortages. Once those immediate needs are met, a next
step would be to look into providing an opening to the
world via a seaport.

Secondly, such a hudna can be sustainable only if
Palestinians move towards real reconciliation. That has
not happened yet. Clearly, it will not be an easy task. But
what is the alternative? Empowering the Government of
national consensus to take up its leadership role in Gaza
is the only way forward. Bringing all the crossings in
Gaza under the control of the consensus Government
and reforming the civil service represent essential next
steps.

Thirdly, all Gaza crossings need to be opened
further to support the free movement of people and
goods, including to reconnect the Strip and the West
Bank and to enable exports.

And, fourthly, the international community
must be prepared to fully support the Government of
national consensus politically and financially. That
includes acting on the commitments made at the
Cairo Conference to support Gaza reconstruction.
A new strategy for Gaza needs the engagement of all
stakeholders. I very much hope that conditions will
soon allow Egypt to continue playing its important role,
including by resuming the stalled ceasefire talks and
promoting Palestinian reconciliation.
I can honestly say that Gaza has consistently
been a top priority for the United Nations, and for me
personally. During each crisis, the United Nations,
including through the personal involvement of the
Secretary-General, was in the forefront to stop the
fighting. Let me here also thank the United Nations
family on the ground, particularly the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, for its indispensable role in picking up
the pieces in the aftermath and for doing the important
development and humanitarian work. The stark truth
is that, despite all the efforts, Gaza is our collective
failure and the people of Gaza continue to suffer the
consequences.

Another lesson learned after seven years and three
wars is that the Middle East peace process has mainly
played out on three interconnected and mutually
conflicting tracks: peace negotiations, Gaza, and the
United Nations. The interplay of these three tracks has
produced a dangerous outcome - I dare say the biggest
crisis to date to our joint efforts to achieve a two-State
solution. As I have noted in my briefings to the Council
since May 2012, the parties are heading towards an
outcome that I can only describe as a one-State reality.

As the parties do not appear at this point ready to
recommence negotiations, we should not rush them
back to the table. If indeed we believe that they do
continue to seek an outcome oftwo neighbouring States
living in peace and security, but are unable themselves
at this juncture to agree on a meaningful framework
to resume negotiations, the international community
should seriously consider presenting such a framework
for negotiations, including parameters, to achieve this.
That may be the only way to preserve the goal ofa two-
State solution in the present circumstances.
Peace is first and foremost the responsibility of the
parties to the conflict, but that reality cannot absolve
international institutions of their responsibilities. For
its part, the Quartet has largely failed to live up to
expectations, although recent efforts to reinvigorate
it, including through an enhanced role for regional
stakeholders, may have a positive impact. It remains the
primary responsibility of the Council to play its role in
developing a new peace architecture for resolving the
conflict at long last. Resolution 242 (1967), embodying
the key principle of land for peace, is nearly half a
century old. During my tenure - in my first year,
actually - the Council adopted only two resolutions
on Israel and Palestine, and neither of these provided a
strategy. Has the time not come for the Council to lead?

In conclusion, let me express my appreciation for
the dedicated work of the many staff members of the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, without whose efforts
I could not have done my job. And further, I wish to
convey my sincere gratitude to the Security Council
and to the Secretary-General for all the support I have
received over these eventful years. I could not have
carried out my mission without their strong backing and,
in particular, without their support for my maintaining
contact - as the only peace envoy permanently on
the ground - with all parties concerned, including,
as appropriate, with non-State actors, such as Hamas.
Goal-oriented contact with such interlocutors is an
essential element for any envoy seeking peace in a
complex, modern conflict.

Finally, to my successor, Nickolay Mladenov,
I wish every success in dealing with this infinitely
challenging environment.

