Mrs. Papadopoulou (Greece): I should like to
thank Mr. Egeland for his briefing on the humanitarian
situation in Darfur and in northern Uganda and also for
his intensive efforts, his advocacy role and his
important work in the humanitarian field.

The mere fact that Mr. Egeland, the highest-
ranking humanitarian United Nations official, had to
cut his visit short because he was denied access to
Jebel Marra, Tawilla and other areas demonstrates the
complications involved with regard to humanitarian
access. Four million people are in need of assistance,
and such assistance must be granted to them. I agree
with Mr. Egeland that now is the time to act.

In that regard, it is vital that the moratorium on
restrictions on humanitarian workers in the Sudan be
extended to and implemented in 2007. It is indeed very
worrisome that certain humanitarian organizations,
such as the Norwegian Refugee Council, have been
forced to suspend their activities. On the positive side,
we welcome the fact that the Minister of Humanitarian
Affairs of the Sudan has agreed to work with the
United Nations to lift the restrictions.
The agreement reached on Thursday in Addis
Ababa must be used to make progress in the
humanitarian sphere. Interpretations or
misinterpretations of what was agreed should stop, and
final agreement must be confirmed by the next meeting
of the African Union Peace and Security Council.

The re-energized African force should protect
civilians and enable security for humanitarian workers
and others. In that context, I consider the
recommendation made by Mr. Egeland today to be
particularly pertinent.

We support the Juba peace process, and we
believe it constitutes a real breakthrough that could
bring an end to a long and particularly brutal conflict.

We also consider Mr. Egeland's meeting with
Joseph Kony a breakthrough. It was the first time that
the international community had the opportunity to
impress upon the leader of the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) the importance of humanitarian issues. We hope
that during the follow-on information expected today
progress will be made in coping with the grave
problems created by LRA actions in the area.

In our view, the most crucial issue in the months
to come for northern Uganda will be to find a way to
reconcile the need for peace with combating impunity
and respecting the International Criminal Court
process. In the short term, regional actors and the
international community should spare no effort to
ensure that resources are adequately allocated to
northern Uganda, including for humanitarian efforts
and for the sustainable reintegration of the population
affected by conflict. In that respect, we commend the
Government of Uganda for its recovery and
development plan for the area.

