Mr. Sucharipa (Austria): Allow me first of all to
congratulate you rather belatedly, Sir, on your exercise of
your high office in September. It was good to see the
presidency in such capable and experienced hands.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The Central and Eastern European countries
associated with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia - and the associated country Cyprus, as well as
the European Free Trade Association countries members of
the European Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein,
align themselves with this statement.

Let me also thank your delegation, Sir, for
organizing this debate on an issue which, in the View of
the European Union, is of greatest importance. Our
thanks, of course, also go to the Deputy Secretary-General
for her valuable introductory remarks.

Let me also express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General and, of course, to Under-Secretary-
General Vieira de Mello, for the report on protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations. The European Union highly values the clear
and structured manner in which the report approaches one
of the most complex issues the international community
has to deal with today. We sincerely hope that this
document will not only serve as an essential and most
needed analytical tool, but also stimulate in-depth
discussions and guide practical efforts.

In May last year, the question of the protection of
humanitarian assistance was, for the first time, discussed
in an open debate of the Security Council. We could
quote numerous examples to illustrate that international
humanitarian law and human rights continue to be gravely
violated with impunity. Whether these violations occurred
as a result of a combination of brutality and ignorance, or
of systematic and organized action, is irrelevant as such:
The victims are deprived of their human security. The
report before us clearly points out that simplistic concepts
that do not address the conflicts leading to and produced
by massive displacement of civilian populations and
humanitarian crises will fail. Humanitarian action has to
be fully consistent with broader United Nations peace and
development activities, and coordinated accordingly.

The compliance of States and non-State actors with
the provisions of international law, and in particular
humanitarian law, is an indispensable prerequisite for the
effective protection of humanitarian assistance operations.
A major problem in recent years has been the failure of
States to bring to justice those responsible for violations.
The adoption of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court, which the European Union worked hard to achieve,
is a significant step forward. In today's conflicts, where
non-State actors play a growing role, ensuring the
accountability of the individual under international law is
of great importance. The jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court over individuals will promote the greater
accountability of State and non-State actors alike.

The Statute of the International Criminal Court also
covers the security needs of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel by providing that the act of

 

intentionally directing attacks against personnel involved in
humanitarian assistance or involved in peacekeeping
missions in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, as long as these missions are entitled to the
protection given to civilians under the law of armed conflict
constitutes a war crime. It thus brings these attacks under
the Court's jurisdiction and ensures that those acts will be
prosecuted.

The European Union, therefore, considers early entry
into force of the Statute to be of paramount importance.
The European Union encourages the countries which have
not yet done so to sign the Statute and all States to ratify it.
The General Assembly at its fifty-third session must take
all necessary measures to ensure entry into operation of the
International Criminal Court without undue delay.

On a more general level, States must become parties
to and implement all other relevant instruments of
international law and should intensify their efforts to
disseminate the respective rules within their armed and
security forces, as well as among the civilian population.
Armed and security forces have to be trained in
international humanitarian standards, and national
legislation must give effect to rules which safeguard
civilians and humanitarian workers and hold perpetrators
accountable. As the majority of civilian victims of acts of
violence in situations of armed conflict are women and
children, the European Union reiterates that a gender
perspective, as well as the important dimension of children
in armed conflict, has to be taken more seriously into
consideration. In the field of training and capacity-building,
the United Nations, not least through its relevant
programmes and bodies, and regional organizations and
international humanitarian organizations have an essential
role to play.

The European Union also believes that the
recommendation made by the Secretary-General in his
report on Africa (S/1998/318) with regard to holding
combatants financially liable to their victims under
international law, where civilians are made the deliberate
target of aggression, is certainly worth exploring.

The European Union considers the right of safe and
unimpeded access of international humanitarian
organizations to refugees, displaced persons and vulnerable
populations in conflict situations to be a fundamental
principle. Faced with the tragic situations in Kosovo and
elsewhere, we must emphasize this principle again and
again. The European Union strongly condemns the arbitrary
denial of these rights.

Furthermore, we strongly believe that State
sovereignty cannot be used as an argument to deny
humanitarian access. In this regard, the European Union
wishes to reiterate that it would welcome the
establishment of an international mechanism to assist host
Governments, at their request, in maintaining the security
and neutrality of refugee camps and settlements, as
proposed by the Secretary General earlier this year. We
welcome, of course, ongoing work on this topic within
the Council.

The European Union deeply deplores the growing
number of attacks against personnel of United Nations
and humanitarian organizations. These attacks are often
carried out by parties to armed conflicts in the context of
a military strategy and in deliberate disregard of their
responsibility to ensure the safety, security and freedom
of movement of such personnel. In this context, the Union
wants to draw particular attention to General Assembly
resolution 52/167 on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and calls for the full
implementation of this resolution and the accession to the
relevant legal instruments, in particular for early
ratification of the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel.

The European Union believes that States should
cooperate more closely with each other in the field, with
the United Nations and with other competent international
institutions to prevent attacks against humanitarian
workers, notably through a better exchange of
information. In this context, the European Union draws
attention to the proposals contained in the European
Commission's working paper "Security of Relief Workers
and Humanitarian Space", which can be provided on
request.

We also think that humanitarian organizations should
put even more emphasis than before on adequate training
for their personnel, taking into account the importance of
the principles of humanitarian law in humanitarian
operations. We strongly encourage humanitarian agencies
to enhance their security arrangements and make every
effort to coordinate their activities so that the risks to
which they might be exposed are reduced to a minimum.
The Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement and Non-Govemmental
Organizations in Disaster Relief should be duly taken into
account.
States on whose territory attacks on humanitarian
workers have taken place should initiate without any

 

delay impartial and efficient inquiry procedures. The
European Union considers it imperative that States ensure
that any threat or act of violence committed against
humanitarian workers on their territory is fully investigated
and that those responsible for such acts are prosecuted, in
accordance with international law and national legislation.

The European Union stresses that appropriate and
realistic mandates, as well as adequate resources, must be
provided for any operations authorized by the Security
Council to provide for the safety of refugees, displaced
persons and other civilians, as well as for the security of
the United Nations personnel and other humanitarian
organizations, and to ensure the unimpeded and safe
delivery of humanitarian assistance.

As the world's largest humanitarian donor, the
European Union expresses its sincere hope that today's
discussions will lead to practical results and thus be an
important step to put an end to the culture of impunity,
which has left such ugly marks on the history of this
century.

