Ms. Pessoa Pinto (Timor-Leste): Mr. President,
this is the first time that I appear before such an august
body that has contributed so much to my country's
freedom and well-being. Hence, my first words are
necessarily of gratitude for the Council's unrelenting
interest and support, without which the progress we
have made so far would not have been possible.

You are all very familiar with our Senior Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Jose Ramos-
Horta, who sends his warm regards. He has been in
Denpasar, Bali, this weekend in meetings with his
Indonesian colleague and friend, Hassan Wirayuda.
Together they have reviewed the progress so far on our
efforts to demarcate our common land border, as well
as addressing other residual issues.

It is a particular pleasure for me to be able to
participate in this meeting of the Council, which will
consider both the last report of the Secretary-General
and the last statement of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General under the Council's current
mandate, leading to a consideration by the Council of a
resolution on the extension of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) with a
modified mandate.

The story of the association of the United Nations
with my country is a unique and inspiring chapter in
the history of our people and will always be linked to
the attainment of our independence and the vision of
self-reliance and social and economic fulfilment we are
striving to accomplish.

I would like to acknowledge the historic and
unique partnership that binds us so closely together.
Starting with a resolution of the General Assembly, the
contribution of the Special Envoys of the Secretary-
General, the role of the United Nations in conducting
the referendum, the endorsement of the INTERFET by
the Council in a particularly tragic time for our people,
the executive administration provided by the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) in close cooperation with the Transitional
Government of Timor-Leste, the national parliamentary
elections, the election of the President and, most
recently, the Mission of Support in specific areas to the
first Government of Timor-Leste offer a chain of
association that cannot be separated from the fulfilment
of the aspirations of our people. It is appropriate to
recall that, now that we are entering the phase of
gradual closure of that special relationship.

In historical terms, there was no road map, but
together we have managed to rebuild a nation. The
independent and self-confident State of Timor-Leste
has emerged from the debris of disorder and
desperation that is so fresh in our minds.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2004/333), which highlights many important
areas where considerable progress has been made.
However, I will not dwell on those achievements. The
report also identifies shortcomings and points the way
forward, stressing the need for concerted action, both
by the Government and people of Timor-Leste and the
country's generous development partners.

However, it is appropriate to clarify that the
investigations of a number of civil servants and police
officers was due to the fact that the political rallies
referred to in the Secretary-General's report took place
over two consecutive days, one of which was a work
day, were and conducted during work hours while the
police officers were in uniform.

In that regard, I would also like to stress that
following the approval of the Civil Service Act, which
embodies the code of conduct and disciplinary rules
and procedures, forms and manuals have been prepared
and finalized with the valuable assistance of UNDP
advisors to facilitate the understanding and the
dissemination of the Act. A major programme of
dissemination is being prepared and will involve
various Government institutions, including the
Ministry of State Management, the Inspector General,
the Human Rights Advisor and the Advisor for Gender
in the Office of the Prime Minister, and will also
involve members of Parliament and civil society.

In relation to civil society, allow me to focus on
the cooperation of the Catholic Church with the
Government to instil a culture of ethical and moral
values where transparency and accountability are not
merely fashionable slogans. Together, the Government,
the Church, the presidency and the national Parliament
are forging a new alliance to revive our cultural values
and beliefs. The Church's programme was launched at
the ordination of Don Alberto Ricardo as bishop of Dili
on 2 May 2004. The programme is anchored in the
Church's social doctrine, with the aim of attaining the
participation of women, preventing HIV/AIDS and
domestic violence and embarking on responsible
family planning where education and moral values play
a pivotal role.

With regard to the tensions in the Dili mosque, it
is worth noting that the mosque was built and is owned
by the Timorese Muslim community and that it has
been illegally occupied since "black September" in
1999; it has since been a source of problems. Today
there are close to 300 undocumented and illegal
immigrants living within the confines of the mosque. I
am pleased to report that tensions have eased
considerably, thanks to the professionalism of our
police, working in conjunction with the human rights
adviser to the Prime Minister and the International
Organization for Migration, and thanks to the tolerance
of my Government.

All illegal aliens occupying the mosque have
been advised by the Government that they are required
to present themselves to the Immigration Department
and to provide their documentation to the authorities
for verification. Those that are without identification
papers are required to contact their respective
embassies. To facilitate this, the Government has
extended the deadline. Those not in possession of the
required papers are at risk of being expelled;
applications for permanent visas will be processed on a
case-by-case basis and according to the laws of Timor-
Leste. Resolution of this issue will further enable
Timorese Muslims to exercise their constitutional and
fundamental human right to freedom of religion, which
until now has been jeopardized by the illegal
immigrants occupying the mosque.

I am also glad to inform the Council that the
Organic Law on the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) and the Organic Law on the Timorese Armed
Forces (F-FDTL) have been approved and have been
promulgated by the President and that they have
entered into force. The law on a code of conduct,
disciplinary rules and procedures for the PNTL has
also been approved by the Council of Ministers and is
expected to be promulgated by the President and
published in the official gazette by Thursday of this
week. As pointed out, those laws are of great
importance for the maintenance of law and order,
because they provide clarity concerning the roles of the
police and armed forces, particularly with regard to
backup arrangements for support to civil power.

We would like also to thank Ambassador Sharma
for his insightful presentation of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2004/333). We have worked closely
with him, and we feel a deep resonance with what he
has said. As has been pointed out, we have been
through good and not so good times together.
Ambassador Sharma knows our trials and tribulations
and has assisted us in facing them with solidarity,
wisdom and commitment. We are sorry that he will be
leaving Timor-Leste at the end of the present mandate
of UNMISET. We wish him all the best and are
confident that he will succeed in his future endeavours.

We are also convinced that the Secretary-General
will nominate an experienced special representative to
succeed him, as he did when he chose Ambassador
Sharma to follow in the distinguished footsteps of
Sergio Vieira de Mello, to whose memory we again pay
our deep respects. As this is my first time addressing
the Security-Council, I wish to acknowledge the
invaluable contribution that Sergio made to our nation.
I feel he was one of us.

I agree that much needs to be done to establish a
society based on respect for the rule of law. The
creation and continued professionalism of an impartial,
accountable and responsive police service is an
important element, and so is the development of the
judiciary. I am sure that members will appreciate that,
the importance of those goals notwithstanding, we have
worked within a very compressed time frame: on the
fast forward button, as it were. The results must be
considered in that perspective.

I trust that, through the deployment of police
technical advisers, the provision of judge-mentors and
the programme of assistance to core administrative
structures and to the justice system, the support of the
United Nations will contribute to the achievement of
our goals. Those officers, working in harmony with
their Timorese counterparts and conscious of the
cultural sensitivities and the needs of our country, will
enjoy unstinted cooperation with a view to meeting our
shared objectives.

I am grateful that the international community
has appreciated the need for maintenance of a small
military contingent to provide assistance to the F-
FDTL and the PNTL in emergencies, to preserve and
restore the fragile peace that currently exists.

Timor-Leste enjoys the best of relations with its
neighbours. We acknowledge the goodwill towards
Timor-Leste that exists at all levels in Indonesia and
particularly the efforts deployed by Indonesia's leaders
to resolve outstanding issues. However, individuals and
groups inimical to our interests still exist. We trust that
the support of the international community, directed
towards resettlement of refugees, promotion of
reconciliation and economic and social development,
will produce concrete results and diminish such threats.
I would like to note that finalization of the land border
demarcation between Indonesia and Timor-Leste and
early operationalization of agreements to facilitate
cross-border links between residents of border areas on
both sides would contribute significantly to that
process. Despite political will and determination on
both sides, we have failed to reach agreement, through
a lack of technical development, on meeting our
deadlines. Timor-Leste would enhance its efforts, in
cooperation with Indonesia, so as to finalize an
agreement before the end of June 2004.

Negotiations on our maritime border with
Australia have begun, with the first formal round
having been held in Dili. The position of my
Government on this is simple and clear: we are entitled
to a just and fair maritime boundary with our two
neighbours, Australia and Indonesia; and we are guided
by principles of international Law and practice.

Between Timor-Leste and Australia, in an area
that is far closer to our shores, lie vast reserves of oil
and gas. A just and fair resolution of this issue would
mean better health care, education and economic
independence for our country, with the eradication of
poverty and the fulfilment of the Millennium
Development Goals. We know that international law is
on our side, and we believe that Australia, one of the
wealthiest countries in the world, as a neighbour and as
a friend, will find its way to respect justice and
democratic principles.

I must emphasize the need for substantial and
continuing support from our development partners to
overcome the formidable challenges before our new
nation. No efforts at enlightened governance can
succeed unless we can also advance economically and
show visible improvements in the quality of life and in
terms of the creation of jobs. The international
community must assist in ensuring that the investments
made in strengthening our self-governing capability are
a springboard to prosperity.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
having outlined several mechanisms and requirements,
including the appointment of Timorese counterparts, so
that maximum advantage can be gained from the
support being extended by the international community
through the Council. We appreciate that advice, and we
shall continue our endeavours in that direction. It will
have been noted that in recent months, great progress
has been made in that respect and many of the
recommendations in the report of the Secretary-
General have been met. However, I would like to stress
that, practically speaking, it is impossible to run until
one learns to walk.
While we certainly do not intend to rest on our
accomplishments, further progress in the areas of good
governance and political development will require
substantial economic growth and social development. I
trust that Timor-Leste will continue to benefit from the
support and assistance of the international community
in that regard, so as to guarantee that the success story
is sustainable and that it is a reason for all of us here to
be proud.

