Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Prior to the conclusion of
negotiations resulting in the draft resolution before us, most
of us were totally dispirited about the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in Africa. We were crestfallen,
because of the fear that the concept of peacekeeping in
Africa was no longer of interest to the Council. But, with
the quality of the draft resolution, those fears have now
been allayed. We have been reassured that interest in the
continent's problems has not been lost.

We are therefore most grateful to the delegation of
the United Kingdom for its initiative and, indeed, for its
constructive approach to the proposals made by various
delegations with a View to improving the text. We cannot
help signalling out Canada for insisting so much, and
rightly so, on the protection of civilians. And, to crown it
all, United States Secretary of State Madeleine Albright
visited Sierra Leone a few days ago to demonstrate once
again the unflinching support of the United States for the
peace process. All these expressions of support will send
the right signals to the Government and the entire people
of Sierra Leone, that the rest of the international
community is behind them in their effort to consolidate
the peace and to rebuild their country.

We all agree that it has been a long and arduous task
to get to where we are today. This unprecedented show of
international support also constitutes a unique opportunity,
which must be seized by the people of Sierra Leone, to
restore their beautiful country to its former glory days as
a great centre of learning, of trade and commerce, of
culture - in short, as the vibrant nation that it once was.
In order to achieve this, however, as called for in the
draft resolution, the parties must fulfil their commitments
under the Peace Agreement. In this connection, the
process of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
should be accelerated. With the return to Freetown of the
leaders of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and the
Armed Forces Revolutionary Council, we hope that this
exercise will indeed be accelerated.

My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to commend the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) and the troop-contributing countries for their
selfless sacrifice, without which the whole situation in
Sierra Leone would have been an entirely different story
today. The new mandate for ECOMOG adopted by
ECOWAS is a clear indication of the positive evolution
of the situation, and we are confident that the ECOMOG
forces will continue to play their role with prowess and
professionalism.

 

With the imminent deployment of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), it is not only
desirable but also absolutely necessary to establish close
cooperation and coordination with ECOMOG. Meanwhile,
my delegation welcomes the activities of the Joint
Implementation Committee and the Joint Monitoring
Commission for the important work they are doing.

The situation in Sierra Leone is clearly very fragile.
There is an urgent need for security, without which it will
not be possible to carry out the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of the 45,000
ex-combatants, thereby removing the security threat.

As we all know, ECOMOG cannot do this alone. We
have always argued that the United Nations cannot
subcontract its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Lack of financial and other
resources has never been and will never be a legitimate
excuse for abdicating this responsibility.

We therefore welcome the courageous position of the
Council on Sierra Leone this time, which augurs well for
future peacekeeping operations in Africa. We are indeed
encouraged by what Ambassador Holbrooke has just said.
It is also true that when we understand the importance of
putting our own house in order, by placing the collective
interest above our narrow individual interests, the support
and solidarity of the other members of the international
community will not be found wanting.

The deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
force with a robust mandate capable of responding to
threats to the implementation of the Peace Agreement and
to the security of civilians is essential if we are to succeed
in Sierra Leone. In this context, my delegation welcomes
the establishment of UNAMSIL with a strength of 6,000
military personnel. We also support the tasks to be carried
out by UNAMSIL, as provided for in the draft resolution
under consideration.

My delegation notes that the plight of children is
among the most pressing challenges facing Sierra Leone.
We welcome the commitment of the Government of Sierra
Leone, UNAMSIL and others to help address this problem.
We are glad to note that important questions such as this
one have been addressed in the draft resolution.

On the whole the draft addresses the most important
issues facing Sierra Leone, and we will therefore vote in
favour of it.

Once again, my delegation is heartened to note that
the ceasefire agreement between the Government of Sierra
Leone and the RUF is holding. The people of Sierra
Leone now have an opportunity to repair the damage
done to their country in this long and fratricidal conflict.
This is exactly what this draft resolution is offering to the
people of Sierra Leone, and we hope that they will
measure up to the challenge and strike while the iron is
hot.

