Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your timely initiative in convening
today's briefing and debate on new security challenges.
We welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Paulo
Sacadura Cabral Portas, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Portugal. Let me also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing, as well as Mr. Yuri Fedotov, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. Antonio Guterres, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and Ms. Margaret Chan,
the Director-General of the World Health Organization,
for their insightful briefings.

Germany firmly believes that managing and
resolving threats to international security without
understanding their underlying causes and dynamics
can at best lead only to temporary solutions. Our world
is at the beginning of this new century facing a whole
array of tremendous new challenges. Among them are
poverty, infectious diseases, transnational organized
crime and climate change, just to name a few. This
Council recognized the challenges of climate change
on security when, under the German presidency in the
month of July, it adopted a substantial and forward-
looking presidential statement (S/PRST/20ll/15) on
that issue. Today's debate is an excellent opportunity to
take a systematic look at those diverse threats and
challenges.

Let me briefly elaborate on three areas that
deserve particular attention. First on the list is health.
Since the first discussion of the linkages between
HIV/AIDS and international peace and security over a
decade ago, the Security Council has come a long way,
having recently adopted resolution 1983 (2011) on that
issue. Today, it is widely acknowledged that conflict
situations can aggravate health problems and that
vulnerable populations, such as refugees or children in
an armed conflict, face higher health risks. At the same
time, we know that the spread of epidemics such as
HIV/AIDS can fuel conflicts by weakening the
capacities of national Governments and by destroying
existing social structures.

We would therefore like to encourage donors,
United Nations agencies and affected States to further
integrate health into stabilization and rehabilitation
programmes and to promote innovative models of
cooperation. One such model is the Debt2Health
initiative launched jointly by the Global Fund to Fight
HIV, Tuberculosis and Malaria and the German
Government in 2007. By redirecting funds from debt
repayments towards life-saving investments in health,
Debt2Health has improved public health systems and
strengthened partnership, including with conflict-
affected countries. Besides significantly decreasing
health-related root causes of conflict, there is also a
need to highlight the importance of addressing health
issues in the aftermath of conflict. The physical and
psychological consequences of Violence, including
sexual Violence, often constitute a heavy burden for

stabilization, reconstruction and development in post-
conflict societies. Mainstreaming health issues into
peace-building activities therefore remains a key
challenge that is often overlooked.

My second point concerns the interrelationship
between climate change, migration and security. In
some regions of our planet, climate change-induced
migration is a reality already today. People are
migrating because their traditional homes are under
threat by a rising sea level, by increasing drought and
desertification, and by the increasingly destructive
power of natural disasters.

Climate change will hardly be the only factor in a
crisis. The terrible famine in the Horn of Africa is an
example of that.

We have to acknowledge that despite our ongoing
efforts to curb greenhouse gas emissions and mitigate
climate change - and the seventeenth United Nations
Climate Change Conference is beginning in Durban
five days from now - migration has already become
an adaptation strategy for people affected by climate
change. The number of affected people within and
across borders will clearly rise, potentially leading to
insecurity and conflict, in addition to the personal
plight of millions of people.

Germany very much supports the approach that
UNHCR is taking in this regard. We need more
research into and better understanding of migration
processes. We must be guided by the fundamental
principles of human dignity, human rights and
international cooperation. The international community
may also need to look more closely into the adequacy
and appropriateness of the legal and political
instruments at hand, a complex task for all of us. We
will also have to look more closely into the security
implications of migration, which will require a
comprehensive approach, including on the part of the
Security Council within its work on new and emerging
security threats.

With a View to Durban, let me add that the worst
case is not inevitable, and mitigation remains key in
this regard.

My third point concerns transnational organized
crime. The composition and operational methods of
transnational organized criminal groups have become
more sophisticated in recent years, and their activities
continue to pose a significant threat to international
peace and security. The seriousness of the problem lies
in the global penetration achieved by such
organizations and in the threat they pose to democracy
and legitimate economic development. These problems
are compounded by the fact that in many cases the
capacity of States to establish the rule of law is
weakened by corruption, weak judicial systems and a
lack of effective policing capacity.

The scale of the challenge requires a coordinated
response from the international community. In that
context, we regard the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime - the Palermo
Convention - as one of the crucial instruments for
enhancing international cooperation in combating
organized crime, and we would like to seize the
opportunity to appeal to all States that have not yet
done so to ratify it as soon as possible.

In 2011 alone my country has contributed around
$7 million to projects implemented by UNODC in the
area of combating organized crime and drug
trafficking, and we intend to continue our financial
support for such projects. As a good example of such
successful cooperation, I would like to mention the
Global Container Control Programme, jointly
conducted by UNODC and the World Customs
Organization. This Programme is aimed at building
capacity through training.

Let us not forget that prevention is key to
countering today's threats. We as Member States must
build up our own capacities and help others to do the
same in order to exercise our sovereignty responsibly,
deal with internal dangers before they threaten others,
and act collectively with other States to meet threats on
a global scale.

