Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
meeting this morning. I should like to take the
opportunity to congratulate Rwanda on its presidency
of the Security Council this month. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and Ambassador
Alemu for his statement on behalf of the Chairperson
of the African Union.

Conflicts in Africa continue to take a devastating toll
on the continent. Lives are needlessly lost. Populations
face brutal consequences, such as sexual violence, the
use of child soldiers and mass displacement. Conflict
has also stopped Africa delivering on its enormous
potential. Africa has vast natural resources, some of
the fastest growing economies in the world and, in the
African Union, an increasingly strong and influential
continental organization. However, only by addressing
the root causes of conflict can Africa secure sustainable
peace and unlock that potential.

As is known only too well, 800,000 people
tragically died in the Rwandan genocide. That mass
atrocity threatened the very existence of Rwanda and
its people. The international community recognizes
with shame that we should have done more. We said
never again. The doctrine of the responsibility to
protect was endorsed by all Members at the World
Summit in 2005 as a means of delivering on that
promise. The responsibility to protect is the foremost
responsibility that sovereign Governments owe to their
populations, but the international community also has
the responsibility to support and assist States in that
task.

Today, we take stock of our performance in tackling
conflict in Africa. We should admit that we are not
doing well. In the past few months alone, crises in Mali,
the Central African Republic and the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo have emerged or
worsened. We must learn the lessons of our failure. We
must better spot the warning signs and act accordingly.
We must use the right tools at the right time.

The United Kingdom believes that representative,
legitimate and inclusive political systems, unwavering
respect for human rights and the rule of law and social and
economic development are the most important factors
that help to prevent conflict in Africa, as elsewhere. The
crisis in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo reminds us that, when such factors are
absent, it is very difficult to break the cycle of conflict.
Delivering effective national institutions is a key part
of upstream prevention. We need to help national
Governments in building capacity through mechanisms
such as the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States.
All Member States should invest early in such fragile
States. The work of the United Nations on civilian
capacities and the efforts of African countries to share
expertise and experiences are also important.
The United Kingdom particularly welcomes last
week's commitment by the Group of Eight Foreign
Ministers to take steps that address and deter sexual
violence, which too often accompanies and fuels
conflict. We will follow up that initiative during our
Security Council presidency in June.

When a crisis is on the horizon, we need to spot
it early. That means, as the Secretary-General told us,
that improving our early-warning systems is vital. The
United Nations Office for West Africa and the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa are starting
to play a role, but it is not yet enough. We hope that the
recently established United Nations Crisis Operations
Centre will also make a difference but, equally, early
warning is useful only when it is acted upon. The
United Nations is slowly getting better at mediation and
preventative diplomacy but there is much more to be
done. Too many members of the Council shy away from
their responsibilities with regard to conflict prevention.

Where conflict breaks out, we must hold those
responsible accountable and demonstrate that impunity
will not be tolerated. The International Criminal Court
and the other regional tribunals are vital to ending
impunity. We need to facilitate the transitional justice
that enables countries to emerge and to recover from
violent conflict.

Preventing conflict and addressing its root causes
are a long-term and complex process. If we are to
succeed in helping African States in that endeavour, we
must work together to support local processes and to
build local capacities. That means, as others have said,
that we should support the African Union Peace and
Security Council in its conflict-prevention work, while
respecting the Security Council's global responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security. We
must promote preventative diplomacy and transform
the United Nations culture of post-conflict response
into prevention before a conflict. We must never stop
learning lessons about what works and what does not.
We must deliver on our promise of never again.

