Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me start by congratulating
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. I wish to assure you ofmy delegation's full support
and cooperation. I would like to thank Ambassador
Matthew Rycroft and his team for their very successful
presidency. Much was achieved in March.

Before I proceed further, on behalf of my
Government I would like very strongly to condemn the
heinous and vicious terrorist attack in Saint Petersburg,
as well as to express our solidarity with the people and
the Government of the Russian Federation. We will
always be second-to-none in our readiness to cooperate
in the fight against this scourge. All can count on that.

I am very pleased to see our good friend and brother
Ambassador Jeremiah Nyamane Kingsley Mamabolo,
who did so much here at the United Nations when he
was the Permanent Representative of his country. I
wish to take this opportunity to congratulate him on his
appointment as the new African Union-United Nations
Joint Special Representative/Joint Chief Mediator for
Darfur. I also thank him for his informative briefing.
I would also like to express our appreciation to his
predecessor for his notable contributions.

The situation in Darfur continues to show marked
progress as was acknowledged in the reports of the
Secretary-General and the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015). Indeed, no major
fighting has been reported since the beginning of
this year, and the security situation has significantly
improved. We commend the Government of the
Sudan for extending the unilateral ceasefire for an
additional six months. The Council should continue to
exert pressure on the armed movements to negotiate
seriously ending the suffering of the people of Darfur
and holding the spoilers accountable. The leadership
of Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid should also
be called upon to join the peace process in earnest
without preconditions.

Of course, we all recognize that much remains to
be done in addressing the root causes of the conflict
in Darfur and ensuring long-term stability. In that
regard, we appreciate that the Government established
the Darfur Peace Follow-up Office and took forward
the implementation of Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur. Addressing the challenge of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) is vital to bringing lasting
peace to Darfur, and we note the efforts that are being
taken in that regard, including facilitating the voluntary
repatriation ofIDPs. It is important that those efforts be
supported by the United Nations and the international
community in general.

The National Dialogue process is indeed a step in
the right direction. We note that the Government has
begun implementing the National Dialogue document,
and we welcome the appointment of Barki Hasan
Saleh to the post of Prime Minister. Support for the
implementation of the National Dialogue is critical for
sustainable peace and security to prevail not only in
Darfur but in the Sudan, in general. Those outside the
National Dialogue process able to exercise leverage on
the parties should exercise pressure on them so that
they join the implementation phase. The Government
should also be encouraged to remain committed to
ensuring inclusivity.

With regard to the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), we note the
improvements made in connection with Visas and
customs clearance. Furthermore, the revision of the
directives and procedures for humanitarian action in
the Sudan by the Humanitarian Aid Commission eased
the regulations governing the delivery of humanitarian
aid as indicated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/20l7/250). It is our hope that all remaining challenges
facing UNAMID operations will be resolved through
taking advantage of the existing arrangements.

We appreciate the personal involvement of the
Secretary-General in resolving the impasse between
the Government of the Sudan and the Secretariat
concerning the way forward in implementing the exit
strategy. That led to the finalization of the report of the
joint working group following the successful meeting
that the group held in Khartoum on 26 February and
the commencement of the joint African Union-United
Nations report on the strategic review. We look forward
to receiving the report that we expect will take into
account the outcome of the aforementioned joint
working group meeting.

Finally, the Sudan has been playing a constructive
role in dealing with peace and security issues in the
region. The relationship between the Sudan and South
Sudan is improving. The Sudanese Government has
opened humanitarian corridors to deliver assistance
to South Sudan. Although there are still a number
of outstanding issues, the improvement of relations
between the Sudan and South Sudan is indeed a
welcome development. In the same vein, the Sudan's
improved relations with Chad and Uganda are also very
encouraging. The facilitation roles played by Presidents
Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and Idriss Deby Itno in
support of the Sudan's peace efforts are a testament to
the confidence that the Sudan has recently achieved in
its relations with those countries, and we hope that that
will make a positive contribution to peace and stability
in the region.

