Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank and congratulate the Togolese
presidency on convening this open debate on the
impact of transnational organized crime on peace,
security and stability in West Africa and the Sahel
region. We welcome the presence at this very important
meeting of His Excellency the President of the
Togolese Republic. We are also grateful to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his statement and to
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.

Growing transnational threats contribute to
undermining governance, social and economic
development and stability, as well as peacebuilding
advances in West Africa and the Sahel region. We note
that, despite the fragile security situation in a number
of countries in West Africa and the Sahel region, there
have been no major crises reported there in recent
times. We welcome the activities of the United Nations

Office for West Africa and its partners in the United
Nations system, as well as of the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and other
relevant organizations that contributed to this situation.
The efforts of the respective Governments in this
regard should be noted as well. It is commendable that
the States and leaders of West Africa and the Sahel
region have adopted a number of important initiatives
and measures at the national and regional levels to
tackle the threat of organized crime in their region.

At the same time, despite the progress achieved,
threats to peace and stability remain and require
continued serious attention. Like other members of the
Council, Azerbaijan is seriously concerned by the
terrorist and separatist activity and increasing Violence
and attacks by armed groups, which have been
aggravated by the illicit proliferation of weapons from
within and outside the region. Nor should we
underestimate the risk of the spread of weapons beyond
the region, with the potential of their falling into the
hands of terrorists and separatists in other parts of the
world.

A stronger commitment to an international order
based on the rule of law and international law is
essential to cooperation among States in addressing
common challenges and to contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Azerbaijan stresses the importance of ensuring that the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of the States of West Africa and the
Sahel region are fully observed and respected.

It is clear that most of the countries of West
Africa and the Sahel region cannot overcome threats in
isolation. Even successful national efforts cannot
restore overall normalcy and ensure a comprehensive
solution if they are not supported by the United
Nations system and the broader international
community. Serious attention should be given to
appeals from the respective countries, which need
capacity-building and funds to counter the threats and
address the challenges.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
initiative to deploy a United Nations inter-agency
assessment mission to the Sahel region, as well as for
the comprehensive report (see S/2012/42) that the
mission has submitted. The analyses carried out by the
mission are illustrative of the need to strengthen
cooperation, including through the development of a

common approach for the Sahel region. We agree with
the mission's view that any immediate long-term
strategy should take into account the root causes of the
problems in the region. The findings and
recommendations of the mission in that regard require
serious consideration, and we hope that they will
contribute to enhancing the United Nations system-
wide strategy to respond to the needs of the respective
States.

The rise of maritime piracy is another challenge
requiring a concerted effort on the part of the countries
and organizations of the region, with the support of the
international community. Indeed, piracy attacks in the
Gulf of Guinea have become more frequent in recent
months. This phenomenon represents a threat not only
to peace and security, but also to the political and
socio-economic development of the countries
concerned.

We commend the national efforts of the affected
countries to mobilize international attention to this
problem. At the same time, it is vital to develop a
comprehensive strategy to counter piracy, as
specifically noted in the Council's resolution 2018
(2011) of 31 October 2011. In addition, it is important
that the countries of the region be provided with the
necessary support, including financial assistance, to
strengthen their capacity to fight piracy. We look
forward to discussing this topic at the debate later this
month.

More should be done with respect to
intercommunity and interreligious dialogue, which, in
our view, are of additional importance against the
background of the efforts being made to ensure peace,
security and stability in the region. It is obvious that
success will depend on greater coherence among all
stakeholders. It is therefore important and
commendable that, in spite of the varied regional
membership, all of the countries are willing to work in
a more coordinated manner.

Last but not least, Azerbaijan supports the draft
presidential statement on the topic to be issued
following the debate.

