Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): 1 would like to thank
the Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
Ms. Sandra Honore, for her briefing.

Before I turn to the points my delegation would
like to make, I note that Ukraine aligns itself with
the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union.

Despite daunting challenges, the Haitian people
have made significant progress towards political
stability after the devastating earthquake of 2010. We
therefore believe in Haitians' ability to overcome the
political uncertainty at hand and to find a Haitian-
owned solution so as to bring long-term unity and
stability to the country. Ukraine commends the efforts
of all political stakeholders aimed at finding consensus
and constructive solutions that will conclude the
electoral process in Haiti. The agreement of5 February,
reached between the ex-President Martelly and the
Presidents of the two chambers of Parliament, reflects
the spirit of the Constitution and provides a road map
for institutional continuity.
We welcome the election by the National Assembly
of the provisional President and Prime Minister, as
well as the agreement to complete the presidential,
legislative and local elections by 24 April, which will
give Haiti an opportunity to re-energize its democratic
institutions and to move forward in addressing the
serious social and development challenges. Ukraine
reaffirms its support for credible, transparent and
secure elections that will reflect the will of the Haitian
people and are conducted in accordance with Haitian
law and the Haitian Constitution. In that light, we want
to emphasize that electoral intimidation, the destruction
of property and violence are unacceptable and run
counter to democratic principles, laws and values. In
that regard, we commend the Haitian National Police
for their efforts to contain the violence and to protect
the civilian population, as well as the role played by
MINUSTAH in stabilizing what could potentially
become an explosive situation. We urge all parties to
avoid setbacks, remain calm and refrain from violence.

My delegation would like to underline the
importance of the continued efforts of the United
Nations, non-governmental organizations and other
multilateral agencies, as well as Member States, in
supporting Haiti's critical needs. The increase in
cholera cases in 2015, outlined in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2016/225), and the ongoing plight
of 59,000 internally displaced persons in the aftermath
of 2010 earthquake are of great concern and require the
continued attention of the international community.

The current fragile situation in Haiti highlights
very clearly that the activities of MINUSTAH remain
of high importance to Haiti. Yet we fully agree that its
composition has to evolve along with the evolution of
the situation in the country. In that context, Ukraine
sees a great deal of merit in carrying out the strategic
assessment envisaged in resolution 2243 (2015), and
looks forward to the recommendations of the Secretary-
General for the future configuration of the Mission
ahead of its mandate expiration in October.

