Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): 1, too, thank the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), the Permanent Representative of Australia, for
his briefing. The report that was presented to the Council
today, which he described as dry but not entirely devoid
of interest, addresses the issues of implementation and
compliance as they affect the mandate of the 1737
Committee. We note and welcome the willingness of
Member States and international organizations to invite
the Panel of Experts to assist in the investigation of
cases related to violations of national implementation
of sanctions measures.

We commend the Committee's continued provision
of guidance, assistance and timely responses to
Member States and international organizations in
the verification of the compatibility of requests
with the sanctions regime. Those actions are clearly
demonstrated in the reported cases, including those
received from Hungary, Sweden, Kuwait, Argentina,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization. We also
welcome the assistance provided to the Committee
through the transmission of useful information by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

We urge the Islamic Republic of Iran to respond
to the Committee's letter of 12 April 2013 in relation
to the Panel's conclusion that it had launched Shahab-l
and Shahab-3 ballistic missiles in contravention of
resolution 1929 (2010). The Islamic Republic of Iran
should also respond to the Committee's letter of 21 May
2013 in relation to the Panel's conclusion concerning an
arms shipment intercepted in Yemen, which represents
a probable violation by Iran of resolution 1747 (2007).

We note and welcome the cooperation the
Committee has received from Member States that have
updated the Committee on enforcement actions they
have taken. We see merit in the Panel's recommendation
that the Committee encourage States to be alert to the
procurement of items destined for an end use prohibited
by relevant resolutions. We commend the Committee
for launching a consultative process with other relevant
sanctions committees to consider the implementation
of targeted financial sanctions against agents and
affiliates of designated persons.

Finally, we would like to commend the Permanent
Representative of Australia for his astute leadership of
the 1737 Committee.

