Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: In the early hours of
this morning, Israeli naval forces boarded a six-ship
convoy that was heading towards Gaza. The stated
purpose of the convoy was to deliver humanitarian aid
to Gaza and to break the Israeli blockade on Gaza. The
convoy was reportedly carrying a range of educational,
medical and construction materials and approximately
700 activists, citizens of a number of countries. Among
their numbers were reportedly members of Parliament
from several countries.

In the lead-up to today's events, the Israeli
authorities conveyed their intention, both publicly and
through diplomatic channels, not to allow the convoy
to reach Gaza. The Israeli authorities stated that,
should the convoy proceed contrary to these warnings,
they would divert the convoy to an Israeli port, inspect
the cargo, facilitate the entry of only those goods that
are allowed into Gaza, in accordance with Israel's
blockade, and deport those on board.
10-38189
The organizers of the convoy indicated their
intention to proceed with their convoy and to attempt
to deliver their full consignment of cargo to Gaza and
to break the blockade. A committee of persons
organized by the de facto Hamas authorities in Gaza
was formed to receive the convoy.

Several Governments with nationals on board the
vessels urged restraint on all sides and indicated to the
Israeli authorities their utmost concern that their
nationals be protected. The Secretary-General's
spokesman warned on Friday that all involved should
act with a sense of care and responsibility and work for
a satisfactory resolution.

The convoy was due to reach Gaza today.
According to the Israeli authorities, Israel's naval
forces conveyed directly to the convoy during the early
hours this morning that it would not be allowed to
reach port in Gaza. However, the convoy proceeded
towards Gaza.

At approximately 4 a.m. local time, the Israeli
navy acted to intercept the convoy. This reportedly
took place 14 nautical miles off the coast in
international waters and involved Israeli military
personnel boarding the vessels, supported by naval
ships and helicopters. Israeli forces took control of all
six vessels. However, there was serious violence on the
main passenger vessel, a Turkish-registered ship named
Mavi Marmara. We have also seen media reports of
violence related to a Greek-registered ship, the
Sfendoni. As a result of this violence, according to the
latest information, at least 10 people were killed and at
least 30 injured, while at least six Israeli military
personnel were injured. There are no final confirmed
casualty figures at this stage.

Given the circumstances, it is not possible to state
definitively the sequence or details of what happened.
The Israeli Government has stated that the
demonstrators on board used knives and clubs against
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) naval personnel and
possibly live fire, and that a weapon was grabbed from
an IDF soldier. Given that those who were on board the
ships are now in Israeli custody, including reporters
who were travelling with the convoy, and had their
transmission equipment confiscated by the boarding
Israeli forces, further information from the organizers
of the convoy has been minimal since this morning. We
have no independent information on what transpired.
10-38189
According to Israeli statements, the seriously
injured were subsequently evacuated by helicopter to
hospitals in Israel. All of the ships have arrived under
escort at the Israeli port of Ashdod. An Israeli Ministry
of Foreign Affairs spokesman has stated that all
international persons from the vessels will be deported.

Israeli authorities have expressed regret about the
casualties but blamed the activists for the violence.
President Abbas has condemned Israel's actions and
the killing of the activists, and declared three days of
mourning in the occupied Palestinian territory. There
have been widespread regional and international
expressions of alarm and concern at the bloodshed, as
well as diplomatic demarches seeking a full
explanation from the Israeli authorities. There have
been protests in Gaza, the West Bank, Israel and
several regional capitals.

The Secretary-General stated earlier today in
Kampala that he is shocked by the killing and injury of
people on the boats and condemned the violence. He
called for a full investigation to determine exactly how
the bloodshed took place and stressed that Israel must
urgently provide a full explanation.

At the Secretary-General's direction, Special
Coordinator Robert Serry, along with Filippo Grandi,
the Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, have been actively engaged on the ground
since the crisis broke to urge restraint and an end to the
Violence, and to coordinate with all relevant parties in
the aftermath of this tragedy.

In conclusion, we underscore the importance of a
full investigation into this incident, as called for by the
Secretary-General. It is also imperative that Israel
provide access to the detainees in accordance with
relevant international legal standards. And more
broadly, we stress the importance of all parties strictly
adhering to the framework of international law,
including international humanitarian law and the law of
the sea. We also stress that these developments come at
a time when all efforts should be focused on the need
to build trust, advance Israeli-Palestinian negotiations
and nurture regional cooperation in support of peace. It
is vital that the proximity talks continue.

Finally, we wish to point out that today's
bloodshed would have been avoided if repeated calls
on Israel to end the counterproductive and
unacceptable blockade of Gaza had been heeded. We
3
stress the scale of the unmet needs of Gaza's civilian
population and reiterate that the blockade is
unacceptable and counterproductive and must end.
Special Coordinator Serry briefed the Council in detail
on 18 May on the serious humanitarian, human rights
and socio-economic conditions facing the civilian
population in Gaza, and made clear the range of
interventions - from water and sanitation to
education, health and the commercial sector - that are
urgent to meeting needs. The only way forward for
Gaza is a different and more positive strategy that
implements resolution 1860 (2009). It is now more
Vital than ever that this be put into effect.

