Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Mr. Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, for his briefing. China
welcomes Mr. Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, to the Chamber
to addresses the Council. I also listened very carefully
by the statement made by Ms. Citaku.

Currently, the security situation in the Kosovo
region is relatively stable, although complex factors
remain. China welcomes the resumption of high-level
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina since August.
We hope that the two sides will remain committed to the
general direction of a political settlement, continue to
implement existing agreements and gradually increase
mutual trust so as to create favourable conditions for
the final peaceful settlement of differences.

For ethnic communities in Kosovo, reconciliation
and peaceful coexistence serve the fundamental interest
of all and meet the need of Kosovo and countries in
the region to develop and prosper. China hopes that the
relevant parties will always put the well-being of their
people first, effectively protect the legitimate rights and
interests of all communities in Kosovo, refrain from
actions and rhetoric that might escalate the situation
and safeguard the peace, development and stability of
the Balkans.

Resolution 1244 (1999) provides an important legal
foundation for resolving the question of Kosovo. All
parties should observe the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and seek, through
dialogue and negotiations, a solution that is acceptable
to all parties within the framework of relevant Security
Council resolutions. China respects the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Serbia. We understand
the country's legitimate concern on the question of
Kosovo and commend its efforts to strive for a political
settlement. The Security Council should maintain
its attention on the question of Kosovo and remain
committed to promoting its proper settlement.

China supports the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), under
the leadership of Special Representative Tanin, in
discharging its duties in accordance with its mandates
and working together with all parties constructively.
We hope that UNMIK, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force will work
together in close collaboration to play a constructive
and positive role in helping to gradually improve the
situation on the ground and achieve early settlement of
the Kosovo issue.

