Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his briefing today
detailing the important work that the staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
performs every day under very difficult conditions,
and Executive Director Fedotov for his briefing on
this important issue. I also thank Ambassador Tanin
for joining today's discussion. As always, we value
his participation and his close cooperation with the
Security Council.

In the last few months, the international community
has underscored its support for strengthening Afghan
leadership and Afghan sovereignty while reinforcing
its commitment to Afghanistan well beyond 2014. As
President Obama has said, the message to the Afghan
people is clear: "As you stand up, you will not stand
alone".

This morning I will focus my remarks on recent
and upcoming events that have reinforced this message.
On 2 May, Afghanistan and the United States signed
a strategic partnership agreement. It is one of several
bilateral agreements that Afghanistan has concluded
that demonstrates how the international community
continues to come together to support Afghanistan as
it prepares for the transition in 2014. The agreement
provides a long-term framework for relations between
Afghanistan and the United States after a responsible
drawdown of United States forces. It reaffirms the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity of Afghanistan. I want to be clear that the
United States does not seek any permanent American
military bases.

The post-2014 United States presence will
be shaped in close consultation with the Afghan
Government and will support Afghanistan's social
and economic development, security, institutions
and regional cooperation. The agreement enshrines a
range of mutual commitments, including on combating
terrorism and strengthening democratic institutions.

The United States welcomes the strong Afghan
commitment to strengthening accountability,
transparency and oversight and to protecting the human
rights of all Afghans - men and women. Afghanistan
and the United States have taken steps together to show
that Afghanistan's progress will be irreversible and that
our commitment is real and enduring.

The strategic partnership is just one piece of a
larger international effort to work with the Afghans for
a successful transition. At the NATO summit held in
Chicago in May, world leaders reaffirmed the Lisbon
framework for transition in Afghanistan and further
outlined the support that the alliance and individual
nations will provide to the Afghan military and police
after 2014. As the Afghans assume full responsibility
for security by the end of 2014, the enemies of the
Afghan people should know that there will be steadfast
and capable Afghan forces standing against them, with
strong NATO support.

President Karzai's recent announcement of the third
of five tranches of areas to transition to Afghan security
lead is an important step forward. As transition begins
in those areas, nearly 75 per cent of the population
of Afghanistan will be living in provinces, districts
and villages where Afghan forces are beginning to
lead. That would not be possible without the growing
strength of the Afghan National Security Forces, which
remain essential to our shared goal of an Afghanistan
that can secure and govern itself.
The transition is on track. Afghans are increasingly
standing up for their own security and future, and
NATO remains united in its support for the Lisbon
timetable and an enduring commitment to Afghanistan.

The region is also supporting Afghanistan through
its transition. We applaud the recent Heart of Asia
ministerial Conference in Kabul, which endorsed a
process of continuous dialogue and confidence-building
measures that will contribute to achieving regional
peace and stability, and we welcome the positive role
that UNAMA played in helping to ensure that the
Conference was a success.

Security improvements will also contribute to the
sustainable reintegration of returning Afghans and
enable economic opportunity. We are encouraged by
the success of the International Conference on Afghan
refugees organized in May by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and urge the
United Nations to continue to focus attention on the
needs of high-return communities to ensure voluntary
and sustainable reintegration.

The March Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, held in Dushanbe,
accelerated Afghanistan's growing connections with its
South and Central Asian neighbours. We also applaud
the private-sector conference being hosted in New
Delhi this week to promote investment in Afghanistan's
people and industries.

We look forward to the Tokyo Conference next
week, which is an important opportunity for the Afghan
Government to clearly commit to improving governance
and intensifying the fight against corruption. Those
reforms are vital. Afghanistan cannot rely on donor
financing indefinitely. Sustainable development
requires private investment and improved regional
connectivity. As Afghanistan makes progress on
governance and anti-corruption, the United States and
the international community will take concrete steps
of our own to help, as we promised at Bonn. Despite
serious fiscal challenges of our own, our continued
investment in Afghanistan is essential, and it should
come from both Governments and the private sector.

The coming months will be a dynamic time for
Afghanistan. The Afghan people, the international
community, the United Nations and UNAMA have
been unfaltering in their commitment to Afghanistan.
I want to underscore the enduring importance of the
work of the United Nations and UNAMA, from its good
offices to promote regional cooperation and co-chairing
of the Joint Coordination Monitoring Board, to its
humanitarian assistance and support for refugees and
internally displaced persons. The United Nations has
remained steadfastly committed to the Afghan people,
and we are grateful. The Afghan Government and
people, the region and the international community have
demonstrated their resolve and long-term commitment
to a secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan. The
United States will work with all of them every step of
the way.

