Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We are most
encouraged to see you in the seat of the President of the
Council for this month, Sir, and wish to express our sincere
appreciation for your having initiated today's most
relevant debate.

We would also like to take this opportunity to
express our admiration for the manner and openness with
which the President of the Council for the month of
April, Ambassador Antonio Monteiro of Portugal,
conducted the Council's affairs, and for his efforts to
inject a quality of greater transparency.

We will keep our comments brief and to the point,
and will avoid the ambiguity that sometimes saturates
diplomatic language.

The issue before the Council today is, unfortunately,
still too painfully relevant to my country and is therefore
determinative for the prospects of real peace. Refugees
are not a problem for Bosnia and Herzegovina; rather,
they represent a potential human asset that is still wasted,
as well as individual lives seeking their place and an
opportunity for fulfilment. Our approach must be one of
collective salvage and individual redemption without
regard to identity or religious and ethnic background.

Thanks to the efforts of representatives of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the Office of the High Representative, in
particular Ambassador Michael Steiner, an organization
has been established in Bosnia and Herzegovina
representing refugees and displaced persons of all ethnic
backgrounds who share one predominant interest: to
return to their homes and to live in a society committed
to diversity and tolerance. This organization is called the
Confederation for Return.

The efforts of these Bosnian refugees - Serbs,
Croats, others, as well as Bosniacs - at self-
empowerment deserves our support and represents a
promising avenue to address the problem on a pragmatic
basis. It also reinforces the perspective that refugees are
not polarized by ethnicity, but as a whole are the victims
of intolerance and artificial ethnic or other differentiation,
too often as a consequence of what starts as political
manipulation using religion or ethnicity as a weapon.

The refugee problems of our planet are but
symptoms of a greater wrong. They are either the indirect
or, increasingly, the direct consequence of some other
underlying problem. The most effective manner to address
or, at least, to minimize a refugee problem is to address
the underlying cause. If it is a natural calamity or the
struggle for survival or food, the response to the problem

 

is obvious, lest the ulcer continue to bleed more refugees.
But we cannot allow a response to a humanitarian crisis to
be used as a fig leaf for an impotent reaction to the
political or military causes of that humanitarian crisis.

Horrifically, today's victims - refugees - are as
likely to be victimized by bullets, shrapnel, systematic rape
and siege, as by hunger and disease. Interdiction, therefore,
must respond to the direct as well as the incidental threat.

Unfortunately, it appears increasingly that refugees are
not just incidental, but the very intended consequence.
Frighteningly, they may be the lucky ones who were
fortunate to escape "ethnic cleansing", execution and
genocide. Under such circumstances, the necessary response
of the international community is not only more obvious
and urgent, but also mandatory - I emphasize, mandatory.
It has often confounded me how often we, the United
Nations, the international community, the Security Council,
were informed by the Secretariat and numerous independent
observers that in Bosnia and Herzegovina "ethnic
cleansing" and displacement were not the coincidental
consequence but the very intended result; and nonetheless,
the often prescribed remedy promoted and tragically
prevailing was one that ignored this very analysis of the
cause. Genocide, the targeting of civilians - whatever we
may call it - must be confronted without ambiguity.
Impartiality dictates that we not be neutral in the face of
"ethnic cleansing" and the targeting of civilians.

Even when the cause was recognized - that is, the
deliberate targeting of a population - and "safe areas"
were established in Bosnia and Herzegovina pursuant to
Security Council resolutions, the means and will to make
such "safe areas" truly safe were found to be tragically
lacking, as in the case of Srebrenica.

Srebrenica is not the shame of those United Nations
personnel and troops of the United Nations Protection Force
who strove, very often heroically, to save innocent lives one
by one. Rather, it is the failure of the political authorities
that heralded the creation of the safe havens and then
abandoned their own commitment. That is history. That is
for this Council and, I am certain, many political historians
and analysts to review, and history will be very difficult to
rewrite in this one instance. What actually concerns me
today is that the spirit of Srebrenica is not just history, but
in fact is also today's dominant factor obstructing return.

The refugees of Srebrenica - those who survived -
and most others want to return. Those who murdered their
relatives and friends will allow them to return only at the
cost of their lives. Those who committed "ethnic
cleansing", genocide, are still in power, behind the scenes
or otherwise, and continue to mock you, to mock
international humanitarian law, as well as the
Dayton/Paris Accords. They stand behind and above
certain newly elected officials and, like Pinocchio's
master, misappropriate this legitimacy to undermine the
very basic terms of the Accords. They refuse to allow
refugees back and continue to destroy newly rebuilt
homes financed by your money, erected with UNHCR
planning and supervision. Confidently, they now openly,
explicitly, refute the right of refugees to return as well as
basic human rights and freedom of movement.

If representatives do not believe me, they need only
read the reports of Mrs. Ogata, the UNHCR and
numerous non-governmental organizations, such as the
International Crisis Group. Incomprehensibly, these very
deniers of the Dayton/Paris Accords nonetheless continue
to be accorded the legitimacy of that which they openly
refute.

It would be now our most sincere hope that the spirit
of the Srebrenica failure not infuse this most noble body.
Economic assistance and legitimacy can be offered only
on the condition of sincere commitment to the peace
process and the Accords. Those who openly deny the
right of refugees to return and openly reject the authority
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia and this Council must not continue to be
shielded by non-responsiveness. They really do mean
what they publicly state and no expedient effort at
reinterpretation will avert the failure of the Dayton/Paris
Accords and disaster.
The return and rights of refugees, the arrest of war
criminals, the success of peace and the response of this
Council, this United Nations and its designees and your
Governments are intractably intertwined and therefore
determinative. What refugee even dares return to a home,
a country, where those who victimized them are still
beyond the law, your law, international law, our law, and
then are even indirectly or directly accorded legitimacy?

We speak to the Council on the issue of refugees in
the context of our own experience because it is critical to
us, and also because it is a most relevant and developing
lesson for all on this matter. Failure adequately to address
the issue in Bosnia will have immediate and strategic
consequences for all, in particular for our efforts at the
United Nations to address refugee issues. Unfortunately,
our lesson is as much in how not to as in how to. In this

 

context, we must emphasize that ethnic, religious division
may have been the solution to political dilemmas of the
past, including the first part of this century; however,
reintegration is the only possible solution for the new global
society faced with a similar problem today.

Lest we forget also to articulate the positive in our
experience, let me take this opportunity to enumerate some
things that have been done right or were at least attempted
correctly in our case.

First, we have worked hard, at times with differences
of opinion but nonetheless together, with UNHCR and other
relevant agencies to construct a programme of return.

Secondly, as we have mentioned, UNHCR and
elements of the Office of the High Representative have
worked with all Bosnian refugees under the title of the
Coalition for Return as a means of self-empowerment and
overcoming artificial ethnic barriers.

Thirdly, although significantly tardy and not sufficient
at times, due to many factors including obstructionism,
many international factors, including several countries that
deserve special thanks, have committed substantial
resources for the rebuilding of Bosnia in general and for
specifically targeted projects for refugees to return. We
should also mention here the efforts of multilateral
institutions, such as the World Bank and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP).

Fourthly, we would like to emphasize the contribution
of host countries which first received so many of our
refugees and offered immediate means for survival. We will
continue to work with them to maximize the mutually
shared objective of return. We would also like to suggest,
in particular to the European Union countries, that the
process of the integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina, its
recognition as a fully European partner, and the dismantling
of travel and trade barriers will encourage not only
movement and commerce, but return as well. Most refugees
fear leaving the security of host countries for the
uncertainty of current Bosnia and Herzegovina if they
believe that there is a huge, insurmountable wall left behind
that will divide them from friends, family, new lives and
safety. The entry of Bosnia and Herzegovina into European
institutions translates into the return of Bosnians to their
homes.

Fifthly, we are appreciative of the efforts of the
multinational stabilization force (SFOR) and the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), as their presence is
a necessary ingredient of the formula for success. Also,
we encourage them to redouble their efforts, and we ask
SFOR, the IPTF and other relevant actors to ensure that
all aspects of security, including security of return and the
arrest of war criminals, are addressed. Otherwise, all that
has been done up to now will be for naught.

Finally, we would like once again to express our
appreciation for the efforts of the Judges, the Prosecutor
and other functionaries of the Tribunal in The Hague.
Although the results thus far are, unfortunately, meagre,
the effort is not; it is appreciated and, moreover, it is
necessary to ensure the ability of return. Most critically,
the Tribunal holds out the real opportunity not only for
the removal of war criminals who block return, but also
for the advancement of the partnership between justice
and reconciliation as the ideological and pragmatic
partners in the struggle for a real and lasting peace.

