Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Let me first of all thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his exhaustive
briefing, which gives us a clear, though extremely
worrying, picture of the situation on the ground. Italy
fully aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by
the European Union presidency later today. But let me
add just a few remarks on the events of recent days.

We are extremely concerned about the 1.5 million
people living in Gaza in extremely severe conditions as
a result of the closures of the crossing points, as well
as of the Israeli decision to drastically reduce the
supply of fuel to Gaza, which is jeopardizing if not
totally hindering the functioning of the power plant,
with all the consequences that we may imagine. Due to
this blockade, all the inhabitants of the Gaza Strip have
been indiscriminately affected. We are very concerned
over the current events, which are putting at risk the
regular supply of humanitarian aid.

In this respect, we were also startled by the recent
statement by the Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), who stated that
in two more days UNRWA would run out of its own
fuel supply. Although the agency had sufficient food
stocks in Gaza, it would not be able to continue its
support to 860,000 directly assisted Gaza residents.

We condemn the continuous launch of rockets
against Israeli territory, which threatens the lives of the
civilian. population. However, we believe that what is
happening in Gaza is a reason for extremely grave
concern. Thus, we invite all parties to cease military
operations in Gaza so as to allow all forms of
humanitarian aid to be delivered to the Gaza
population.

All parties must be consistent with the spirit of
Annapolis and recreate the conditions that will prevent
any hindrance to the peace process. In this respect, we
are partially relieved by the significant de-escalation of
violence referred to by Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe, as well as by indications of a possible easing
of the blockade by Israeli authorities, allowing for a
more adequate flow of fuel into Gaza.

We strongly hope that this reverse trend is a
lasting one, and that it can permanently break the
dangerous chain of violence of recent days and enable
us to regain the spirit that animated the Annapolis talks
in November.

