The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has established or
authorized a growing number of peacekeeping
operations which contain both civilian and military
components. It takes particular note of the increasing
role and special functions of civilian police in such
operations.

"The Security Council notes the efforts by the
General Assembly and its Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations in carrying out their task to
review all aspects of peacekeeping operations,
including, inter alia, enhancing the capacity of the
United Nations system to accommodate the growing
demand for civilian police in peacekeeping operations.
It furthermore commends the efforts of the Secretary-
General in this regard. The Council encourages States
to look for further means to enhance the ways in
which civilian police components of peacekeeping
operations are set up and supported.

"The Security Council considers that in
operations mandated by the Security Council or the
General Assembly the civilian police perform
indispensable functions in monitoring and training
national police forces and can play a major role,
through assistance to local police forces, in restoring
civil order, supporting the rule of law and fostering
civil reconciliation. It sees an increasingly important
role for civilian police, among others, in contributing
to the building of confidence and security between
parties and among local populations, in order to
prevent conflict, to contain conflict or to build peace
in the aftermath of conflict.

"The Security Council encourages States to make
available to the United Nations at short notice
appropriately trained civilian police, if possible
through the United Nations standby arrangements. It
welcomes the role of United Nations selection
assistance teams in this regard.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of the recruitment of qualified civilian
police from the widest possible geographic range to
serve in United Nations operations. It also expresses
the importance of the recruitment of female police
officers for United Nations operations.

"The Security Council encourages States
individually or collectively to provide appropriate
training of civilian police for international service. It
encourages the Secretary-General to provide
assistance and guidance to Member States in order
to promote a standardized approach to the training
and recruitment of civilian police.

"The Security Council underlines the necessity
for United Nations civilian police, in accordance
with their mandates, to be trained as required, inter
alia, to render assistance and support in the
reorganization, training and monitoring of national
police and to help defuse tension on the ground
through negotiations. The Council furthermore
considers it essential that United Nations civilian
police contingents contain adequate legal expertise.

"The Security Council underlines the need for
close coordination between civilian police and the
military and humanitarian and other civilian
components of United Nations operations. It
encourages efforts by Member States to organize
joint training between civilian and military
components designated for United Nations
operations in order to improve coordination and
security for personnel in the field.

"The Security Council expresses its gratitude to
those countries which have contributed civilian
police to the peacekeeping operations of the United
Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/38.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.25 am.
