Mr. Tadie (spoke in Serbian; English interpretation provided by the delegation): I strongly
condemn all crimes committed in 1999. Today, 10
years later, every Albanian person who lived in Kosovo
still lives there. Two hundred thousand Serbian people
do not live there any longer. Is this going to be the
legacy of the policy of 1999? That is my question to
the Council.

Serbia is a democracy. After October 2000, when
we defeated the Milosevic regime, we established
democracy in our country. We respect the rule of law
and minority rights, but at the same time we are
protecting the integrity and sovereignty of our State,
like every Member State of the United Nations. For
that reason, we are going to continue our efforts to
establish the rule of law, peace, democracy and the
highest standards for all nationalities and citizens of
my country.

In response to the intervention by the
representative of the United Kingdom: I am not making
up my own definition of the remit of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX); I am only reading the
report of the Secretary-General dated 24 November
2008 (S/2008/692), which was endorsed by the
Security Council. In the report, it is crystal-clear that
UNMIK and EULEX are to work in Kosovo under
resolution 1244 (1999) and that they have to take a
neutral position regarding Kosovo's status.

The presence of the United Nations and EULEX
in Kosovo is crucially important to Serbia. That is why
I must stress that we expect UNMIK always to be
represented at the regional meetings in which Serbia
participates. I cannot understand the logic whereby
EULEX would forbid a United Nations presence at our
meetings. That is unacceptable to Serbia. And I cannot
understand why the United Nations would accept such
a position. We must work together, not squeeze one
another out. We need each other: we want to
successfully resolve difficult problems, and in order to
solve such problems, we need each other.

Very briefly, I should like to make a few
comments. Stopping Serbian officials on the
Administrative Boundary Line is extremely dangerous
and disturbing. It must end. Today, the Mayor of
Belgrade, the capital of Serbia, was stopped and
prevented from delivering humanitarian aid to Serbian
villages in Kosovo. If we do not find a systematic
solution to that issue, we will have many difficulties,
and we must avoid that.

In Serbia's view, the six-point plan proposed by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon must be fully
implemented. First of all, it is a decision of the
Security Council, and secondly, it will help everyone in
Kosovo to establish normal conditions.

The Kosovo Security Force is completely
unacceptable to Serbia; it represents a paramilitary
organization that violates resolution 1244 (1999) and
the Kumanova Military-Technical Agreement. The
Force, which represents a challenge to regional
stability, should be dismantled. That is the position of
Serbia. Serbia's proposal for Kosovo was
demilitarization, not the creation of a new paramilitary
security force.

With regard to free trade in the region, we signed
the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA),
which defines our obligations and our cooperation in
the economic sector. We established a free trade zone
in the former Yugoslavia and the Western Balkans,
which includes Albania and Moldova. Unfortunately,
the Pristina representative has tried to mislead the
Council by saying that Serbia is blocking trade with the
province. That is simply not true. Serbia remains ready
to implement free trade commitments as defined by
CEFTA. UNMIK-Kosovo is a party to CEFTA, and we
will continue trading with it. But we cannot accept
unilaterally designed customs forms entitled "Republic
of Kosovo"; we must engage and find a solution. That
is very important to Serbia, and it is our official
position.

Finally, I thank Council members for their
presentations. Serbia will continue all its efforts to
establish peace and find a democratic solution for the
region. Serbia will be the cornerstone of stability in the
Western Balkans and make efforts to become a State
member of the European Union. But that does not
mean that Serbia will give up its legitimate interests.

