Mr. Yun Byung-se (Republic of Korea): Let me
begin by thanking you, Madam President, for convening
today's important discussion. My appreciation also goes
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Vice-President
Christine Beerli for their informative briefings. I am

also grateful to the Secretary-General for the valuable
recommendations presented in his biennial report
(S/2013/503).

Today's discussion and the adoption of resolution
2117 (2013) reflect the unswerving commitment of
the international community to addressing the illicit
transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of
small arms and light weapons. I believe that this
meeting offers an excellent opportunity for us to work
together in strengthening the Security Council's role on
the issue, given the lengthy absence of a relevant high-
level discussion in the Council.

The cross-cutting and adverse consequences of the
illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse
of small arms and light weapons are well documented in
numerous Security Council resolutions and presidential
statements. It clearly demonstrates that no one country
or institution can solve the problem alone. It requires
continued commitment on the part of all sides, including
by the Security Council.

First of all, each and every State is primarily
responsible for preventing the proliferation and
diversion of illicit small arms. Therefore, each State
should ensure the highest degree of accountability in
order to prevent its weapons from flowing into regions
or countries of concern and falling into the wrong
bands. In that regard, I believe that the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT), which was adopted in April, marked
an important milestone in our efforts to prevent the
illicit transfer and diversion of conventional arms. We
appreciate the leadership of Australia and Argentina
in bringing the ATT negotiations to fruition. The
Republic of Korea, one of the original signatory States
to the Treaty, will play its part in bringing the Treaty
into force at an early date. I would also like to welcome
the United States as a new signatory to that important
treaty.

In addition, the Republic of Korea will also
continue to lead efforts, along with Australia, in
advancing the biennial General Assembly resolution
on illicit brokering. I have every confidence that the
resolution will be instrumental in creating yet another
international norm against the merchants of death who
profit from the world's deadliest conflicts and destroy
fragile peace in recovering States.

Along with the efforts of each Member State, the
Security Council must play a vital and increased role,
given the multifaceted impact of small arms on its
country-specific and thematic agendas. Let me share a
couple of ideas in that regard.

First, the Security Council's arms embargoes have
acted as an effective line of defense against the illicit
transfer of small arms. The Security Council therefore
needs to exert greater efforts to ensure that the arms
embargoes are more workable and to further assist
Member States in their implementation. As rightly
recommended by the Secretary-General, it will be a
step in the right direction for the Council to mandate
peacekeeping operations and political missions to assist
in monitoring and implementing arms embargoes,
including the collection of prohibited arms and the
management of Government stockpiles, as appropriate.

Furthermore, it is equally important that the
Council provide practical support to Member States in
the implementation of arms embargoes. As the recent
case ofPanama's interdiction ofthe Democratic People's
Republic of Korea vessel Chang Chon Gang clearly
demonstrates, strict arms embargo measures imposed by
Member States can make a real difference in combating
arms proliferation. With effective and timely support
from the Panel of Experts of the Sanctions Committees,
for example, Member States will be able to implement
arms embargoes with increased confidence.

Secondly, in order to better protect civilians,
particularly women and children, in armed conflicts,
the Council's post-conflict peacebuilding efforts,
such as programmes for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security sector reform, require
further improvement. Peacekeeping, peacebuilding
missions and special political missions should be given
effective mandates and sufficient resources to enable
them to fully support their host Governments. As the
Secretary-General points out in his report, support
actions for arms control and regulation should be
considered in the planning ofintegrated peace missions.
Reinforced border controls can also contribute to
making disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes more sustainable.

Thirdly, enhanced coordination and information
sharing across the United Nations system would create
synergy in better combating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. In that vein, we support the
enhanced role of the Coordinating Action on Small
Arms, which is the United Nations inter-agency task
force on small arms.

Finally, the Security Council needs to establish
a follow-up mechanism to the Secretary-General's
biennial reports. To maintain that momentum and move
a step forward, we need to continually assess where
we are and where we are heading through such an
established process.

Many conflicts and much post-conflict violence
throughout the world are fuelled and exacerbated by
small arms and light weapons. The scale ofthe associated
human suffering is immense; women and children are
particularly vulnerable. Inaction and procrastination
today will result in a high cost tomorrow.

As the Korean Government pursues the goal of
well-being for all global citizens, it will continue to
exert its sincere efforts in combating the illicit use and
trade in small arms and light weapons, while providing
effective assistance for ongoing global peacebuilding
efforts, in particular in the development of fragile
States.

The Security Council must take the lead in restoring
peace and stability and ensure that the security and well-
being of civilians are key elements ofits considerations.
We must work together to maintain the valuable and
long-awaited momentum created by the adoption of the
Arms Trade Treaty and today's high-level meeting.

