Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): The South African
Government has condemned the assassination of
Hamas founder and spiritual leader Sheikh Ahmed
Yassin and of six other Palestinians outside a mosque
in Gaza City, Palestine, yesterday. Such extrajudicial
assassinations are in contravention of international law
and relevant United Nations conventions and serve

only to strengthen those who are against peace in the
Middle East.

South Africa has also condemned the suicide
attacks in Ashdod last week, in which 10 Israelis were
killed.

We believe that the indiscriminate killings of
Israelis and Palestinians serve only to fuel the cycle of
violence and counter-violence in the Middle East.

For a long time now, the Security Council has
been aware that it has been the policy of the Israeli
Government to carry out extrajudicial killings and
other violent actions that are in direct contravention of
international law and relevant United Nations
conventions. The time has come for the Security
Council to exercise its responsibility to uphold
international law under the Charter of the United
Nations and to condemn these atrocities. My delegation
believes that this urgent meeting offers the Security
Council an opportunity to break its silence and to take
a stand against this dangerous practice before it is too
late.

We believe that we have every right to expect the
Security Council, and even the Quartet, for that matter,
to bring their full influence to bear on the parties to
cease all acts that could further erode any progress
being made in the implementation of the road map.
There is general agreement that the two-State
solution - the establishment of the State of Palestine,
living in peace and security with the State of Israel -
is the answer to the violence in the Middle East. The
Security Council must pursue that objective with full
determination.

Furthermore, the Security Council has to accept
that we are not dealing with two parties of equal
strength and with equal control over their respective
populations. The Government of Israel makes formal
decisions regarding the use of disproportionate force
against people in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem, and should be held accountable
for its actions. The Palestinian Authority has been
deliberately and systematically weakened by Israel,
which has also imprisoned its democratically elected
leader. As it is, the Palestinian Authority is on the
verge of bankruptcy due to the collapse of the
Palestinian economy brought about by Israel's closure
policy, including the relentless construction of the
illegal separation wall.

It should therefore come as no surprise that, in
these dire conditions, extremism has taken root among
a small sector of the Palestinian population. South
Africa has always condemned extremism, whether on
the Palestinian side or the Israeli side, as it does not
contribute to peace in the Middle East. We therefore
call on the Israeli Government and the relevant
Palestinian groups to show restraint and not to provide
a pretext on which further acts of violence and
destruction will be carried out.

The United Nations and the international
community must act decisively to create the conditions
in which the vision of a two-State solution can be
realized. Continuing Israeli occupation, the destruction
of infrastructure, collective punishment and
extrajudicial assassinations will make it hard to achieve
peace. The South African Government reiterates that
the only way to bring about peace in the Middle East is
to have a comprehensive and unconditional negotiated
settlement to end the occupation of the Palestinian,
Syrian and Lebanese territories. This will contribute to
the achievement of peace and security throughout the
Middle East region.

