Mr. Grauls (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to address
the Security Council in my capacity as Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific
configuration on the Central African Republic.

1 went on mission to Bangui from 9 to 12 June.
During that mission, I met with members of the
Government, the Independent Electoral Commission,
the Dialogue Follow-up Committee and the
international community, as well as members of the
United Nations leadership and country team,
representatives of women's organizations and
humanitarian partners. In my briefing this afternoon, I
would like to highlight some of the issues related to the
implementation of the strategic framework for
peacebuilding in the Central African Republic
discussed during my visit.

First of all, however, allow me to express the
Peacebuilding Commission's deep appreciation for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Sable-Work Zewde, for her work in Bangui in
sometimes difficult circumstances. That work helps us
enormously in achieving the goals that we have set
ourselves within the Peacebuilding Commission.

I wish first of all to say something about the
electoral process. As the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General pointed out, the most recent
postponement of the date for the presidential and
parliamentary elections resulted from a consensual
agreement among the national stakeholders involved in
the electoral process, all of whom, moreover, are
represented in the Independent Electoral Commission.
The international community supported that decision to
postpone, given that it provides the time required for
the proper preparation of credible elections.

During my meeting with the Prime Minister and
the President of the Independent Electoral
Commission, I stressed that the holding of elections,
including the setting of election dates, was a matter of
the country's national sovereignty, and that the
international community could play a supporting role
by providing technical and financial assistance.

During my mission, the President of the
Independent Electoral Commission informed me of the
new proposed electoral calendar. It envisages a first
round on 24 October and a second on 19 December. In
order to encourage the international community to
further support the electoral process, it is important

that those dates be urgently validated by means of a
presidential decree to signify the Government's
acceptance of the new calendar. That would facilitate
the resource mobilization efforts that I have already
begun and that seek to fill the $7.5-million gap in the
total electoral budget, estimated at $21 million. While
it is necessary to recognize the financial efforts made
to date by the Central African Government, we must
avoid allowing the signing of a presidential decree
sanctioning the calendar to depend on financing by the
international community.

Another important matter that I discussed during
my visit is the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process. The requisite gap
between the start of DDR activities, on the one hand,
and the holding of elections, on the other, could
become problematic, given that some rebel leaders
continue to hope to participate in a transitional
Government if the elections are postponed beyond the
constitutional time frame. Such calculations explain
not only the continuously delayed start of DDR, but
also the lack of progress in the Government's efforts to
hold successful talks with the remaining rebel groups
that have not adhered to the peace process. It would be
desirable for the Security Council to put more pressure
on all stakeholders, in particular the recalcitrant armed
groups, to engage in the DDR process.

The imminent onset of the rainy season will
probably further delay the DDR activities in a large
part of the country. That is why, during my meetings, I
advocated for DDR to start in the zones where security
and weather conditions allow, in particular the areas
controlled by the Armee populaire pour la restauration
de la democratie in the North-West of the country. That
suggestion was welcomed by the Government and the
United Nations, and will have to be discussed in the
DDR Steering Committee. I also discussed the
possibility of reintegrating a certain number of ex-
combatants into the national security forces, in
particular in secondary functions, such as rangers or
the gendarmerie, but also in the army itself. The
minister in charge of defence was not opposed to that
idea, but indicated that it would have to be executed
according to applicable selection and quota criteria.

Questions also remain with regard to the
reintegration component of the DDR process - that is,
the "R" of DDR. The funding provided by the
international community through the United Nations
Development Programme Trust Fund covers the costs
of disarmament and demobilization. Currently, the
European Union and the World Bank are jointly
developing a reintegration strategy. I proposed to the
other national and international partners that they
integrate into that strategy their respective
commitments to reinvigorating host communities and
those affected by the conflicts. Such a document
clearly goes beyond the issue of the reintegration of
ex-combatants and also covers more general
reintegration efforts. It could also serve as a basis for
the Government to present its own planned and
ongoing activities, including those financed by funds
of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community.

During my mission, I also discussed the other
priorities of the strategic framework. I reiterated that
the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission was ready to organize an
event following the successful holding of the elections
and the conclusion of the country's DDR process in
order to mobilize resources for other peacebuilding
priorities in the country, in particular security sector
reform (SSR). In the short term, I have asked the
Government to identify the most urgent priorities in
this field and indicated my willingness to approach
some donors for a limited set of specific interventions.
It was agreed that the European Union SSR expert in
Bangui will work with the SSR technical secretariat to
reformulate and fine-tune SSR projects with a view to
seeking funding from international partners for the
their implementation.

It was further agreed with the Minister of Justice
that a document mapping activities would be drawn up
in the area of the rule of law and justice similar to that
concerning ongoing and planned activities in the
development of communities affected by conflict. The
purpose of the mapping document is to ensure
coordination and coherence in activities in the areas of
justice and the rule of law. It would also allow for gaps
to be identified and to allow new stakeholders to
contribute to efforts in this area in a manner that avoids
duplication and overlap.

I also met representatives of women's
organizations and stressed the importance of the gender
perspective in all my contacts. I advocated for greater
representation of women in State institutions and for
representatives of women's organizations to be allowed
to participate as observers in the deliberations of the
Independent Electoral Committee and the Dialogue
Follow-up Committee.

I should like to make a final comment on the
planned departure of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) at
the end of the year. I am pleased that resolution 1923
(2010) requests the Secretary-General to provide an
assessment of international and regional options for the
Central African Republic in his July report, since
MINURCAT was a stabilizing presence in the north-
eastern part of the country. Simply leaving that region,
which is prone to internal turmoil and regional
spillover, is not an option given the genuine risk of
falling back into conflict. If the regional option is
chosen, it will be necessary to strengthen the Mission
for the Consolidation of Peace in the Central African
Republic in terms of numbers and logistics, which can
be achieved only through a combination of
international support measures. If the Central African
Republic is to serve as a successful example of the
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, the
importance of peacekeeping in the short term should
not and must not be forgotten.

