Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I will follow your instructions, Sir, and refrain
from thanking the briefers. I would nevertheless like
to welcome the presence of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Haiti among us.

I will focus on three points: first, the country's
political situation; secondly, current human rights
challenges; and, thirdly, the importance of continuity
and the gradual transition from the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) to
the new mission.

First, concerning the political situation, although
Haiti has experienced weeks marked by tensions, it is
crucial that those tensions do notjeopardize the progress
made in recent years. The violent demonstrations that
took place remind us of the need to pursue institutional
reforms. Political instability can be resolved only
through an inclusive internal dialogue to address
socioeconomic challenges. Democratic governance
involves constructive dialogue with the opposition
and civil society, including on the sensitive issue of
PetroCaribe funds and combating corruption. Moreover,
the renewal of legislative power is a key step towards
the consolidation of democracy. Belgium reiterates
the importance of rapidly adopting the electoral law
and updating the electoral lists to pave the way for the
holding of credible, inclusive and timely elections.

Secondly, with regard to human rights, we welcome
the appointment of a delegate minister for human rights
and the fight against poverty. Belgium also welcomes
the prompt reaction of the Haitian authorities following
reports of human rights violations committed by the
Haitian National Police. In addition, we are pleased
to note the publication of the first public report of the
Office of the National Human Rights Ombudsperson.
We call on the authorities to further strengthen the
capacity of the General Inspectorate of the national
police and to implement its plan in response to the
recommendations of the Human Rights Council.

Thirdly, Belgium underlines the importance
of continuity and a smooth transition during the
withdrawal phase of MINUJUSTH. We welcome the
Secretary-General's recommendations concerning the
future United Nations presence in Haiti and support
the choice of a special political mission. We believe
that a mandate under Chapter VI is appropriate, and
we note that such an option was favoured by the
Haitian authorities in their meetings with the strategic
assessment mission.

It is important that high-level strategic political
and consultative capacities be available on the ground
to support the Haitian authorities. We advocate for
the inclusion of the following components within the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General: good offices, police development, justice
reform, reduction of community violence, penitentiary
administration and the protection and the promotion of
basic rights, including women's rights. We believe that
it is important not to dissociate the various elements of
the criminal system by keeping the elements of support
for the police and the justice and penitentiary systems
together. A holistic approach will be needed within
the mission.

Belgium is convinced of the need for a robust
human rights component in the future mission.
Important emphasis should be placed on encouraging
women's participation, with regard to which I am
merely echoing what Ms. Loune Viaud said earlier.
The future mandate should also include mechanisms
for regularly evaluating the goals and results achieved,
including through specific indicators.

Lastly, we often talk about the transition, but
it is mainly to the national authorities that a series
of functions will be transferred. Responsibility lies
first and foremost with the Haitian Government, in
particular through the adoption and implementation of
legislation aimed at consolidating the rule of law.

In conclusion, I express my gratitude for the
important work of MINUJUSTH.

