Ms. Wilmshurst (United Kingdom): May I first
extend to you the congratulations of my delegation, Sir,
on your assumption of the Presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. We look forward to
working with your delegation.

I should also like to express our appreciation for the
way in which your predecessor, Ambassador Graf zu
Rantzau, presided over the Council's work in the month
of June.

Last August, the Belgrade authorities took two
important steps towards encouraging the emergence of a
peaceful settlement in Bosnia. The first was to support the
Contact Group proposals as a starting point for
negotiations between the parties. The Bosnian Serb
leadership, however, have not yet taken this essential step.
We urge them to do so and thus to open the way for their
participation in negotiations.

The second important step taken by Belgrade last
August was to close their international border with the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina with respect to all
goods except foodstuffs, medical supplies and clothing for
essential humanitarian needs. The Co-Chairmen of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
(ICFY) have reported that Belgrade continues to meet its
commitment to close that border, and that cooperation
between the ICFY Mission and Belgrade remains good.
My Government endorses that assessment, and continues
to have the fullest confidence in the work of the Co-
Chairmen and of the ICFY mission. The resolution which
the Council has just adopted, of which my Government
was a sponsor, allows for the limited renewal of the
suspension of sanctions on Belgrade. We believe that this
step is justified in response to the actions of the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to date.

Closure of the border has already brought very real
material pressure to bear on the Bosnian Serb leadership

 

in terms of its economic, political and military impact, and
it is important that this pressure be maintained. We
therefore expect the authorities in Belgrade to make further
efforts to enhance the effectiveness of that closure and, in
particular, to ensure that there is no provision of military
assistance for the Bosnian Serb forces. We also look to the
Governments in the region to play their part in ensuring
that Bosnian Serb isolation is intensified, by taking steps to
prevent trade diversion to Pale, whether by land or sea.
And we look to the international community to join us in
providing support, in terms of finance, manpower and
equipment, to the ICFY Mission. It is particularly important
that Governments bring to the attention of the ICFY
Mission any information concerning suspected border
violations, so that the Mission can follow up as appropriate.

Belgrade's closure of their border with Bosnia was an
important step, but nevertheless it was only a first step. The
logic of Belgrade's decision to isolate the Bosnian Serb
leadership until they embrace the Contact Group's proposals
as a starting point should, we believe, lead them to a
further, very significant, step - that is, the recognition of
Bosnia. The Council has made clear on numerous occasions
the importance it attaches to early mutual recognition
between the States of the Former Yugoslavia within their
internationally recognized borders. We hope that the
Council will in the near future be in a position to consider
additional sanctions relief in the context of the Belgrade
authorities having decided to take that further step -
mutual recognition between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My Government strongly commends the efforts so far of
the new European Union Co-Chairman of the ICFY,
Mr. Carl Bildt, and of his United Nations counterpart,
Mr. Thorvald Stoltenberg, to that end. Time is short: we
urge Belgrade to take that further step without delay and to
move towards mutual recognition.

