Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's debate. I
also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Haysom for his briefing and Ambassador
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for
his statement.

Thanks to the tireless efforts of the Afghan
Government and people and the firm support of the
international community, Afghanistan smoothly
completed political, security and economic transitions
at the end of 2014 and entered its important
transformation decade, thereby turning a new page in
the country's history. The Chinese Government and
people congratulate the Government and the people
of Afghanistan for the significant achievements made.
However, we should also note that Afghanistan still
faces various difficulties and challenges in the political,
security, economic and reconciliation fields. Looking
to the future, Afghanistan's achievement of sustainable
economic and social development will hinge mainly
on the efforts of the Government and the people of
Afghanistan themselves. In the meantime, they will also
rely on the continuing massive support and assistance
provided by the international community, based on full
respect for Afghanistan's sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity.

I wish to make the following points.

First, the current mindset must be changed to adapt
to the new normal of the Afghanistan situation - or,
as Ambassador Tanin said, the new reality. This year
marks the first year of Afghanistan's transformation
decade. As the country enters a new stage of political,
economic and social development, the Government
and the people of Afghanistan will have to shoulder
increased responsibilities in national reconstruction
and economic and social development, which is in
accord with the fundamental principle resolving
the Afghanistan situation with the ownership and
leadership of the Afghan people. The international
community should focus on the new long-term view,
proactively adapt to the new normal of the significant
role of the people and the Government and give them
full confidence and support, while actively helping
them strengthen their capacity-building in all areas
aimed at a unified Afghanistan and its people enjoying
self-esteem, self-improvement and self-reliance.

Secondly, we firmly believe in the steady
advancement of Afghanistan's reconciliation. A broad-
based and inclusive reconciliation owned and led by
the Afghan people is the correct direction to ensure
Afghanistan's progress towards national unity, harmony
and lasting peace. China appreciates the efforts of
Afghan President Ahmadzai in promoting national
reconciliation. We believe that the Government and
the people of Afghanistan, with the assistance of the
international community, will achieve harmony and
peaceful coexistence among all of its ethnic groups.
China is ready to play a constructive role in that regard
based on the needs of Afghanistan's various factions.
China stands ready to provide at any time necessary
assistance and facilities for the peace and reconciliation
process.

Thirdly, Afghanistan must march in step with
the times and strive for new opportunities in terms of
economic development. Economic development is the
basis and guarantee to Afghanistan's lasting peace and
stability. Afghanistan enjoys abundant resources and
geographical advantage, and thus has huge potential
for economic development. China welcomes and
appreciates the development strategy that has been
meticulously worked out by the new Government,
which is well suited to the country's conditions and will
accelerate its economic development. The international
community must actively collaborate and fully honour
its commitments in order to achieve further results
in Afghanistan's economy based on its national
priorities. China is ready to assist the Government of
Afghanistan based on its own development experience
and convergence points between the two countries'
development strategies in stepping up construction
related to infrastructure, mining, agriculture and water
projects, among other areas, and in further developing
its economy and improving people's livelihoods.

Fourthly, the open, inclusive and active support of
Afghanistan' in its increased participation in regional
cooperation is necessary, as strengthened regional
cooperation is an important guarantee for the country's
peaceful reconstruction. A solution to the Afghanistan
question will not succeed without the support and
cooperation of the countries in the region. Improved
and strengthened relations with countries in the region
and increased engagement in regional economic
cooperation will assist Afghanistan in creating
conditions favourable to its peaceful development.

China welcomes the steps taken by Afghanistan,
based on its development needs, to actively participate
in China's "One Belt, One Road" initiative, and to
join hands in our common development for mutual
benefit and results. China would also like to support
the strengthened role of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and other regional organizations in
efforts to settle the Afghan question. Last year,
China successfully hosted the fourth Istanbul Process
Ministerial Conference. China looks forward to further
positive results from the fifth meeting, to be held in
Pakistan.

Fifthly, coordinated efforts to strengthen and
improve the role of the United Nations in Afghanistan
are necessary. China supports the ongoing, active role
of the United Nations on behalf of Afghanistan. We
support the efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in addressing the
Afghanistan issue and believe that UNAMA's mandate
should address the requirements of further improving
and perfecting the transformation process with a
view to improved support for, and cooperation with,
the Government of Afghanistan in its efforts towards
national reconciliation and reconstruction.
In that work, UNAMA should respect the leadership
role of the Afghan Government and strengthen
communication and cooperation with it to genuinely
ensure that the result of one plus one will be larger than
two. China is ready to work with other Council members
and with the Afghan Government in diligently seeking
improved measures to ensure UNAMA's heightened
role on behalf of Afghanistan.

China and Afghanistan have a long history of
exchanges. China is also a friend and neighbour of
Afghanistan. Peace and security in Afghanistan are
therefore closely related to the security situation in
western China. China looks forward to seeing a united,
stable, developed and friendly Afghanistan.

This year marks the sixtieth anniversary of the
establishment of diplomatic relations between our two
countries. In January, Chinese President Xi Jinping
exchanged messages of congratulations with the
President of Afghanistan. They warmly congratulated
each other on the sixtieth anniversary and the Year of
China-Afghanistan Friendship and Cooperation, the
prelude to raising China-Afghanistan cooperation in al
fields to new heights.

China stands ready to join the international
community in continuing its firm support to
Afghanistan in its national reconciliation and peaceful
reconstruction efforts and in promoting improved
results in the transformation process, and in greater
contributions towards economic development and
improving the people's livelihoods, with a View to long-
term peace and stability.

