Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),
Mr. Ne'stor Osorio, for his briefing on the work of the
Committee. We are pleased to note that the Committee
has acted in a balanced and objective manner, not
overstepping its mandate. Such work must continue
in the future. We are also grateful to the Committee's
Panel of Experts for their assistance. It is important
for the Panel to continue to work in an impartial and
independent manner, using only reliable sources and
verified information.

The Russian Federation fully upholds all Security
Council resolutions with respect to Iran. Moreover, we
are convinced that the effectiveness of the sanctions
regime and the unified and collective nature of
international efforts in dealing with the situation
concerning Iran's nuclear programme as a whole are
undermined by additional unilateral restrictions. In a
number of cases, these restrictions are extraterritorial
in nature, which is categorically unacceptable from an
international legal point of view.

We are pleased with the contents of the resolution
on the situation concerning Iran's nuclear programme
adopted a week ago in Vienna during the meeting of
the Board of Directors of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). The resolution was supported
by the overwhelming majority of the 35 members of the
Board. Such a result bears witness to the document's
quality and its considered and balanced nature.

We are pleased that our Western partners, including
the five plus one group, listened to the approach that
was put forward jointly by the Russian and Chinese
delegations, which, as a whole, was reflected in the text
of the Board of Directors' resolution. The language in
the resolution is aimed at stepping up dialogue between
Iran and the IAEA and establishing a consistent
negotiations process between the five plus one group
and Iran. Those measures will foster a political and
diplomatic settlement to the situation regarding
Iran's nuclear programme based on the principles of
consistency and reciprocity and in line with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The
resolution contains no threats or judgements by any

party.

We hope that such readiness for dialogue will guide
all parties in future work in this area.

