Mr. Kazi (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks the
Chinese presidency for convening today's open debate,
and we appreciate the Secretary-General's introductory
briefing.

We also align ourselves with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

During the high-level week of the seventy-third
session of the General Assembly, we heard a resounding
reaffirmation of multilateralism by most of our leaders.
In tandem, they made a compelling case for the United
Nations as a critical vehicle of multilateralism and
underscored the need to make it fit for purpose in the
twenty-first century. The word "reform" recurred as a
common refrain, with much of the focus on the Security
Council itself.

In our world today, multilateralism remains a
critical guiding light for a rules-based order in the dark
tunnels we often find ourselves in. Over the past 70
years, the international community has accustomed
itself to a multilateral approach, centred on the United
Nations, to addressing most of the pressing challenges
of our times. This has been particularly relevant in the
context of maintaining international peace and security.
The Charter of the United Nations has emerged as the
main reference point for the peaceful settlement of
disputes and for adhering to a set of internationally
agreed norms and principles during armed conflicts.
Despite the United Nations limited results in managing
conflicts, the Organization has emerged as the most
reliable forum in which to raise concerns over the
outbreak, escalation and recurrence of conflicts in any
given situation. This has been guided by the values
and principles the United Nations stands for, and not
merely on the basis of its balance sheets of successes
and failures.

With the rapid advancement of science and
technology, especially in the domains of information
and biological technology, the conventional notion of
humanity itself will be subject to new, challenging
questions. These questions will continue to require
the collective consideration of all humankind, and
not just a select few. We will need global responses to
what will be essentially global challenges concerning
the world of work, the planetary environment and
security in new frontiers. It is critical that such global
responses remain mindful of the discontents of those
who consider themselves to be left out for one reason or
another. Otherwise, there will be a growing temptation
to take recourse to protectionism, isolation, intolerance
and xenophobia.

Such temptations and strategies can be politically
expedient, but cannot be a viable solution for the alleged
ailments of globalization. Instead of turning our back
on global processes and discourses, it is crucial that we
redouble our efforts to address the polarization that is
yet again creeping into the multilateral context. The
multilateral process can be slow and painstaking, and
yet it is worth all the efforts invested in it. There is
no reason why globalization and multilateralism should
stand in conflict with our sense of patriotism and
nationalism, or why they should not draw strength from
these to promote the common interest of all peoples
around the world.

Anyone who may have doubts about multilateralism
should perhaps consider the case of Bangladesh. Thanks
largely to multilateralism, a nation born with a war-
ravaged economy and dismissed as a basket case has
managed to withstand all odds and chart out a pathway
for itself as one of the fastest growing economies in
the world, lifting more than a million people out of
poverty. Multilateralism has always been the mainstay
of our foreign policy engagements and remains so on
the basis of our sheer national, existential interest. The
Sustainable Development Goals reinforce our national
aspirations to build a peaceful, just and inclusive society
by pursuing the comprehensive pathway to sustaining
peace. In the aftermath of the recent episode of the
Rohingya humanitarian crisis, Bangladesh has had
no option but to seek recourse to the United Nations,
and particularly the Council, for its custodianship
of the crisis until a peaceful and lasting solution can
be reached.

Bangladesh will therefore remain an ardent
champion of the United Nations, commensurate with
our resolve to prepare ourselves for the emerging
opportunities and challenges before our world. Our lead
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping operations
is driven by the values we cherish as a nation in support
of multilateralism and international peace and security.

The meeting rose at 6.05 pm.
