Mr. Pedersen (Norway): The war in Gaza this
summer took a terrible toll on civilians and left the Gaza
Strip in ruins. The rockets fired out of Gaza terrorized
people all over Israel. Once again, for the third time in
less than six years, the international community was
reminded that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a threat
to international peace and security.

Norway commends Egypt for its role in brokering a
temporary cessation of hostilities. Absent a permanent
ceasefire between the parties, however, all attempts
at stabilizing the situation in and around Gaza are
doomed to fail. Therefore, Norway urges the Israeli and
Palestinian negotiators to take courageous steps when
they meet again in Cairo later this month.

On 12 October, Norway, Egypt and Palestine
co-hosted the Cairo International Conference on
Palestine "Reconstructing Gaza". Representatives of
more than 90 countries and organizations participated
and pledged an impressive $5.4 billion dollars - half of
which will be allocated to recovery and reconstruction
in Gaza. Just as important as the money pledged were
the clear political messages given.

First, the Gaza Strip constitutes an integral part of
the territory occupied in 1967 and is part of a future
State of Palestine. Efforts to benefit Gaza will be
successful only if placed within the overall framework
of support to Palestine. The donors emphasized the need
for one single and legitimate recipient Government for
Palestine. They made clear that reconstruction was
not possible without conducive political and security
environments in Gaza. Security must be ensured for
all civilians. Therefore, the participants called on all
parties involved to support a process that results in
the Palestinian Authority regaining all its functions
and effective control in Gaza. Norway calls on all
Palestinian factions to cooperate for Palestinian unity
under the leadership of President Abbas.

Secondly, the reconstruction of Gaza will simply
not be possible unless border crossings to Israel are
opened, socioeconomic development is facilitated
and economic recovery accelerated. The Palestinian
private sector plays a key role in that regard. Norway
welcomes the announcement made by a representative
of Israel of decisive changes in the current restrictions,
as the people of Gaza cannot live under blockade and
in poverty and misery. Norway calls on Israel to make
significant contributions to the reconstruction efforts.

Thirdly, the challenges faced in Gaza and the West
Bank can be fully addressed only in a final status
agreement that resolves all core issues between the
Israelis and the Palestinians. Norway deplores recent
announcements of settlement building, including in
occupied East Jerusalem, and calls for a resumption
of serious, committed and productive negotiations that
can bring an end to the conflict and the occupation that
began in 1967. Norway reiterates its call on the Security
Council to give leadership and guidance both to the
stabilization efforts after the military confrontations
this summer and to the resumption ofthe peace process.

Extremist forces bent on death and destruction in
Iraq, Syria and beyond must be confronted head-on. In
the face of brutal and criminal acts by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and other terrorist groups, the
international community must unite against the threat
they pose.

At the same time, it is necessary to reach political
solutions in both Iraq and Syria. Those conflicts, which
kill and maim people and tear apart the social fabrics of
both countries, cannot be brought to an end by military
means alone.

With respect to Syria, it is crucial that the United
Nations and Special Envoy de Mistura succeed in
engaging the parties and the region in a political
process underpinned by the emerging convergence of
interests among a broad spectrum of Syrians, as well as
key regional powers. Norway fully supports his efforts.

Norway is doing its part in the fight against violent
extremism and terrorism, including through active
support for the international humanitarian and military
efforts in Iraq.

