Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I wish to congratulate the
Dominican Republic onjoining the Security Council, as
well as on its ascension to the presidency of the Council
for the month of January. I also wish to congratulate the
other four newly elected non-permanent members of
the Security Council - Belgium, Germany, Indonesia,
and South Africa - and, at the outset, convey our
support to them as they undertake the noble tasks ahead
of them.

I should also not forget to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting on such an important subject
and for circulating the concept note that has guided this
debate (S/2019/ 1, annex). I also take this opportunity to
thank all the briefers for their enlightening interventions
this morning on the nexus between climate change and
conflicts, as well as related insecurity.

Kenya attaches great importance to the effective
management of climate-related disasters, which
remain a major threat to sustainable development. The
presentations and experiences shared on climate change
by briefers and various speakers today point to the fact
that many of our nations remain exposed to droughts,
hurricanes, tsunamis, floods and extreme temperatures,
among other existential risks. Those hazards have
often wiped out investments, destroyed livelihoods,
engendered conflict and propagated poverty.

Where poverty is high and adaptive capabilities
insufficient, there is considerable vulnerability, even
to mildly extreme weather and other climatic shocks.
In most cases it is women, children and persons
with disabilities who hear the greatest risk. Cases
of climate-related extreme weather events, such as
droughts and floods, have become regular occurrences
in many parts of Africa and are a leading threat
to sustainable development, as well as peace and
security. For instance, in the Horn of Africa, persistent
droughts often cause food insecurity in addition to
water- and pasture-related conflicts, let alone general
economic instability.

My delegation believes that, through greater global
cooperation and collaboration, we can adapt to, and
improve our resilience against, climate-related disasters
that continue to threaten international peace and
security. We may not be able to change the time, place,
frequency or magnitude of climate-related disasters,
but we can at least prepare, plan and minimize their
impact whenever they occur.

Many climate-related international frameworks,
such as the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015-2030 and the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, are anchored on the
assumption that, through our collective efforts, we can
effectively combat disasters and cultivate resilience,
especially among the most vulnerable in our societies.
However, the key challenge remains mobilizing
means of implementation, particularly at local levels.
Moreover, due to insufficient financing and a lack
of appropriate technologies and other capacities in
developing countries, the uniform domestication of
international guidelines becomes a major challenge.

To succeed, we must close implementation gaps
through more investments and the strengthening of the
relevant national institutions responsible for disaster
preparedness and management. Kenya updated its
national disaster risk management policy in 2018,
after benchmarking the best practices in disaster risk
management. The policy lays down strategies to ensure
that the Government commits itself to enhancing
research in disasters and the formulation of risk
reduction strategies. The policy is hinged, inter alia, on
an effective early-warning, information and prediction
system, mainstreaming disaster management in
development planning and a strong institutional
framework, particularly at the grass roots level, to
coordinate various stakeholders.

We believe that we should renew our commitment at
the global level and revitalize international cooperation
and partnerships for disaster and risk reduction,
particularly in the key areas of climate-related
information gathering, early warning, research and
development. Therefore, the mobilization of adequate
and predictable financial resources, technology transfer
and capacity-building will also enable Governments
and regional organizations to respond to the negative
effects of climate change more effectively and avert
many conflicts and related security threats.

In conclusion, I reiterate Kenya's support
for multilateral efforts to address the impact of
climate-related disasters on international peace
and security. We therefore welcome the Secretary-
General's prioritization of, and call for, greater ambition
on climate action. We look forward to the climate
summit scheduled for September.

