Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting to discuss the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission on its sixth session (S/2013/63). We
also express our appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh, Mr. Abulkalam Abdul
Momen, for his excellent leadership of the Commission
last year. I would also like to welcome the Permanent
Representative of Croatia, Mr. Ranko Vilovic', as the
new Chairperson ofthe Commission and wish him every
success in fulfilling that demanding responsibility.

The issuance of the present report in a new
format allows for an in-depth assessment of progress
and limitations in the implementation of the
recommendations of the 2010 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex). It is noteworthy that, by drawing examples from
the experiences of the country-specific configurations,
the report places particular emphasis on the results
achieved and the challenges and opportunities related to
the Commission's work in the countries on its agenda.

The Peacebuilding Commission was established to

bring coordination, coherence and integrity to the United
Nations peacebuilding efforts with a view to addressing
the special needs of countries emerging from conflict.
Because peacebuilding processes depend heavily on
existing circumstances on the ground and changing
global realities, such as the current international
financial situation, the Commission cannot meet all
expectations or fully secure a central role in rebuilding
war-torn societies. The Commission's added value will
be most apparent if it takes more practical approaches,
such as marshalling potential donors and mobilizing
resources for the countries on its agenda in line with
their priorities.

The sense of national ownership is at the core of
peacebuilding. The Governments of countries on the
Commission's agenda bear primary responsibility
for post-conflict reconstruction policies, including
identification oftheir own needs and priorities. Positive
developments, such as the launch of Liberia's national
reconciliation strategy, the successful conduct of
elections in Sierra Leone and resource mobilization
in support of a new poverty reduction strategy
in Burundi underscore the critical importance of
national ownership in and continued commitment to
peacebuilding. Serious setbacks in the Commission's
activities caused by the crises in Guinea-Bissau and
the Central African Republic highlight the urgent need
for cardinal solutions to the root causes of recurring
instability in those countries.

Peacebuilding efforts will yield true results if
they strive to build and develop the institutional
capacities of post-conflict countries. The establishment
of viable State institutions with solid capacities is
a key prerequisite that underpins the effectiveness
of peacebuilding and fosters national ownership.
International assistance for the countries on the agenda
should be aimed at developing national systems that
are able to attract sustainable financial and technical
support.

The Commission's efforts to strengthen partnership
with international financial institutions, such as the
World Bank and the African Development Bank, on the
basis of complementarity between their respective roles
in support of national peacebuilding strategies, should
be further continued. It is also important to establish
proper mechanisms and procedures that will ensure
greater coordination and coherence among key actors
in the field and the alignment of their activities with the
recipient Governments' agendas.

We also underline the necessity of improved
interaction and coordination between the Commission
and senior representatives of the United Nations in the
countries concerned. That interaction will increase
the shared understanding of respective comparative
advantages, roles and responsibilities and help identify
areas where relations could be mutually reinforcing.

I would like to conclude by commending the
dedicated work of the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations. The relevance of the Commission and
the effectiveness of its overall work are judged by the
impact of its configurations on the ground. We are
looking forward to tomorrow's informal interactive
dialogue, where we will reflect on various aspects of
the Commission's and configurations' activities, assess
achievements and analyse existing challenges in a
candid and detailed manner.

