Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Mr. President, I wish to
express strong appreciation for your interest in this
frank discussion on children and armed conflict. I wish
also to convey my very strong support for the diligence
of the Secretary-General in presenting the report
(S/2011/250) on time, for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the work she has put in and
for the Executive Director of UNICEF as well.

I need not go in detail about love for children and
how it transcends social, cultural and all developmental
factors. The United Nations Charter itself speaks of the
noble objective of saving succeeding generations. The
international community has conceived the Convention
on the Rights of the Child; Pakistan was one of the six
co-initiators of that summit in 1990 which provided the
due fillip for the ratification of the Convention.

Pakistan also takes pride in being actively
involved in promoting and protecting the rights of the
child. We have a national commission for child welfare
in development, in collaboration with UNICEF and the
International Labour Organization, and we have
worked for legislation on the progressive elimination
of child labour, the rehabilitation of working children,
formal and non-formal education, free vocational
training and skill development. The United Nations
agencies have been very helpful throughout this
process.

We have also signed the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of
children, and have worked on the Optional Protocol on

the involvement of children in armed conflict, which is
at a very advanced stage and within this year will see
fruition. I do not think that anyone in this Chamber
will ignore these noble intentions; but even hell has a
path paved with good intentions, and we must have
what I consider strictures where the mandate is
concerned. The children and armed conflict mandate
was created by the Council precisely to look into such
situations, to ensure that the rights of children are
protected in the worst environments of conflict. This is
very important; indeed it is the crucial core of what
needs to be achieved.

There are thousands and thousands of derivations
of actions that this body takes. How many can we
stretch into without losing the direction of the core? I
think that all other situations should be aptly covered
by the Committee on the Rights of the Child and other
relevant United Nations agencies. As a refresher, I
would like to recall that in 2001 we adopted resolution
1379 (2001), of which paragraph 16 is the important
feature. That paragraph speaks of parties to armed
conflict that recruit or use children in violation of the
international obligations applicable to them, in
situations that are on the Security Council's agenda or
that may be brought to the attention of the Council by
the Secretary-General, in accordance with Article 99 of
the Charter, which in his opinion - and I want to
underline this - may threaten the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Then in 2009, in resolution 1882 (2009), we
added, in paragraph 19 (a), the words "or in other
situations of concern". The important phrase here is "in
accordance with paragraph 3 of the present resolution".
Paragraph 3 says that the annexes to the Secretary-
General's reports should be "in accordance with the
conditions set out in paragraph 16 of its resolution
1379 (2001)", which Ijust read. That remains the core,
which cannot be in any way mitigated or set aside.

When there have been attempts to do so, the
Office of Legal Affairs points out the difficulties. In a
note to the Special Representative in 2009, the Office
wrote that that this terminology has been used by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict in the title of the annex,
without a clear mandate of the Security Council nor,
for that matter, its endorsement, and that that situation
gives rise to legal, political and practical difficulties
for the Secretary-General, the Special Representative
and the Secretariat as a whole.

Today, the Council has decided to amend this
further, and in paragraph 22 (a) the wording about
situations of concern has been removed and replaced
by "or in other situations". So we should start to lose
any ambiguity and understand where we stand to do
this good work. The work is exemplary, but it starts
moving elsewhere. I endorse what my Indian colleague
said earlier. We have four trigger mechanisms; let us
keep them going. Let us not make things contentious.
That is what the United Nations is all about: the letter
of the law. Who better than the Security Council to
know about that?

I would like to say that the reference to Pakistan,
from my Government's point of View, is misleading
and serves to accord undeserved respectability to
terrorists and criminals - which would be greatly
unfortunate. There are no provisions for situations
other than armed conflict.

In conclusion, I have been asked by my
Government to condemn in the strongest possible terms
any use of children by extremists or any other groups
to promote their nihilistic agenda, and to say that my
Government is taking appropriate action to stop such
practices. At the same time, we sincerely hope that the
future reports of the Secretary-General will remain
higher on objectivity but squarely correspond to the
given mandate.

