Mr. Pascoe: Achieving a full and sustained
cessation of violence and seeking a peaceful resolution
of the crisis in Syria is at the centre of our efforts in the
Middle East. The Council took decisive action on
Saturday by authorizing the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria in response to the
proposal of the Secretary-General, who strongly
welcomed the unanimous adoption of resolution 2043
(2012). The Joint Special Envoy and the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations will
brief tomorrow on the good offices efforts and the
deployment of the observers. I will therefore limit my
comments to a few critical points before turning to the
Israeli-Palestinian issue.

We are at a pivotal moment in Syria. The
cessation of armed violence remains incomplete. Too
many lives have been lost. Human rights violations are
still being perpetrated with impunity. It is our hope that
the deployment of observers will help to stop the
killing and consolidate the calm. The objective,
however, is clearly not to freeze the situation but to
create the conditions for a serious and credible political
process. The Joint Special Envoy has called on both the
Government and the opposition to engage in such a
process as a matter of utmost priority. It is essential
that the Government of Syria fully and immediately
implement its obligations to stop using heavy weapons
and to pull back military forces from population
centres. Action on the other aspects of the six-point
plan is no less important. Measures taken by the Syrian
authorities to date, including on the release of
arbitrarily detained persons and respect for the right to
demonstrate peacefully, are clearly insufficient. Both
would be critical elements to creating the conditions
for a political solution through peaceful dialogue.

Ending the suffering of the people most affected
by the fighting also continues to be a top priority of our
collective efforts. The second meeting of the Syria
Humanitarian Forum took place on 20 April in Geneva.
This important mechanism, chaired by the United
Nations with the co-facilitation of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, the European Union and the
League of Arab States, gathered some 350 participants
12-30484
from Member States, United Nations agencies, the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies, and international non-governmental
organizations. Syrian Government representatives
recognized that there are serious humanitarian needs.
However, little progress has been made so far on
allowing the full and unimpeded access and increased
capacity of agencies on the ground required to ensure
the timely provision of humanitarian assistance. We
urge the Government to take all necessary steps to
facilitate the humanitarian response, as 1 million
people are in need. We welcome in this regard the
generous mobilization of donors' support at the Syria
Humanitarian Forum meeting.

Let me now turn to the Middle East peace
process. For the United Nations, achieving peace
between Israelis and Palestinians is an undiminished
priority. The Secretary-General was pleased to join his
Quartet partners in Washington, DC, on 11 April, in
order to reflect on developments over the past six
months and forge a way forward that builds on the
Quartet statement of 23 September 2011. Quartet
principals heard a briefing from Jordanian Foreign
Minister Nasser Judeh on ongoing Jordanian efforts to
promote exploratory talks. After a pause, negotiators
met again in Amman in early April and agreed to an
exchange of letters outlining their positions. Both
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu have
since continued to reiterate their desire to negotiate.
Although the environment remains fragile, any
opportunity to pursue dialogue towards a resumption of
meaningful negotiations must be welcomed and
supported.

As previously agreed between the parties, on
17 April a senior Palestinian delegation met with Prime
Minister Netanyahu in Jerusalem to deliver a letter
from President Abbas. Prime Minister Netanyahu has
indicated his intention to respond in writing. A joint
statement following the meeting noted the commitment
of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to achieving
peace. It is our hope that this exchange of letters can
provide an opening for further dialogue.

At the same time, the Quartet recognized the
urgent need for tangible signs of progress on the
ground. It particularly underscored the need for
continued international support for the Palestinian
Authority's important institution-building efforts. It
further drew attention to the need for $1.1 billion in
12-30484

assistance to meet the Palestinian Authority's 2012
recurrent financing requirements. The Quartet urged
the speedy conclusion of efforts to resolve outstanding
issues related to tax and customs revenue collection. It
further singled out the need to improve development
for Area C in the West Bank as central to the viability
of a future Palestinian State. Palestinians require access
to a fair planning and zoning regime so they do not
have to resort to building unauthorized structures that
lead to unjustified demolitions, which often impact the
most vulnerable people. Access to Area C will also
enable much-needed urban development, particularly
in areas adjacent to established cities.

Reminding both parties of their obligations under
the Road Map, the Quartet reiterated its call on them to
avoid actions that undermine trust. Absent a political
horizon, the fragility of the situation on the ground
raises serious concerns. On 30 March, on the occasion
of Land Day, large demonstrations were held in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as well as in
Gaza, Lebanon, Jordan and, to a smaller extent, Egypt
and Syria. Clashes between demonstrators and the
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) resulted in one Palestinian
being killed and some 180 wounded. The IDF used
crowd-control measures aimed at minimizing the
number of casualties, which otherwise would have
been higher. Palestinian security forces in the West
Bank and Gaza also took measures to avoid bloodshed,
and in Lebanon the Lebanese authorities took measures
to prevent tension and violence in the immediate
vicinity of the Blue Line. Nevertheless, we remain
mindful that, in the current tenuous environment, there
is always the risk of an eruption of violence.

This risk was further illustrated by the security
incidents observed this month. Clashes between
demonstrators and the IDF resulted in four Palestinian
deaths and 293 injuries, including among 30 children.
The IDF conducted 314 operations in the occupied
West Bank, during which one Palestinian was killed
and 248 Palestinians, including 12 children, were
injured. Two IDF soldiers were also injured. Two
hundred and nine Palestinians were arrested. On
18 April, the Israeli military suspended a senior
military officer who had assaulted a foreign activist in
the West Bank and a commando soldier who killed a
Palestinian during a training session in a West Bank
village. On 2 April, Israeli security forces raided a
Palestinian media centre in East Jerusalem, seizing
equipment and files. On two occasions, on 2 and
3
19 April, Israeli citizens were attacked in East
Jerusalem - reportedly, by a Palestinian armed with
an axe, in the first instance; neither sustained life-
threatening injuries.

The Quartet has taken note of the significant
progress on security achieved by the Palestinian
Authority in the West Bank. Palestinian security forces
have continued their efforts to maintain law and order
in the West Bank. However, there were a few incidents.
On 15 April, one Palestinian militant was killed, and
several others were injured, in a shoot-out with
Palestinian security forces conducting an arrest raid
near Jenin. With respect to the transparent enforcement
of law and order by Palestinian Authority security
forces in the West Bank, we are particularly concerned
about reports about an increase in arrests or
intimidation of Palestinian journalists and bloggers for
expressing their views.

The Israeli Government has announced tenders
for more than 1,000 housing units in the occupied
Palestinian territory, 870 of which are in the East
Jerusalem settlement of Har Homa, with the remainder
in a settlement in the West Bank. Those actions
undermine efforts to achieve a two-State solution and
are contrary to international law.

As a result of a court case brought by an Israeli
settler association, two Palestinian households of
refugee families were evicted from their homes in the
heart of the Palestinian neighbourhood of Beit Hanina,
in East Jerusalem. In total, 54 Palestinian structures,
including 14 residences, were demolished in the West
Bank, leading to the displacement of 117 Palestinians,
including 63 children.

The Quartet is concerned about the ongoing
settler violence in the West Bank and called on Israel to
take effective measures, including bringing the
perpetrators of such acts to justice. On 4 April, Israeli
security forces evacuated 12 settler families who had
taken up residence in a house in Hebron.

The Secretary-General follows closely the
situation of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli detention
centres. Some 320 remain under administrative
detention. On 1 April, the case of prisoner Hana
Shalabi came to an end when she agreed to be deported
to Gaza, after a 43-day hunger strike. However, on
17 April, demonstrations in Gaza and the West Bank
took place to commemorate Palestinian Prisoners Day,
and 1,200 Palestinian prisoners reportedly started an
open-ended hunger strike to protest the conditions of
Palestinian prisoners.

Turning to Gaza, the Quartet, while reaffirming
its previous positions, stated that the situation in and
around Gaza will remain unsustainable so long as it is
not reunited with the West Bank under the legitimate
Palestinian Authority adhering to the commitments of
the Palestine Liberation Organization. The
reconciliation process has yet to see any progress since
the Doha declaration of 6 February. The Quartet further
underscored the importance of continued steps to
address the needs of Gaza's residents, and welcomed
the Israeli Government's approval at the meeting of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians on priority
United Nations infrastructure projects in Gaza.

This month, a total of 13 rockets, including 1
Grad rocket and 11 mortars, were fired from Gaza into
Israel, while the IDF conducted 3 incursions and 3
airstrikes into Gaza. Clashes in Gaza resulted in the
death of two Palestinian civilians and one militant.
Thirty-nine civilians and two militants were injured.
One Palestinian was killed in tunnel-related activities.
Two Palestinians were killed by IDF troops on 1 and
3 April, respectively, when approaching the security
fence. One was allegedly armed and trying to plant
explosives, but the second was an unarmed 17-year-old
boy. Indiscriminate rocket attacks from Gaza into
Israel must cease and Israeli forces must show
maximum restraint.

On 7 April, Hamas de facto authorities executed
three prisoners, two of them charged with criminal
cases and one accused of collaboration with Israel. The
execution was carried out without the approval of
President Abbas, as required by Palestinian basic law.
Palestinian and international human rights
organizations have strongly condemned the continued
Hamas policy of execution in Gaza. The United
Nations continues to call for the cessation of all
military trials by Palestinian authorities.

In another development, on 5 March two Grad
rockets were reportedly fired from the Sinai peninsula
towards the Israeli city of Eilat. One rocket landed near
a residential area, causing minor damage.

The Secretary-General welcomed the recent
meeting and joint public commitments of Israelis and
Palestinians. What is important now is to transform
that fragile opening into an opportunity to
12-30484
incrementally promote dialogue while ensuring
continued international support for the Palestinian
Authority's institution-building efforts.

Let me briefly turn to the situation in Lebanon.
On 4 April, Mr. Samir Geagea, the leader of the
Lebanese forces, escaped an apparent assassination
attempt when two bullets were fired at him in the
garden of his residence, narrowly missing their target.
The Lebanese authorities are investigating that attack
on the life of one of its major political figures.

The situation along Lebanon's borders with Syria
remains of concern. On 9 April, a cameraman for the
Lebanese television network Al-Jadeed was killed in
the Lebanese border region of Wadi Khaled by gunfire
emanating from the Syrian side. President Sleiman,
Prime Minister Mikati and representatives across the
entire political spectrum in Lebanon condemned the
incident. The Lebanese authorities have launched an
inquiry into the incident and have requested that Syrian
authorities undertake their own investigation.

The United Nations continues to coordinate
closely with the Government of Lebanon on the
provision of assistance to the 9,700 Syrian refugees
registered in northern Lebanon, as well as on matters
of protection and the determination of their status.
Special Coordinator Plumbly toured the area on
17 April and met with local political and security
representatives and with Syrian refugees. In the eastern
Lebanese Bekaa Valley, the latest assessment of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees is that approximately 7,500 Syrian refugees
are receiving assistance.

The overall situation in the area of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon has
remained generally quiet and stable. Air violations by
the Israeli Defense Forces have continued on an almost
daily basis.

