Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by expressing our
condolences to the peoples and the Governments of
Egypt and Somalia for the dastardly attacks perpetrated
recently in their countries. We thank the United States
for organizing today's debate and Ms. Sandra Honore'
for her comprehensive briefing on the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2017/223) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
including its recommendations on the new peacekeeping
operation that will, we hope, succeed MINUSTAH as
of 15 October.

My country associates itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Peru on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Haiti. I would also like to make
some additional comments in my national capacity.

Argentina has participated in every United
Nations effort to help Haiti to attain stability and work
out its own path to development since 1994. In that
regard, we can only be pleased with the forthcoming
successful conclusion of MINUSTAH's mission and
the transition to a new phase, which will, we hope, see
peace consolidated in Haiti for good. We commend the
Haitian people for the peaceful conduct oftheir electoral
process and the restoration of constitutional order, and
congratulate their new President, Mr. Jovenel Moise, on
his election in February and wish him every success in
his new job.

We also welcome the new Government under Prime
Minister Jack Guy Lafontant and encourage his efforts
to tackle his country's continuing tough challenges.
In that regard, we are pleased that both the Secretary-
General's report and the resolution drafted by the
Group of Friends of Haiti expect that the mandate
of the new mission to be established in October will
focus on helping the Haitian State to strengthen its
rule-of-law institutions, develop the Haitian National
Police and protect human rights. Those are functions
whose inclusion in peacekeeping-mission mandates my
country has always argued for. We trust that the mission
will also contribute to the country's economic and social
development by continuing to conduct programmes for
reducing community violence, quick-impact projects
and other activities that can help to achieve genuine
and lasting peace, including through political efforts
supporting implementation of the Organization's new
approach to cholera.

After 13 years in Haiti and following the departure
in April 2015 of our battalion and air unit, our
military hospital will leave in October. After that,
we are planning to continue the participation of the
15 Argentine civilian police officers who are there
currently, with the possibility of adding some more
if that is possible and needed under the new mission's
mandate. With regard to the coming transition and
as we expressed at the Council's meeting with the
Mission's troop- and police-contributing countries (see S/PV.7914), we would perhaps have preferred a more
gradual drawdown of MINUSTAH's police component,
whereby the police and civilian components would
begin to be reduced once the military withdrew or
after a certain amount of time has passed, so as not
to suddenly weaken the Organization's presence at a
time when both the police and civilian activities are
becoming more essential to the consolidation of peace
and the achievement of sustainable peace. Nonetheless,
we would like to reiterate our confidence in the
judgement of the Secretariat and the will of the Haitian
Government and the people, and we hope that both
the transition and the launch of the new mission will
go smoothly and with adequate human and material
resources, and will signal the start of an era of peace
and development in Haiti.

I would like especially to thank Ms. Honore on the
successful conclusion of her work.

