Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia)(spoke in Spanish): No
member of the United Nations can possibly have failed to
notice the degree of attention that the various bodies of
the Organization devote to African problems. From our
treatment of the problems on that continent, the
international community can draw lessons regarding the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
administration of humanitarian assistance, cooperation for
development and the promotion of human rights, among
many others.

I do not intend to try to answer the questions so
rightly raised by the Presidents of the Council. Rather,
having heard the various statements of delegations today,
another urgent question must be raised: we wonder
whether the United Nations is acting effectively to face
the enormous challenge of peace in Africa. We ask this
not so much in terms of financial resources or of the
political will to act, but rather of the management ability
of the Organization, of its capacity to benefit from the
strength of the various organs and programmes with a
view to achieving durable peace and sustainable
development in the region, as suggested by the title of the
Secretary-General's report last year.

Today we are focusing on the requirements for peace
in Africa from the standpoint of peacekeeping operations
and partnerships for peacekeeping with regional
organizations. However, as other delegations have already
pointed out, including those of Argentina and Brazil, how

 

can we expect to find lasting peace without the benefit of
a favourable economic climate so that peace can become
rooted in the daily life of Africans?

It seems to us that in order to make better use of the
scarce resources available within the Organization to
achieve peace in Africa, it is necessary to improve the
coordination between and harmonize the management of the
various United Nations organs, particularly of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council. In this regard, we agree with the decision
of the General Assembly to establish an open-ended
working group to monitor the implementation of the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report, taking advantage, moreover, of the conclusions
arrived at by the Economic and Social Council at its last
session. That is an appropriate body to bring together the
various conceptions of our Organization on the best way to
manage peacekeeping efforts in Africa. That is, if we are to
establish better associations or partnerships, we should
begin by doing so within our own Organization.

The Security Council may not be able to respond
adequately to the major challenges of the African continent
without real and effective coordination with the other
principal bodies within their respective spheres of
competence or under their corresponding mandates. I
believe that the results of United Nations action could be
far better if we could create the conditions for a more
efficient presence of our system in the region.

That was the question I wanted to raise, and those
were the reflections that I wanted to bring to the attention
of the participants in the current debate.

