Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me to start by
thanking you, Madam President, for presiding over
today's meeting. We greatly appreciate it. I would also
like to commend the Kingdom of the Netherlands for
its efforts as penholder in today's adoption ofresolution
2405 (2018). I appreciate the presence of our briefers:
Special Representative Yamamoto, Ms. Sarabi and
Ms. Safi. Their briefings described many positive
developments, and we should continue along those
lines. Allow me to share some of Poland's thoughts.

Poland strongly supports the fundamental role of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and its personnel in supporting Afghan
society, promoting and monitoring human rights,
encouraging peace and reconciliation and providing
valuable assistance to the Government of Afghanistan.
I would like to align myself with the statement of the
European Union (EU), to be delivered later.

We welcome the Kabul Process on peace and
security cooperation as a prospective framework,
bringing together a number of regional and international
participants, including the United Nations and the EU.
We believe that the initiative will give new impetus to
the efforts and lead to a peaceful and prompt settlement
of the conflict. In that context, following consultation,
of course, with the female members of the High Peace
Council, we call on the Afghan Government to put in
place clear procedures for how to engage and to include
women in peace negotiations with the Taliban and other
parties to the conflict.

The fight against the Taliban greatly affects women,
since they make up 12 per cent of the conflict-related
civilian casualties. Consequently, it is women's rights
that are violated the most by the presence of the Taliban
in communities. At the same time, women frequently
have better access to certain populations and locations
and can gather critical information about threats to
security. They can also improve the relationship of the
security forces with local communities and can detect
early signs ofradicalization, since they are often the first
targets of fundamentalists. However, Afghan women
do not have a significant role in decision-making,
including on how to combat the Taliban at the local
and national levels. We appreciate the fact that the
percentage of women in the High Peace Council has
increased to 20 per cent, including at a senior level
and in the provincial peace committees across the 34
provinces of Afghanistan. However, women's voices
are missing in the actual talks and negotiations.

While we recognize the Afghan Government's
efforts to strengthen the engagement of women in the
police and security sectors, many challenges remain
in that area. Further work is needed to develop Clear
procedures on how to increase the number of women
in the leadership and management of the security
sector. The process cannot happen without the active
participation of civil society organizations led by
women. In that connection, we recognize the important
role played by the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women and other
United Nations entities in supporting the empowerment
of Afghan women. Moreover, we would like to take
this opportunity to highlight the positive impact and
ongoing significance of the international commitments
made at the NATO Warsaw Summit in 2016 and its
important influence on security, development and
stability in Afghanistan.

The protection of civilians and compliance with the
obligations under international humanitarian law remain
a serious problem, causing innocent people to suffer the
effects of the military conflict in Afghanistan. As the
2017 annual report on the issue showed, there is still
significant room for progress. Poland strongly supports
the efforts of UNAMA to limit civilian casualties, in
particular among children, who are severely affected by
unexploded ordnance.

The upcoming parliamentary and district
council elections represent a significant task for the
Afghan political system on its path to an inclusive
and transparent outcome. Poland hopes that the new
Parliament will create a strong legislative foundation
for the sustainable development of the country. In terms
of technical support, we encourage UNAMA to provide
the necessary assistance at the request of the Afghan
authorities. The broad participation of women, both as
candidates and as voters, remains a high priority for us.

In conclusion, I would like once again to commend
the work of UNAMA, and in particular Mr. Yamamoto.

