Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I am grateful to Mr. Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing on the
current situation in Kosovo.

I also express my gratitude to Her Excellency
Ms. Kuburovic', Minister of Justice of the Republic of
Serbia, and Ms. Citaku for their statements.

Bolivia calls for compliance with resolution 1244
(1999), including full respect for the territorial integrity,
sovereignty, and independence ofSerbia. We believe that
the attempt to establish a Kosovo army runs contrary
to that resolution and poses a threat to the progress
made between the parties. Accordingly, that type of
action or, indeed, any action leading to an escalation
of violence, is not conducive to fostering a peaceful
solution and must therefore be avoided. We believe that
a constructive environment must be established so as
to achieve solutions leading to progress and stability.
We therefore commend the European Union-facilitated
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade, which opens
a way to a lasting solution so as to end the conflicts
affecting the region. To that end, parties must refrain
from making statements containing bellicose and
inflammatory rhetoric.

Bolivia encourages the parties to continue
working together, in particular on the agreement
concerning the establishment of the association of
Serbian municipalities covered in the Brussels dialogue
leading to security and human rights of Serbians in
Kosovo and Metohija in which they are the majority
of the population. We underscore the voluntary return
of 90 members non-majority communities, especially
the Roma-Ashkali-Egyptian community. Moreover,
Bolivia deplores the hindering ofthe return ofinternally
displaced persons in certain regions in Kosovo. We
call on the parties to join efforts to ensuring their safe
return to their homes.

With regard to UNMIK, we highlight the work and
efforts made in cooperation with the Kosovar authorities
to approve legislation strengthening capacity ensuring
the protection of cultural and religious heritage, as well
as its work in holding an open roundtable discussion on
women and peace and security in Kosovo, on the theme
"The role of women in reconciliation: building peace
and security in Kosovo". We believe that women are
key actors in long-term confidence-building and peace
in the region.

We call on the parties to refrain from committing
acts of aggression running contrary to the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. We
call on the parties to reach a peaceful resolution to the
conflict through the dialogue and the duty to negotiate
in accordance with the provisions of international law.
Such efforts must be made so as to achieve lasting
peace that, over the long-term, will benefit the region
if the Serbs and Kosovars show the will to resolve their
differences with the help of regional organizations.

Bolivia appreciates the efforts made by the
European Union and agrees with the statement made
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/387),
according to which,

"[t]he European Union-facilitated dialogue is
the best available mechanism for the peaceful
resolution of differences, to the benefit of both
sides. Progress, for each party, can be achieved
only by peaceful means and, regardless of electoral
cycles and daily politics ". (S/2017/387. para. 47)
Finally, Bolivia appreciates the work and efforts
made by UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, and by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. We encourage
continued confidence-building efforts, as well as the
use of peaceful means and dialogue with a view to
promoting peace, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

