Ms. ankatop-Diseko (South Africa): My
delegation wishes to congratulate the Federal Republic
of Nigeria on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We are grateful to Nigeria for
its foresight in choosing to focus on security sector
reform (SSR) as a key topic for this month. We thank
Nigeria for sponsoring the first draft resolution on this
topic, and pledge South Africa's support for it.

We wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his statement, welcome his second report on SSR
(S/20l3/480) and look forward to playing an active role
in implementing its recommendations.

South Africa attaches great importance to SSR.
Nigeria, together with South Africa, co-hosted a high-
level forum on African perspectives on security sector
reform in May 2010. Building on the outcomes, a
follow-up high-level forum was held in October 2012
on building partnerships for security sector reform in
Africa. Both outcomes were submitted to the Secretary-
General.

Furthermore, in November 2013, South Africa and
Slovakia co-hosted a high-level meeting of the United
Nations Group of Friends of SSR to launch the latest
report of the Secretary-General on SSR and to discuss
the way forward in implementing the second report of
the Secretary-General.

We have noted several achievements in the report,
such as the provision of support to countries in the
development of national security policies, strategies and
plans, facilitating national dialogue on issues related to
security sector reform, assisting national authorities
with the development of executive and oversight
mechanisms and supporting countries in coordination
and resource mobilization, which is a step welcomed
by my delegation. While we welcome those positive
developments, we believe that more can still be done,
especially in the light of the noteworthy setbacks that
have been experienced in countries such as the Central
African Republic, South Sudan and Somalia.

Drawing on the lessons learned on the African
continent and South Africa's own homegrown
experience undergoing SSR, we can attest to the fact
that each country faces its own unique challenges, and
therefore, whatever approach is adopted, it has to be
context-specific.

A key political and practical challenge in
supporting SRR is facilitating national ownership. We
welcome the development of the Integrated Technical
Guidance Notes on that important issue by the
inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force, which
recognizes that national ownership requires countries
to develop their own national vision for their security
sectors that is informed by their own circumstances,
to commit sufficient resources to ensure the long-term
sustainability and viability of reforms and to review the
progress in their implementation.

SSR challenges and opportunities are regional
in nature. Cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations is therefore important. We appreciate the
cooperation between the African Union (AU) and the
United Nations. The strategic partnership developed
between the United Nations and the African Union
on SSR is an expression of the important role that the
United Nations could play in advancing security sector
reform on the African continent.

Therefore, we welcome the African Union policy
framework recently adopted by the African Union Heads
of State and Government and the ongoing capacity-
building programme by the AU, United Nations and
European Union. South Africa is committed to the
implementation of that framework.

We also recognize the important role United Nations
peacekeeping missions play in security sector reform,
where they have become increasingly multidimensional.
Theimportance ofSSRanddisarmament,demobilization
and reintegration programmes are essential elements
for peacebuilding, and we welcome the increasing
involvement of the Peacebuilding Commission in that
regard. The Peacebuilding Commission should continue
to intensify its efforts to mobilize resources, including
by supporting national aid coordination and resource
mobilization efforts by countries under its purview.

The inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task
Force and the Security Sector Reform Unit have
emerged as important sources of expertise on SSR.
The 2013 report of the Secretary-General outlines the
increasing complexity of mandates and activities in
support of national SSR processes. It also concludes
that a number of steps need to be taken in order to
strengthen the United Nations delivery on the ground.
We must support that.

In conclusion, the legitimacy and global character
of the United Nations gives it a particular responsibility
in facilitating a coordinated approach to security sector
reform based on the principle of national ownership and
inclusivity. That all-inclusive process must always have
a capacity to address the needs of the people, including
in particular the role that women and youth can play.
We are optimistic that the debate today will move us a
step closer to further enhancing and coordinating our
approach to SSR.

