Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The sponsors of terrorism are the ones
daydreaming about Syria's downfall, just as they
dreamed of burying Iraq, Libya and Yemen. However,
I am sure that when they fall asleep they will have
nightmares about and be haunted by Syrian, Libyan,
Yemeni and Palestinian curses.

From the very first days ofthe terrorist war imposed
on my country, Syria, the United States, France and
Britain, which have been calling for action, became
worthy of the title of the three musketeers who defend
terrorism. If only they modelled themselves after
Don Quixote, whom you mentioned, Mr. President,
as he was a noble person fighting for human justice.
Those three States, in addition to other States outside
the Council - such as Turkey, Qatar and Saudi
Arabia - call for convening formal and informal
meetings and informal-informal consultations, in
various formats, and submit one draft resolution after
another, in such a way that has pushed the United
Nations to abandon its most important purposes and
principles in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Through the erroneous practices of some, the
Organization has now become a platform and a tool
to defend, protect and promote terrorism in Syria and
undermine international consensus on combating it. If
that continues to be the case, we would not be surprised
if the Governments of those States were to nominate
terrorists - such as the Briton Jihadi John, the French
Abu Murrah, the American Abu Huraira, the Turkish
Abu Mekdad, the Saudi Abdullah Al-Muhaysini or
the Canadian Abu Abdul Rahman, in addition to Abu
Jaafar from Aleppo, who was just mentioned by the
representative of the United States - for a Nobel Peace
Prize. Or indeed, if the United Kingdom and French
Governments were to name a couple of streets in Paris
and London after Abu Mohammad Al-Julani, leader of
Jabhat Al-Nusra, or Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi, leader of
Da'esh, in eternal commemoration of their contribution
to humanitarian action in Aleppo, the promotion of
democracy and the protection of civilians.

We would call on the three musketeers today and
ask them where they have been. Why were they silent?
Why this shameful posture vis-a-vis the bombing of
the Russian field hospital today, with the killing of two
Russian doctors and the wounding of staff and patients
alike by the self-styled moderate terrorists who are
being defended by those States in act, deed and word
inside and outside of the Security Council? That field
hospital was set up to treat innocent civilians liberated
by the Syrian army and its allies from the terrorists of
Jabhat Al-Nusra, who had used them as human shields.
It is a well-established fact that terrorists entered
Aleppo in the summer of 2012, as two United Nations
officials, Mr. De Mistura and before him Mr. Stephen
O'Brien, finally recognized in their latest briefing (see S/PV.7822) to the Security Council.

The liberation of some 100,000 civilians in Aleppo,
from the area members refer to as eastern Aleppo,
including tens of thousands of children, was never a
part of the plans of the three musketeers' Governments
and their proxies. Otherwise, those Governments would
have welcomed the achievements of the Syrian army
and its allies, who are combating terrorism in Syria on
behalf of the entire membership of the international
community - now that the threat of terrorism is
present in every corner of the world because of the
reckless policies and the cheap political blackmail of
those Governments.

I will not recount the suffering of our people in
Aleppo under the practices of terrorist groups - nor,
indeed, the horrific stories being told by those freed
from the crime and barbarity of those groups. But
I would confirm that the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic, supported by its allies, will not give in
to the attempts of those three States and their proxies
to exploit the Security Council to support terrorists
in Syria. We will not let our people in Aleppo down.
We will not hesitate in our constitutional and legal
duty to expel terrorists from Aleppo and from all
Syrian territory. We will not hesitate to save Syrians
from the scourge and practices of those groups, in
conformity with the principles of international law and
in implementation of Security Council resolutions on
combating terrorism - just like any State Member
of this international Organization that cherishes
its sovereignty.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
its allies have abided by all previous periods of calm
because we value the lives of Syrian civilians. However,
those periods were simply used as an opportunity
for terrorist groups, supported and directed by their
handlers - some States members of the Security
Council and some not - to regroup their forces and
reconstitute their terrorist fighters and to obtain more
weapons and military, human and logistical supplies
in order to carry out their crimes against the Syrian
people. In that context, the question being asked by the
Syrian people and the free international public opinion
is this: Has the Security Council ever adopted a draft
resolution to impose a truce on terrorists merely to
allow them to take a breath and rearm?

In the face of such cheap political blackmail by the
three musketeers, the Syrian Government, supported
by its allies, will continue to spare no effort - as it
has done since the very first days of the war against
terrorism - in upholding international humanitarian
law, protecting civilians and fulfilling its duty to
assist all Syrians in need, including by recently
putting in place safe passage for civilians in Aleppo
to facilitate their exit. Armed persons were also given
the opportunity to lay down their weapons in order
to restore peace and stability to the city. In return,
international humanitarian organizations and their
officials - including the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs - who have cried tears before
the Security Council, have to date done nothing to help
the people liberated by the Syrian Army from terrorism
in Aleppo.

It is now the duty of Member States of this
international Organization not to fall victim to the
attempts of some States members of the Security
Council and outside to force through draft resolutions

that only strengthen terrorism and promote it in Syria.
No Member State is safe from terrorism. For those who
hold high the interests of the Syrian people, either to
alleviate their suffering or to reach a Syrian-led political
solution, I emphasise that they must knock at the door
ofthe Syrian Government. The address is known to all.

In conclusion, a permanent Member State of the
Council, whose Foreign Secretary justifies the killing
by the Saudi air force of thousands of civilians in
Yemen, destroying that country, surely is in no position
to make false accusations against others. Today the
Foreign Minister of the United Kingdom said that Saudi
Arabia had crossed no red lines in Yemen and that the
United Kingdom would continue to provide weapons
and advice to Saudi Arabia in its war against Yemen.
That was the statement, word for word, from the United
Kingdom Foreign Minister, in exact contradiction
to what the world is witnessing: the bombing of
hospitals, the killing of civilians and the destruction of
infrastructure in Yemen.

The meeting rose at 4pm.
