Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
meeting. I also would like to thank the Mr. Fedotov,
Executive director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his very informative
briefing.

Transnational organized crime causes and
aggravates conflict, and that was one of the main
messages during the 6 November debate (see S/PV.8393)
on the role of policing in peacekeeping operations,
which included the participation of numerous United
Nations Police Commissioners. During that meeting,
we stressed that financial gains from organized crime
are a source of income that fund insurgent groups and
terrorists and thereby perpetuate the cycle of conflict.
Like other forms of crime, drug trafficking fuels
corruption, terrorism and other illicit trafficking. It
transcends borders and affects the lives of millions of
people around the world, especially young people. To
counter drug trafficking in West and Central Africa,
we need an integrated approach. Let me mention three
main aspects in that regard: first, regional security
cooperation; secondly, criminal justice; and, thirdly,
sanctions.

First, with regard to regional security cooperation,
regional problems require regional solutions, supported
by the United Nations where needed. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands is a staunch supporter of closer
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations like the African Union. As such, we
are a supporter of sustainable financing for African
Union peace support operations. In order to tackle
drug trafficking in West and Central Africa, regional
initiatives are key, and UNODC plays a crucial role
in facilitating such initiatives, including within the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
UNODC facilitates cooperation through projects
like the West Africa Coast Initiative and the Airport
Communication Project, which the Kingdom of the
Netherlands supports. In the context of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), we welcomed the
regional approach to drug trafficking in the mandate
of its Joint Force. We support the G-5 Sahel Security
Platform, aimed at exchanging information on criminal
and terrorist activities in West Africa.

That brings me to my second point, concerning
criminal justice. Security and justice are two sides
of the same coin. Impunity for drug trafficking
undermines trust in public institutions and hampers
sustainable peace and security. A criminal justice
response is crucial to upholding the rule of law and
ensuring cooperation between local populations and
security forces. The role of the police is essential in
that regard. That was one of the reasons for which
the Kingdom of the Netherlands, together with Cote
d'Ivoire, drafted resolution 2447 (2018), on policing,
justice and corrections, which the Security Council
adopted unanimously last week. Furthermore, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands supports strengthening
the justice sector in Mali through the police
component within the G-5 Joint Force. In criminal
justice, cooperation to share evidence and ensure due
process is pivotal. Accordingly, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands supported the secondment of a Nigerian
prosecutor in Italy to facilitate information sharing and
mutual legal assistance in the area of illicit trafficking.
We recommend similar secondments in other Member
States and institutions.

Concerning my last point - sanctions - criminal
networks thrive in conflict and in situations in which
corruption and impunity are widespread. The Council
must use its entire toolkit to address threats against
international peace and security, including through
targeted sanctions against traffickers who spoil
peace processes and weaken institutions. We already
have good practices. In the Mali sanctions regime,
the production and trafficking of narcotic drugs is a
listing criterion, and in the Libya sanctions regime, the
Council targeted human traffickers. We have done it
before, and we must not shy away from doing it again.

In conclusion, drugs damage countries' social,
health-care and economic systems. In my introduction,
I talked about an integrated approach to counter drug
trafficking. Ultimately, the Sustainable Development
Goals provide such an integrated approach. We must
ensure the rule of law and better living conditions
for our people so that drug traffickers cannot get a
foothold. Let this be our joint goal in our fight against
drug traffickers in West and Central Africa and around
the world.

