Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We thank Mr. O'Brien
for his comprehensive briefing and for his continuing
commitment to the humanitarian relief efforts in Syria.

In the past few weeks, we have reiterated on
numerous occasions our collective resolve to address
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Syria, with
particular regard to the situation in Aleppo.

Unfortunately our calls for immediate, unhindered
and complete humanitarian access to all areas of Syria,
including Aleppo, continue to fall on deaf ears. Even
Special Envoy De Mistura decided to cancel his latest
meeting with the International Syria Support Group
(ISSG) humanitarian task force out of frustration for
lack of significant change on the ground. It is crucial
that the ISSG members, as well as members of the
Security Council continue to make comprehensive
efforts to get all the parties to the conflict to accept
the proposal for recovering substantial pauses in the
fighting, which would ensure sustained humanitarian
deliveries via cross-line and cross-border convoys to
areas most in need, notably Aleppo. The humanitarian
and political track are intrinsically linked, and it is
therefore important to continue these efforts because
the pauses can lead not only to improved humanitarian
assistance but also to more room for constructive
dialogue on potential long-term cessations ofhostilities.

To conclude, we wish to offer our support to the
proposed initiative by Mr. O'Brien for allowing more
humanitarian corridors and assistance to Syrians in
need. We sincerely hope that all sides to the conflict will
be receptive to those proposals and allow for civilians
to escape the fighting by guaranteeing voluntary, free
movement, including for those in besieged and hard-to-
reach areas.

We also reiterate our support for the humanitarian
task force of the ISSG and hope that the parties to the
conflict will cooperate with efforts to ensure immediate,
unhindered and complete humanitarian access to the
people of Syria. It is important that we redouble our
efforts to ensure that our proposals are met, in particular
concerning the cessation of hostilities, considering the
growing threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusrah Front and all other
individual groups, undertakings and entities associated
with Al-Qaida or ISIL, and other terrorist groups, as
designated by the Security Council.

