Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the African members of the Security Council - the Niger, South Africa, Tunisia - and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). I would like at the outset to thank the Under- Secretary General for Peace Operations, Jean-Pierre Lacroix, and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for their comprehensive briefings. I wish also to welcome to the Council the Permanent Representative of the Sudan. The A3+1 commends the stabilizing role of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in the Area and along the Sudan-South Sudan border, including its support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. We also express our appreciation to Ethiopia and its peacekeepers for their commitment and dedication to ensuring security and building confidence in the area and the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. The African Union recognizes these commendable efforts and continues to stand by the Governments of the Sudan and of South Sudan and their people as they move along the path to comprehensive peace and sustainable development, while relying on the partnership and support of the Security Council and the wider international community. The A3+1 notes with appreciation the mutually reinforcing relations between the Governments of the Sudan and of South Sudan, in light of the signing of the peace agreement between the Sudanese parties on 3 October in Juba, as well as the Sudan's constructive engagement as the incumbent Chair of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in the peacebuilding process in South Sudan. We believe that it remains useful for the Sudan and South Sudan, and for the Security Council, to capitalize on such dynamism so that the pursuit of just and lasting peace in both countries extends to the Abyei Area and reciprocally. We urge the two Sudans to continue to foster rapprochement and mutual trust with a view to fully implementing their cooperation agreements and reaching a positive-sum settlement to the final status of Abyei. In this regard, the A3+1 is encouraged by senior-level visits held over the last two months in Juba and Khartoum, and the commitment expressed by both sides to reinvigorating the peace process and addressing the final status issue. We look forward to joint and swift progress on the issue. We are further encouraged by the novel designation by Khartoum and Juba of their respective chief administrators for Abyei. We stress the paramount importance of swiftly resuming, in the coming months, regular meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, as per the decision reached at the 19 February Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting. The A3+1 takes note that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has ground to a halt a number of UNISFA-mandated activities, affected meaningful engagement of the mission at the local and traditional-leader levels, and circumscribed progress on Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism benchmarks and Joint Political and Security Mechanism decisions, as outlined in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/1019). We express our support for UNISFA's ongoing efforts aimed at energizing local peace processes and monitoring intercommunal reconciliation. Further, we praise UNISFA's role in empowering women and youth participation at the local and grass-roots levels so as to enhance prospects for preventing conflict, COVID-19 and human rights abuses. We underline the necessity of heeding potential new cycles of hostilities along communal lines, and of working together to address the drivers of such violence and defuse tensions. It is essential, too, that the utmost efforts be made to ensure that Abyei and its Safe Demilitarized Border Zone become free of crime and of weapons. We further stress the importance that UNISFA's mandate and operational activities be facilitated and its personnel protected so that it may perform its tasks at full capacity and in an efficient manner. On the way forward for the United Nations presence in Abyei, the A3+1 sees continued relevance for the UNISFA mandate in stabilizing the Abyei area and along the border, and in bringing certainty amid these uncertain times. Accordingly, we would like to endorse the recommendation of the Secretary-General in his report on the extension of UNISFA's mandate and its support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism for a further period of six months
