Mr. Kolby (Norway): The situation in the Middle
East is at a crossroad. The responsibility for ending
violence and pursuing peace rests primarily with the
parties. But the international community cannot remain
aloof.

Norway regrets that Secretary Powell's mission to
the Middle East did not achieve all its goals. However,
we welcome the continued commitment of the United
States to finding a way to peace.

Israel has the right to protect its citizens. The
terrorist attacks against Israeli citizens must be
condemned, and they must stop. Yet Israel also carries
a big responsibility for the well-being of innocent
civilians living in the occupied territories.
Norway is deeply shocked by the damage
inflicted by the Israeli military attacks, in particular in
Jenin. Israel has clear obligations under international
law to protect civilians. The destruction of civilian and
personal property is not acceptable. Norway is
extremely concerned with the humanitarian
consequences of the destruction inflicted upon
Palestinian towns, villages and in particular the refugee
camp in Jenin. Norway believes it is in the interest of
both Israelis and Palestinians to find out exactly what
happened during the most recent waves of fighting, not
least in Jenin.

It is important to provide urgent assistance to the
wounded, the homeless and the hungry, some of whom
have been made refugees anew. Israel must
immediately allow unhindered access for all
humanitarian organizations and emergency supplies,
through Israel, to the relevant parts of the Palestinian
area.

In order to design an appropriate response to this
humanitarian crisis, Norway, which chairs the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC), is
hosting, in close cooperation with AHLC partners, an
AHLC meeting in Oslo on 24 and 25 April. It is our
hope that this meeting will clarify the most urgent
needs and provide an international commitment to the
rebuilding of Palestinian society.

Humanitarian assistance can minimize the
suffering, but the fundamental problem - that of
ending the occupation - is political. There are
sufficient guidelines from international society to the
parties -from the Security Council, from the "quartet"
and from the United States Administration - on how
to reach a ceasefire and to resume a meaningful
political process. Norway supports the idea of
establishing an observer mechanism if this can help the
parties to reach those goals. The ideas of the Secretary-
General regarding an international force are an
important contribution to the discussion on how the
international community can assist in finding a solution
to the present crisis. A number of elements will be
further clarified. However, such a force will be
dependent on the consent of both parties.

Norway calls on Israel and the Palestinians to act
with responsibility and to move towards a political
resolution of the conflict. It is time for the parties to
adopt a constructive strategy. Norway calls on Israel to
immediately halt all its military operations and
withdraw its forces from reoccupied Palestinian towns
and villages. President Arafat and the Palestinian
Authority must do their utmost to stop Palestinian
terrorism. Israel must stop destroying the Palestinian
police infrastructure, which undermines the long-term
capacity of the Palestinian Authority to fight terrorism.
President Arafat must be allowed to resume his duties
as head of the Palestinian Authority.

Our objective must be the resumption of peace
negotiations with the aim of realizing the international
consensus on the vision of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side within internationally
recognized borders.

The Council must do what it can to support the
realization of this vision. At this critical hour, the
Council must act with one voice in pursuit of a new
future for Palestinians and Israelis alike.

