Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important debate
at such a crucial time, when major political changes are
taking place in the Middle East.

We are living in a hightly interlinked world, where
events in one region, or even at the local level, might
have an influence on world processes. Last year we
watched with a sense of sincere empathy and solidarity
the events in the Middle East and North Africa. Today's
situation in Syria is also a subject of great concern.
Attempts to solve the conflict and stabilize the situation
in that country have, unfortunately, been unsuccessful
so far. Thousands of innocent people have been killed
and the number of victims is growing day by day. The
Kyrgyz Republic calls for the immediate cessation of
Violence in Syria. Unity on the part of the international
community is urgently needed to create the conditions
to start an inclusive national dialogue among the
various political forces and to pursue political, social
and economic reforms in the interest of all Syrians. In
that regard, we fully support the efforts of Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, Joint Special Representative of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, to explore a
peaceful, political solution to the conflict in Syria.

The situation in and around Syria should not detract
attention from the efforts to resume direct Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations. We consider it important
to continue that process to find ways for a long-term
settlement of the situation and to reach apeace agreement
providing for the coexistence of two States in peace
and security in accordance with previously defined and
accepted parameters. We agree with Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, who stated in his address to the General
Assembly that, after decades of harsh occupation and
humiliating restrictions in almost every aspect of their
lives, the Palestinians must be able to realize their right
to a viable State of their own (see A/67/PV.6).

In recent months, we have been following with
great concern the aggravation of the economic,
financial and humanitarian situation in Palestine. In
that connection, we call for a lifting of the blockade
of the Gaza Strip and for the delivery of financial and
humanitarian assistance to create conditions favourable
for development for the Palestinian people.
The Middle East Quartet has a strong mandate
because of the trust placed in it by the whole international
community. It should promptly put inplace all the
necessary conditions to enable the two States to find a
mutually acceptable resolution. Kyrgyzstan hopes that
the Quartet will play an active role in finding a solution
suitable to all parties concerned. We are in favour of
the settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict by
political and diplomatic means on the basis of relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet's road map.

It is time to decide on the issue of Palestine's
accession as a Member ofthe United Nations or granting
it non-member State observer status. We have long
been waiting to welcome Palestine as a Member of the
United Nations. In that regard, Kyrgyzstan considers
it extremely important to achieve rapid progress in the
peace process and to overcome the current worrisome
impasse. We also urge the parties to demonstrate their
strong will and unwavering commitment to peace and
to eliminate all the obstacles impeding the resumption
of direct talks.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that the peoples
of the Middle East have been suffering from conflict
and confrontation for several decades. The time has
come to reach a final and comprehensive settlement
that would resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We
believe that maintaining the current situation is totally
unacceptable.

