President Mbeki: First of all, Mr. President,
thank you very much for taking the initiative to call
this meeting of the Security Council to discuss what is
indeed an important matter. I will be very brief, partly
because I am expected in the General Assembly
shortly. I want to go and respond to President Bush
there.

To come at this matter quite practically, it is a
very important matter for us as Africans, and indeed
we count very much on the support of the Security
Council to address this important issue. I must say that
the African continent, as members are aware, is indeed
very committed to addressing this matter itself.
Members will have seen many examples in which the
framework for the resolution of all sorts of matters has
come out of African initiatives. The political settlement
in Liberia came out of a process that was led by the
Economic Community of West African States. The
process that has culminated now in the Ouagadougou
agreement in C6te d'Ivoire, the peace process in
Burundi, the peace process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
in North and South Sudan were all matters that were
handled by the continent itself. I am mentioning that
just to emphasize the seriousness of the continent itself
in dealing with the matter on our agenda today.

The letter that was sent out by the French
representative raises two important questions, that I
think are really what we really need to focus upon. It
mentions promoting an effective partnership between
the United Nations and Africa based on the African
regional organizations, and it goes on to ask:

"In order to go farther, how can enhanced
African crisis management and resolution
capacities be facilitated and how can the need for
African peacekeeping training be met? How can
the post-conflict recovery efforts that must be
carried out by the African countries concerned be
supported? How can the establishment of more
operational crisis prevention mechanisms be
encouraged in Africa?" (S/2007/552, p. 3)

I think, really, that these are the actual matters that the
Security Council needs to address.

Because of the seriousness of our intent with
regard to this matter - no doubt, President Konare
will speak about this - we have set up a somewhat
comprehensive architecture for peace and security on
the continent, which includes the Peace and Security
Council, the early warning system, a panel of the wise,
an African stand-by force, a post-conflict
reconstruction and development framework - the
totality of these.

What is missing is the capacity to do those things
and the resources of all sorts to be able to do them. We
would want to address that matter directly ourselves, as
much as we can. I think it would be very good indeed
if some way could be found by which the Security
Council could engage the African Union, represented
here by President Konare, in some detail on this. Here
is this architecture by which the Africans are saying:
We want to address these problems ourselves, of course
within the context of the international responsibilities
of the Security Council with regard to peace and
stability. But we do want to; hence, the reference to
regional organizations correctly raised by the French
representative.

What is it that can be done to ensure that we
increase this capacity in all of those areas? I think if we
did that, the result that we would see would indeed be a
much more peaceful and a much more stable African
continent.

