Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We join others in addressing warm words to
you, Madam President, to Ambassador Richard Ryan,
Ambassador Mahbubani, Mr. Ayafor and Mr. Tsui. We
also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Liberia, Mr. Captan, who is participating in today's
meeting.

We are grateful to the Panel of Experts for its
work it has done. Its report will certainly be helpful to
the members of the Security Council in assessing the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime against Liberia
and in deciding on further steps in this area.

We share the view of the experts that the political
atmosphere in the region in the last six months has
improved significantly. At the same time, we cannot
fail to see, however, how the humanitarian situation in
Liberia itself has deteriorated. It would seem to us that
the Council can't simply disregard these two factors
when it works on future decisions on the matter of
Liberia.

We welcome the progress noted in the report on
aspects of sanctions, such as the re-registration of
Liberian aircraft, the travel ban on senior Liberian
officials and the embargo on diamonds leaving the
country. At the same time, we are disturbed about facts
cited regarding illegal activities by individual persons
and corporations that are circumventing Security
Council resolution 1343 (2001). All the cases described
in the report must be very carefully investigated by the
national law enforcement authorities of the relevant
countries. We are convinced that invaluable assistance
should be provided by the experts, making available to
States all the materials they have collected.

The report contains a number of
recommendations on many different aspects of the
sanctions regime. We are prepared to consider the
proposals very carefully, taking into account possible
political and humanitarian consequences of applying
them. We will very carefully take into account the
position of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in these matters.

