Mr. Davis: I should like to begin by thanking the
Greek presidency of the Security Council for having
organized today's debate.

The contribution of the Council of Europe to
maintaining international peace and stability is based
on the concept of democratic security. The Council of
Europe is reinforcing continent-wide stability across its
46 member States through adherence to democratic
values and the acceptance of legal standards, based on
respect for human rights and the rule of law. We
believe that freedom and security are inseparable and
that one cannot exist without the other.

Our concept of democratic security is anchored in
a system of legally binding treaties. Compliance with
obligations is regularly monitored and, in the case of
the European Convention on Human Rights, enforced
through the European Court of Human Rights.

When it comes to the fight against terrorism, the
Council of Europe has adopted a set of conventions
providing for new means to diminish the capacity of
terrorists to strike wherever or whenever they choose.
These new treaties establish as criminal offences a
number of acts which may lead to acts of terrorism,
such as incitement, recruitment and training. They also
reinforce cooperation in the prevention of terrorism by
modifying existing extradition and mutual assistance
arrangements between those countries which are
parties to the conventions. Finally, these new
provisions reinforce the protection and compensation
regime for the Victims of terrorism.

The foundations of this anti-terrorist policy,
namely, measures to prevent the erosion of human
rights, are motivated by the same imperative - that is,
the protection of our citizens and the citizens of other
countries on other continents. The most effective
anti-terrorist policy is one which stops more terrorists
than it helps to recruit, and this is why our response to
terrorism is as fair as it is robust. Our promotion of
intercultural and interreligious dialogue focuses on the
root causes of terrorism and completes our threefold
approach to this global threat.
That third point also shows that the Council of
Europe's contribution to building peace and security is
not limited to standard-setting and adopting legal
instruments. In addition, we are currently running three
campaigns which cover global areas of concern and
which are also high on the United Nations agenda for
promoting human security.

The Council of Europe has launched a campaign
to combat trafficking in human beings. In parallel with
that, we have launched a three-year programme for the
promotion of children's rights and the protection of
children from violence. At the same time, we are
running a youth campaign on diversity, human rights
and participation, under the slogan "All Different, All
Equal". Its objective is to engage people in the effort to
eradicate racism, discrimination and intolerance, which
unfortunately persist and even flourish in many parts of
Europe. In spite of its geographical scope, the message
of the campaign is universal.

Post-conflict rehabilitation is another important
part of our work. Kosovo is a case in point. The
Council of Europe has been working closely with
Mr. Martti Ahtisaari and his team in areas such as
decentralization, constitutional law, human rights and
cultural heritage. Other successful examples of our
work are the arrangements with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
on the implementation of our Framework Convention
for the Protection of National Minorities, and with
UNMIK and NATO on the implementation of the
monitoring mechanisms of our Committee for the
Prevention of Torture. Since, whatever its future status,
Kosovo will remain a part of Europe, we believe that
everyone living there should be protected by the
European Convention on Human Rights.

To conclude, I will turn briefly to some of the
points raised in section C of the discussion paper
(S/2006/719, annex) circulated by the Greek
presidency for this meeting.

As regards the general relationship between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe and between
the United Nations and the many other
intergovernmental bodies represented here, I think we
all agree that it is the responsibility of the United
Nations to maintain peace and security worldwide and
that there is an obvious link between regional security
and global security.
While I welcome the idea of clarifying the
respective roles of various bodies - possibly through
framework agreements with the United Nations - I
would hope that we could also develop a results-
oriented approach and not waste time and energy on
semantic discussions and attempts to categorize
organizations that cannot be categorized. We are all
unique, with special features reflecting history,
geography and mission.

At the end of the day, what really matters is the
political will and the ability of each organization to
deliver. What is needed is more action, not more
words.

