Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We wish to join our
colleagues and thank you, Mr. President, for presiding
over this debate. We also wish to congratulate Equatorial
Guinea for presiding over the Security Council for the
month of February. This debate is just another example
of the excellent work Equatorial Guinea has done with
regard to consolidating the efforts of the international
community to deal with some of the most pressing
challenges facing our world today. This is an important
step towards achieving our shared objective of ending
wars, civil conflicts and human rights violations on
the African continent, thereby allowing us to focus
our efforts and resources on education, health care,
social inclusion and economic development, among
others efforts.

The Republic of Angola views the spread of violent
extremism and terrorism in Africa and the humanitarian
and human rights crises caused by armed conflicts as
the most pressing challenges we face on the African
continent. In order to achieve the ambitious political
objective of silencing the guns in Africa, it is imperative
that we address effectively some of the root causes of
those conflicts, such as State fragility and weak State
institutions, the illicit arms trade, the effects of rapid
urbanization and youth unemployment, inequality and
social exclusion, as well as illegal resource extraction
and climate change.

To increase the chances of successful voluntary
civilian disarmament and eradicate non-State armed
groups in countries affected by conflict, the State and
its various organs have to be seen to operate within
a framework of good governance, the rule of law and
respect for human rights. Institutions responsible for
delivering justice and security in fragile and conflict-
prone States are often weak or dysfunctional. Civilians
and armed groups will respond to a call for voluntary
disarmament only if they are guaranteed security.

In that regard, the African Union (AU), in line
with the African Peace and Security Architecture and
in cooperation with relevant Member States, should
increase its efforts to strengthen national and regional
mechanisms in order to halt the illicit flow of weapons,
especially small and light weapons, to non-State
actors, which contributes only to exacerbating
insecurity and violence and undermining social
cohesion, socioeconomic development and the effective
functioning of the relevant State's security institutions.

One of the first steps needed to eradicate this
problem must be to ensure that States that manufacture
and export conventional arms work with affected nations
to ensure adequate control systems to safeguard against
the illicit diversion of those arms. More important, in
the context of non-interference in the internal affairs
of States, we as an international community must
be able to deal more effectively and severely with
countries that deliberately arm non-State actors and
armed groups in order to undermine democratically
elected Governments.

Guaranteeing security by stopping the illicit flow
of weapons and drugs is an important step towards
the effective functioning of security institutions. Such
measures, along with strengthening social cohesion and
socioeconomic development, have been the focus of the
new Government agenda of the Republic of Angola,
which stresses the importance of effective governance
by ensuring inclusive participation by women and
youth, strengthening the rule of law to combat impunity
and corruption, and promoting better management of
natural resources in order to foster inclusive growth
and reduce inequality.

That Government agenda is in line with Agenda
2063 - the AU's strategic framework for achieving
growth and sustainable development - and the United
Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It
seeks not only to mount an effective policy response
to the economic, social and environmental changes
facing Angola but also to create a more resilient State
and society that is able to manage the pressures of rapid
urbanization, youth unemployment, inequality and
social exclusion.

Given that climate change and environmental
damage will act as multipliers of fragility, with the
potential of creating conflict over diminishing land and
water resources, the Government ofAngola is investing
its human and material capacity not only to improve
the governance of our natural resources, which are
still our biggest source of revenue, but also to advance
regional cooperation on the cross-border management
and monitoring of natural resources, which is crucial
to shared peace and can serve as an important tool for
promoting greater regional integration.

In conclusion, our Government is fully committed
to the objective of silencing the guns by 2020 in order
to substantially contribute to achieving the goals of
the AU initiative on the African Peace and Security
Architecture roadmap for the period 2016-2020, a
strategic document for realizing a conflict-free Africa.

We are fully aware that it will not be possible to
end all conflicts on the continent by 2020, given the
continued presence of terrorists in the north and
the west and the illicit trafficking in human beings,
drugs and weapons in certain regions. Therefore, we
urge our partners on the continent to increase their
financial and operational support to structures such
as the African Standby Force, the Peace Fund and the
Continental Early Warning System, which are meant to
support the African Peace and Security Architecture
as a regional mechanism for preventing, managing and
resolving conflicts.
