Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, forjoining us here
in the Council today and for presiding over our work.
We also wish to thank Mr. Mohamed Siala, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Libya; Mr. Ghassan Salame,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL); and Ambassador Olof Skoog, Permanent
Representative of Sweden, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, for their detailed briefings.

The stabilization and resolution of the protracted
conflict in Libya remains a priority for the Security
Council. Uruguay calls on the all parties in the Libyan
conflict to be calm and moderate, while we reiterate
that the only solution to the conflict is through political
means and negotiation among the parties. The way out
will be through all Libyans, the product of inclusive
negotiations that enable a scheduled political process
leading to the holding of elections while protecting the
country from any authoritarianism.

In that sense, we support the action plan presented
by Secretary-General Antenio Guterres and his Special
Representative to revive the political process in Libya
under the facilitation and leadership of the United
Nations. The Security Council should continue giving
its support to Prime Minister Serraj and the Presidency
Council of the Government of National Accord to
enable them to fulfil the Libyan Political Agreement.

Uruguay has always stated that it welcomes any
unilateral, regional or multilateral initiative that
proposes solutions to this and any other conflict. In
that connection, we commend the meeting convened by
France in July that led to an agreement on the cessation
of hostilities and on the holding of elections in 2018.
We hope that what was agreed on at that occasion will
be carried out. We also welcome the meetings of the
joint drafting committee of members of the House
of Representatives and the High State Council at the
request of the Special Representative. Those are all
transcendental measure to promote trust and progress
towards national reconciliation, which must be followed
by specific actions on the ground.

We encourage Mr. Salame' to work closely with
the Libyan authorities to agree on the amendments
required in the Libyan Political Agreement so that the
Agreement can be used as a framework to bring peace
and unity to the country, to extend the control of the
legitimate Libyan Government to the whole territory,
and to urgently meet the multiple challenges it faces.
That is the only way the Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord will be able to extend
its authority, curb the new wave of violence, preserve its
legitimacy and provide security and essential services
to the Libyan people.

I would like to highlight here the fight against
terrorism, which still has centres of power in Libya,
as well as the need to address the serious humanitarian
crisis and to cooperate with the European authorities to
tackle trafficking in persons and arms smuggling. The
Violence that continues over vast swathes of the Libyan
territory - particularly in Derna, which was subjected
to siege and air strikes costing the lives of dozens of
civilians - can only lead to escalating the conflict
and undermining efforts under way to reactivate the
Libyan Political Agreement.

The reigning chaos in recent years in Libya has
fomented actions of extremists and armed militias.
who have taken advantage of the institutional and
security vacuum to carry out their criminal and
terrorist activities that affect not only Libya, but
also its neighbours in the region and beyond. From a
geopolitical standpoint, achieving peace and stability
in Libya is crucial for the Maghreb and other regions
in the continent.

We remain concerned about the desperate situation
facing migrants who use Libya as a country of transit
on the way to Europe. Hundreds of thousands of
sub-Saharan migrants are in Libya as we speak, hoping
for a chance to attempt to cross the Mediterranean.
They are subject to abuse and very serious violations
of their human rights. In the last few hours, there
have been reports once again on the sale of slaves
in Libya. That is a reprehensible fact that must be
unanimously condemned.

We reiterate that in seeking solutions to this problem,
we should prioritize the human rights of migrants and
refugees, avoiding treating them as criminals. Only the
political and institutional stabilization of Libya will
allow for any significant reduction in that phenomenon.

To conclude, we confirm our support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
for the role of UNSMIL. We encourage him to continue
working closely with Prime Minister Serraj and the
Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord and with the other parties in Libya in order to
agree upon an appropriate framework to address the
country's current situation, pave the way for a revival
of the political process and reduce violence. The new
Libyan Political Agreement, together with the United
Nations action plan, will have to be a central part of
the solution to the urgent and huge challenges facing
Libya. They include fighting terrorism and addressing
the very serious humanitarian, economic and security
crises affecting millions of persons.

