Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his useful and detailed briefing. We
would also like to express our appreciation to the
Spanish delegation for its efforts in the drafting and
adoption of today's resolution 2274 (2016), on extending
the work and mandate of UNAMA. Egypt welcomes
the Council's unanimity on this important resolution,
and always emphasizes the crucial role played by the
Security Council and UNAMA.

The regions of Central Asia and the Middle East
share interlinked interests and stability factors. Egypt
has therefore always kept a watchful eye on the Afghan
Government and supported it in its fight against
terrorism and in its strenuous efforts to establish
its control and sovereignty over the whole of the
country. We support the Afghan authorities in their
political and social efforts to entrench security and
ensure the development and prosperity of the entire
Afghan people. We would like to stress the risk that
the illicit trade in drugs poses to stability and security
in Afghanistan and Central Asia as a whole. In that
regard, we would like to emphasize the importance
of close coordination, regionally and internationally,
with the Afghan authorities, in combating trafficking
in narcotics, an effort that cannot be separated from
counter-terrorism action, owing to the fact that drugs
are one of the principal sources of financing for terrorist
groups and armed groups. In that regard, we can only
welcome the efforts of the the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime as well as those of the regional
organizations working in this area to help Afghanistan
solve this problem, which is so damaging to efforts to
promote development and peace in Central Asia.

Where the United Nations is concerned, and taking
into consideration the Secretary-General's September
report on Afghanistan (S/2015/684), the General
Assembly's most recent resolution on the situation in
Afghanistan, issued in December (resolution 70/77) and
the resolution adopted by the Security Council today,
the international community is raising the alarm about
the growing presence of Da'esh inside Afghanistan
and its increasing control and capacities in the eastern
part of the country. This is a cancerous tumour that we
must confront, fight and uproot wherever it appears,
both through our international Organization and in our
anti-terrorism efforts. In that context, Egypt reiterates its
continued willingness to help to train the Afghan army
and police at specialized high-level sessions. We would
also like to emphasize that we have no involvement in
any internal Afghan struggles and no interests at stake
except that of helping to ensure security and stability
in the entire Afghan region by assisting the country's
national army and its fight against the various terrorist
organizations. We therefore hope to be able to work to
ensure tripartite coordination in this vital area, as well
as sufficient financing from donors to cover the costs of
these specialized training sessions.
The Arab Republic of Egypt welcomes regional
initiatives in this field, particularly the final declaration,
entitled "Enhanced Cooperation for Countering
Security Threats and Promoting Connectivity in the
Heart of Asia Region", issued at the Fifth Ministerial
Meeting of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul process, held on
9 December 2015 in Islamabad. At the international
level, we reiterate the importance of addressing the issue
of Afghanistan in the appropriate forums, especially
the European Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan,
to be held on 4 and 5 October in Brussels.

Finally, Egypt is closely monitoring developments
in the political and military situations in Afghanistan
in order to achieve the shared goal of enhancing the
capacities of a State that has suffered too much over
the past few decades and to help it meet the challenges
it faces in the areas of peace, stability, security and
sustainable development.

