Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation, on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti,
would like to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation
of Mexico for having taken the initiative to organize
this debate on Haiti and in this way to address the
latest report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2009/l29) and the Security Council's recent visit to
Haiti in March 2009, led by Costa Rica.

Before noting the two main topics to be addressed
by the Council, I would like to reaffirm once again the
Group of Friends of Haiti's full commitment to and
support for the Haitian Government and people in
rebuilding their country, consolidating peace and
stability, and promoting recovery and sustainable
development.

As the coordinator of the Group of Friends of
Haiti, I would like to express our strong support for
MINUSTAH - and for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in their efforts to improve the
2
stability and governance in Haiti. The latest report of
the Secretary-General, dated 6 March 2009, underlines
the progress made in implementing the mandate of
MINUSTAH, as set out in resolution 1840 (2008) and
previous resolutions.

The Group of Friends of Haiti welcomes the
progress achieved in four of the five areas considered
critical for consolidating Haiti's stability: political
dialogue and elections; extension of State authority,
including border management; strengthening of
security; and the rule of law and human rights.
Similarly, we recognize the strong commitment of a
group of Latin American countries that are pooling
their resources to help train the Haitian National
Police. We also underscore the efforts made by the
Meeting of Deputy Ministers for Foreign Affairs and
Deputy Ministers for Defence of the Consultative
Group 2 x 9 on Haiti.

As regards political dialogue and the elections,
our Group believes that establishing the Government of
Prime Minister Pierre-Louis represents an important
step forward and the expression of improved
cooperation among the executive branch, Parliament
and civil society in response to the devastating series
of tropical storms that struck the country. It is
important to consolidate that cooperation in order to
meet the country's needs.

The Group of Friends of Haiti stresses the need
for free and fair elections and calls on all political
actors to ensure that the upcoming elections for the
renewal of one third of the Senate are held in a
peaceful atmosphere.

Haiti continues to grapple with food insecurity,
significant poverty and a fragile humanitarian
situation. In those areas, unfortunately, there has been a
marked deterioration in the daily living conditions of
the vast majority of the Haitian people. The Group of
Friends of Haiti shares the View of the Secretary-
General that stabilization, security and development
are linked, since the current levels of poverty,
deprivation and suffering in the country are clearly
incompatible with long-term stability. Therefore, it is
urgent that the Haitian authorities collaborate closely
with the international community to facilitate the
distribution of humanitarian aid and recovery work and
to lay a foundation for renewed private-sector activity
in the interests of the country's long-term
reconstruction and development.
09-293 1 8
The Group of Friends of Haiti reaffirms the great
importance of the donor conference on 14 April. It will
be an opportunity for donors and partners to improve
coordination and to make available the additional
assistance required by the Government of Haiti to meet
the country's immediate needs and to lay the
foundations for sustainable economic and social
development.

