Mr. Marn (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
presidency of the United Kingdom for organizing this
important debate. The current ongoing conflicts, from
Gaza, Syria, Iraq and Ukraine to the Central African
Republic and South Sudan, and in particular the
suffering of their civilian populations, including women
and children, more than merit such a debate at this
time. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for their insightful briefings. And I would like
to take this opportunity to thank High Commissioner
Pillay for her tireless efforts in advocating for human
rights over the past six years, and to wish her the best
in her future endeavours.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.

The images we see from the conflicts raging
around the world are heartbreaking and saddening.
What makes them even more unacceptable is the fact
that they occur in spite of our consistent work over the
past decade on issues relating to conflict prevention
and the peaceful resolution of disputes. We have been
persistently building a broad framework that has led us
to the point where that framework must be implemented
and the words of the Charter of the United Nations on
prevention put into practice.

The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of the international
peace and security. In order to be able to uphold that
responsibility, the Council should strengthen its early-
warning mechanism. In that regard, we see merit in
organizing regular horizon-scanning meetings with
United Nations officials, including the Special Advisers
on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to

Protect, and the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We would also encourage the Secretary-General, in
accordance with Article 99 ofthe Charter of the United
Nations, to make greater use of his power to bring the
Council's attention to any matter that he believes might
threaten international peace and security. Against
such a background, the Council should take preventive
measures.

However - and this is still most often the case - the
international community, including the United Nations,
tends to deal with crises when it is already too late and
when a violent conflict has developed a dynamic that
is difficult to derail. That leads to costly interventions.
What are seen as political considerations often
override concerns about violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. All violent conflicts
today show the vital importance of the early-warning
and prevention parts of the conflict cycle, parts that
we have learned to understand so much better in recent
years. The progress that has been made to date could
not have been achieved without the education and
expertise of the Secretary-General's Special Advisers
on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility
to Protect, whose functions include acting as an early-
warning mechanism for preventing potential situations
that could result in mass atrocities, as well as the
important role of the Special Representatives on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and for Children and Armed
Conflict. The Secretary-General's Rights Up Front
initiative addresses those lacunae, and we welcome
the establishment of an internal coordination system
within the United Nations, which we hope will soon
be put into meaningful practice, including within the
United Nations country teams.

When conflicts cannot be prevented, the Security
Council must act promptly to end them. Furthermore,
if genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes and crimes
against humanity are threatening or ongoing, it is
imperative that the permanent members of the Council
not exercise the right of veto to thwart efforts to take
the measures necessary to prevent or address such
situations. In cases where such atrocities are committed,
accountability for those crimes is crucial, not only
in order to prevent future atrocities but also to build
confidence in society. Slovenia is a strong supporter of
the use of the International Criminal Court to ensure
accountability where necessary.

In conclusion, Slovenia welcomes the resolution
adopted today (resolution 2171 (2014)). Conflict
prevention and the peaceful resolution of disputes are at
the core of our foreign-policy priorities. In that regard,
we pay particular attention to the use of mediation as
part of the larger toolkit for preventing and resolving
conflicts and achieving sustainable peace, and for
enhancing United Nations mediation efforts and
promoting the use of mediation in capacity-building at
all levels. Given the vital importance of preventing and
resolving conflicts and ensuring that they do not recur,
we must continue to advance mediation mechanisms,
build mediation capacities, support the inclusion of
women and strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and regional actors in those areas. We should
also pay attention to education aimed at fostering a
culture of peace, tolerance and prosperity.

