At the outset, I would like to congratulate the President of the Security Council for this month and wish him every success in his tasks. I would also like to thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing today. Achieving justice throughout Libyan territory is a responsibility that falls under Libyan sovereignty and national jurisdiction. However, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions, we also reaffirm our continued cooperation with and support of the complementing role of the International Criminal Court (ICC), as highlighted by Ms. Bensouda on many occasions and in various reports. We believe in the mandate of the national judiciary system to prosecute the accused in accordance with the Libyan penal code, in furtherance of Libya's sovereignty over its territory and citizens. In addition, the Libyan judiciary is committed to ensuring a fair and impartial trial for all its accused, including fugitives and outlaws. The national judiciary system is determined to prosecute all those who have committed violations of any type on Libyan soil. Their crimes shall not be subject to a statute of limitations. In that regard, we would like to emphasize that the Libyan judiciary system monitors all violations and crimes, particularly those committed by war criminal Khalifa Haftar since the attack on Tripoli and its outskirts on 4 April 2019. Those include the numerous violations he has committed in other Libyan cities, such as kidnapping, killing and public executions in Benghazi in the east, the Murzuq massacre in the south, the massacre of the military school students in Tripoli and many other violations. In that regard, the military prosecutor in Libya has issued warrants for the arrest of a number of criminals and outlaws - first and foremost of war criminal Khalifa Haftar and other leaders under his command. We also wish to inform the Council that my Government is finalizing its third report, to be issued by the Joint Committee for Monitoring and Documenting Human Rights Violations, in accordance with Government of National Accord decree 735-2019. The report will soon be shared with the ICC and the Council. As stated in Ms. Bensouda's briefing today, which covers the past six months, and her previous seventeenth and eighteenth reports, Mr. Haftar's forces are explicitly accused of numerous war crimes, from air strikes and the indiscriminate bombing of civilians and civilian facilities to other serious violations, the latest of which was the 7 April bombardment of Al-Hadaba General Hospital in Tripoli, which was treating patients who had contracted the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). That led to several iterations of the closure of the hospital and terrified patients and medical staff. In addition, the provision of water, gas, and electricity to the city had to be shut off. Those violations were firmly condemned by the Secretary-General and many countries. At a time when the entire world is facing anxiety and panic due to the pandemic, this tragedy exacerbates the current crisis faced by civilians in my country. As for the concerns expressed in the report about the situation of illegal migrants, we would like to emphasize that my Government has taken a number of swift measures to protect them, such as expediting their transfer from conflict areas, and is cooperating with specialized United Nations agencies to monitor their living and medical conditions. However, that may not be enough. As mentioned in a recent report on the implementation of resolution 2437 (2018) (see S/2019/711), an air strike against a migrant detention centre in Tajoura in July 2019 killed 53 migrants and injured 130 - an example of how Mr. Haftar and his militias deliberately target these detention centres. We thank Ms. Bensouda for her reports and findings, which, as she has consistently said, seek to uncover war crimes and crimes against humanity in Libya and to hold their perpetrators accountable. The questions on the table now are: What is next? What are we going to do with all the findings and evidence provided today and in previous reports? What is the ICC waiting for to hold accountable all those responsible for the violations mentioned today and perpetrated by the so-called National Army? Who is ultimately responsible? According to article 28 (a) of the Rome Statute of the ICC, "A military commander or person effectively acting as a military commander shall be criminally responsible for crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court committed by forces under his or her effective command and control, or effective authority and control as the case may be, as a result of his or her failure to exercise control properly over such forces". Swift action was taken against Mahmoud Al-Werfalli - who, incidentally, is being promoted by Mr. Haftar and is fighting in the outskirts of Tripoli as we speak - for his crimes, based on the evidence found. We might ask, what is the difference between his crimes and Mr. Haftar's massive crimes against humanity and human rights violations, which targeted and killing thousands of innocent people, if Mr. Haftar and his commanders have publicly claimed responsibility for many of those crimes? According to Article 7 of the Rome Statute, a crime against humanity "means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack: (a) Murder; (b) Extermination; (c) Enslavement; (d) Deportation or forcible transfer of population". And these are only some of the crimes Mr. Haftar has committed, as confirmed in the report. Another question emerges. What about the countries and officials outside Libya who support and finance those grave violations? Does that not entail joint responsibility? What about the use of mercenaries from several nationalities to carry out such violations, as mentioned by name in reports of the Council's Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya? What about the countries that finance and provide the arms needed to perpetrate such human rights violations? I remind Ms. Bensouda that the ICC is not a human rights organization created to simply list violations and crimes. The Court is also mandated to investigate and prosecute. We therefore hope that, in consideration of my statement and the questions I have just posed, the ICC will work in cooperation with the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya and its Panel of Experts to ensure that the evidence and findings are consistent and that the accused are clearly and explicitly identified and held to account. Although this is an ICC briefing, I would like to remind the Council of its responsibility towards my country and of the importance of taking a firm stand for justice and accountability. As everyone is aware, the aggressor continues his attacks despite his false announcement of a humanitarian truce, immediately after which he deliberately targeted civilians in the centre of Tripoli and elsewhere. In the area of Zenata, for example, he killed and wounded dozens, ignoring and disregarding the efforts, initiatives and calls of Moscow, Berlin and others. Furthermore, one week ago, he announced a coup against the political agreement and all the legitimate State institutions and proclaimed himself the supreme military ruler and tyrant of the country in an outdated farcical performance. In the light of the recent events, is anyone still hesitant to consider him an obstructionist and spoiler of the peace process and the resolutions of the Council? Is anyone still hesitant to call out and shame this aggressor and war criminal by name? When will he be held accountable? We still only hear general words of condemnation as if the perpetrator were a ghost. We continue to reserve our legitimate right to self-defence, to protect our people and to combat aggressors and outlaws who threaten the safety of our civilians. After more than a year, it is obvious that this warlord's military adventure has failed. Thanks to our Libyan National Army, our valiant forces and the resilience of our people, the world has seen the beginning of the process of curing the country from the real pandemic that is threatening peace and stability in Libya and the region. Meanwhile, we continue to reach out to all Libyans across the country who have embraced the path of peace and stability, and strive towards a democratic, civil State.
