Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I, too, would like to thank the Secretary-
General for the excellent quality of his special report
on the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET), which has just been submitted to
us.

I should like also to say how much we appreciate
the clear and detailed briefing given by Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno as well as his
eloquent testimony. I should like also to welcome the
presence here this morning of the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste, Ambassador Guterres. I
am pleased that our two countries have decided to
establish diplomatic relations, a decision that will be
formalized in the near future.

Like previous speakers, I should like to extend
the condolences and sympathy of Cameroon to the
Republic of Korea for the tragic loss of five of its
nationals who were part of the Korean contingent of
UNMISET.

The report of the Secretary-General is a timely
one. I should like to state unequivocally that Cameroon
agrees, without any reservations, with the
recommendations contained in paragraphs 19 to 34 of
section III of that report.

The Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste was a
protege of the United Nations; it is a source of pride for
the Security Council.

We have on several occasions emphasized the fact
that security and stability in this young democracy are
a prerequisite for its economic and social development.
The many challenges faced by the new Timorese
authorities - in the areas of education, reconstruction
and economic recovery, in the combat against the
endemic unemployment affecting the country and in
terms of capacity-building - can be met only if internal
and external security is ensured and if democratic
institutions can successfully overcome any attempt to
destabilize them.

It is obvious today that the former militia still
have a great capacity to do harm and that they have in
recent months begun to rebuild clandestine networks
that have the clear objective of jeopardizing Timorese
democracy.

We welcome the measures advocated by the
Secretary-General, especially those aimed at
suspending the drawdown of the military component of
UNMISET until December 2003, in order to facilitate
the massive redeployment of these forces to the border
with Indonesia. Similarly, the establishment of an
international anti-riot police unit is an extremely wise
decision, given the demonstrations that took place in
connection with the events of December 2002.

It is also clear at this stage that the Timor-Leste
police force still urgently needs high-level technical
assistance. My delegation supports the proposal to raise
the number of high-level experts from 100 to 200.

The strengthening of security cooperation
between Indonesia and Timor-Leste is an important
aspect of UNMISET strategy. We encourage both
countries quickly to finalize the demarcation of their
common border. Above all, we support the plan of the
Indonesian authorities to move Timorese refugees to
other provinces, far from the Timorese border.

My country appeals to the bilateral and
multilateral donors to support this initiative forthwith.
The refugee camps are fertile ground for militia, where
they go to recruit people whom they exploit to
perpetuate insecurity in Timor-Leste.

As I have already stressed, the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste is one of the greatest success
stories of the Security Council and the United Nations.
Let us see to it that this success endures and that
Timor-Leste shall live in peace within secure borders
and that it may undertake the immense task of
reconstruction and development that will allow it to
assure economic and social progress for its people.

Lastly, my country wishes to reaffirm its support
for UNMISET, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Kamalesh Sharma and his entire civilian and
military team. In these difficult times, we offer our
encouragement to the Timorese authorities, especially
President Xanana Gusmao and Prime Minister Marti
Alkatiri.

