Mr. Bessho (Japan): I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary- General, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, for his informative briefing and tireless
efforts on behalf of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Let me further
express my appreciation to Ms. Sima Samar for her
briefing, and Ambassador Adela Raz of Afghanistan
for her valuable input.

Japan welcomes the finalization of the results of
the parliamentary elections held last October, as well
as the inauguration of the first Afghan Parliament since
2011. With the newly elected Independent Election
Commission and based on the lessons learned from
the elections, it is very important for the upcoming
presidential elections to be credible, so that the results
are widely accepted.

Japan commends the efforts of the Afghan
Government to achieve peace with the Taliban,
including the holding of the consultative peace
loya jirga from April to May, as well as the ongoing
preparations for the Kabul process meeting. Dialogue
among the Afghan people is fundamental to realizing
sustainable peace in Afghanistan. Japan hopes that the
efforts made by the relevant groups towards peace,
including the dialogue between the United States and
the Taliban and the trilateral dialogue among the United
States, Russia and China, will help lead to a successful
intra-Afghan dialogue.

Meanwhile, Japan expresses its deep concern about
the continuing terrorist attacks in Afghanistan. Japan
hopes that positive developments in the peace process
will put an end to violence, bring a comprehensive
ceasefire and, eventually, lead to lasting peace. Japan
will seek to cooperate with the international community
to advance the peace process.

The participation of women in the peace process in
Afghanistan is fundamental. Japan has been organizing
workshops for women in Afghanistan to enhance their
response capability towards gender-based violence. We
shall continue those efforts.

Japan remains committed to supporting a self-
reliant and stable Afghanistan. In March, Japan
announced new assistance of approximately $96 million
to Afghanistan. That has since been disbursed to
projects, including efforts to provide assistance to
refugees and respond to drought, as well as demining
and counter-narcotics initiatives. In addition, in March
Japan provided emergency relief goods in response to
flood damage. Japan will continue to cooperate hand in
hand with the Afghan people, including through such
short-term humanitarian assistance.

Enhancing regional cooperation between
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries is also
important. When the Foreign Ministers of Japan and
the five Central Asian countries gathered in Dushanbe
in May for a ministerial meeting of the Central Asia
plus Japan dialogue, Afghanistan also participated as
a guest country. Japan will remain committed to the
countries of the region, including through supporting
the enhancement of border controls.

I would like to conclude my statement by
emphasizing the important role of UNAMA in
achieving peace and prosperity in Afghanistan, and
Japan commends and supports the efforts made by
Mr. Yamamoto and his team.

