Mr. Montafio (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
would like to thank the presidency of Lithuania for
having chosen this item for its first open debate.
Civilians in armed conflict are still the majority of
victims, largely due to the use of weapons in densely
populated areas.

I should also like to thank the speakers who spoke
before me in introducing their respective reports, as
well as the Secretary-General for his tenth periodic
report on this item (S/2014/689).

Peacekeeping operations are the most important
means available to the Organization to protect civilians,
but they are also among its most complex tasks. That
is why it is crucial to have the utmost conceptual
and operational clarity for this mandate in all of the
stages of a peacekeeping operation and among all of
its components and actors. It is crucial to guarantee
that the resources that are authorized and deployed
correspond to the descriptions and expectations of the
mandates granted to missions, and that they serve to
build the capacity of national Governments. Let us not
forget, nonetheless, that the main responsibility for the
protection of civilians falls upon the parties in conflict,
and in particular the States.

Mexico believes that the United Nations system,
especially the Security Council, has the necessary
tools to achieve the effective protection of civilians
in armed conflict. That is why my delegation would
like to point out that effective protection for civilians
must guarantee absolute respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights law by all actors,
including the Organization. Mexico fully supports the
action plan entitled "Rights up front".

As established in resolution 2117 (2013), the illicit
trafficking and accumulation of small arms and light
weapons impedes peacemaking and keeping. We
therefore reiterate our appeal for Member States to join
or ratify the Arms Trade Treaty.

We agree with the Secretary-General's vision on
the use of unmanned aerial vehicles. As he points out
in his report,

"Maintaining the distinction between counter-
terrorism operations and the Mission's stabilization
activities is important, including for the effective
protection of civilians and humanitarian action."
(S/2013/689, para. 43)

Allow me to remind the Council that, in the context
of the recent session of the General Assembly, my
delegation introduced a draft resolution that sought
to establish for the first time that the use of those
technologies should be carried out in full compliance
with international humanitarian law, including the
principles of distinction and proportionality.

Mexico reaffirms its concern about the restrictions
to humanitarian access that have prevented the safe and
timely delivery and supply of assistance that we have
seen, unfortunately, very recently in Syria and South
Sudan. Those limitations on the flow of assistance and
the attacks on humanitarian personnel require urgent
attention from the Security Council and the rest of the
States Members of the United Nations.

Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our support for the French proposal to draft
a code of conduct among the five permanent members
of the Security Council whereby, when considering
allegations of war crimes, crimes against humanity or
genocide, the permanent five will renounce their right
to exercise the veto.

In a few weeks, we will mark the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide in Rwanda. We note that
the international community has made substantial
progress since then in improving the protection of
civilians and that the Council has been a fundamental
part of that process. However, it is clear that, although
we have a long way to go, intensifying our efforts to
create a true culture of protecting civilians at the
national and international levels should not, under any
circumstances, be merely an option, but rather our
collective obligation.

