Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The conflict in Liberia has dragged on for five
years, exacting a heavy toll on the economy and the life
and property of the Liberian people, as well as posing a
threat to peace and security in neighbouring countries and
in western Africa as a whole. In recent years, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has made
tremendous efforts and sacrifices in the search for a
settlement of the Liberian question even as its members
struggle with their own economic difficulties. They have
sent peace-keeping forces to Liberia in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter. Heads of State and
Government concerned in the region have met on many
occasions to offer good offices and mediation with a view
to seeking a solution acceptable to all parties that will
facilitate the political settlement of the Liberian question.
We have noted from the recent report of the
Secretary-General that these efforts have yielded initial
results. The parties in Liberia have tentatively agreed on the
installation of the Council of State and are ready to hold
further talks with a view to working out an agreement.
These are welcome developments.

However, we should also be aware that no remarkable
progress has been achieved thus far in the peace process in
Liberia, as evidenced by continuing military conflict, the
obstruction of humanitarian relief efforts and the continued
flow of large amounts of arms into Liberia. We are deeply
concerned over this situation.

The repeated setbacks in the Liberian peace process
have once again proved that peace cannot be achieved by
military means. Persistence in patient negotiations in good
faith and dialogue are the only way to a political solution
acceptable to all the conflicting parties. What is important
in this regard is the political will of the parties to commit
themselves to a peaceful settlement and their resolute
renunciation of military means. For this reason, we hope
that the parties in Liberia will put State and national
interests first and cooperate with the United Nations and
ECOWAS, strictly comply with the agreements already
reached and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and
take practical and effective measures to stop all hostilities
so as to create conditions for the final achievement of
national reconciliation.

We have always maintained that the Security
Council should attach the same importance to the
settlement of conflicts in Africa as it does to conflicts on
other continents and support the reasonable demands of
the African countries and peoples, and should refrain
from applying double standards when it comes to
considering peace-keeping operations in Africa.

The Chinese Government and people have
steadfastly supported the peace process in Liberia, as well
as the efforts of the international community and
ECOWAS for peace in Liberia. China has contributed
military observers to UNOMIL and will provide rice,
tents and other assistance worth RMB yuan 3 million to
Liberia. The Liberian peace process is now at a critical
moment when it must forge ahead or it will be driven
back. The Chinese delegation believes that the adoption
of the draft resolution before us will help advance the
peace process in Liberia and we will therefore vote in
favour of it.

