Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ian Martin for his
briefing on the current situation in Timor-Leste. We
believe that the appointment of Mr. Martin to carry out
that most delicate mission was most appropriate, given
his in-depth knowledge of the situation in Timor-Leste
and his excellent relations with most of the Timorese
leaders.

We also commend the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste on behalf of
his Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ramos-Horta.
Through Ambassador Guterres, I should like once
again to convey to the authorities in Dili the assurance
that Argentina continues and will continue to support
Timor-Leste in these difficult circumstances and that
my country will take Timorese preferences duly into
account when making a decision on a future presence
of the United Nations.

Let us recall that for more than four years now,
Timor-Leste has been a sovereign country. We call on
the people and the leadership of the country to resolve
all of the existing differences through peaceful means,
in the framework of democratic processes, with full
respect for human rights.

We believe that additional efforts should be made
to achieve national reconciliation. Within that
framework, it will be important to take account of the
results of the current investigations into the

circumstances and the root causes of the recent acts of
violence. We believe also that those responsible for
such acts cannot go unpunished.

My country recalls vividly the terrible events of
1999 and believes that no effort should be spared in
order to put an end to the cycle of violence. In that
regard, Argentina recognizes and welcomes all the
efforts made by Australia, Portugal, New Zealand and
Malaysia through the timely deployment of military
and police troops. We welcome the statements made by
those delegations at this meeting.

We believe that the violence is not being
perpetrated only by those persons who have been
expelled from the armed forces. Other illegal bands
and groups have exploited the situation in order to
create chaos and confusion. As has been demonstrated,
the proliferation of small arms in the country is an
additional cause for concern.

The serious incidents that took place in Timor-
Leste have compelled us to reassess the overly
optimistic prognosis we made a few months ago. In
particular, we believe that the Secretariat's assessment
with regard to Timor-Leste's future need for United
Nations assistance should be reviewed, so as to ensure
the consolidation of the progress achieved in that
country since its independence and prevent those gains
from being reversed.

We believe that it is increasingly clear that the
continued presence of international military and, above
all, police troops will be essential in the months to
come, in particular with respect to the general elections
to be held in 2007.

We expect to receive as soon as possible specific
recommendations from the Secretary-General as to the
specific format and composition of such a presence.
Nevertheless, we should not rule out a priori the
possibility of including military and police components
in the mandate of the mission that is to replace the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL).

On the basis of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General, and taking into account the
preferences of the Government of Timor-Leste, my
delegation will actively participate in the negotiations
to be held in forthcoming weeks in order to establish
the new United Nations presence in that country. In the
meantime, we believe that UNOTIL's mandate should

S/l'V.5457

 

be accorded a technical extension until the Secretariat
can work out the details of the new operation.

Likewise, we believe that the presence of
international troops in the framework of current
bilateral arrangements is necessary so as to maintain
security in Timor-Leste until the new multilateral
arrangements can be implemented.

