Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to welcome the Member of the
Collective Presidency of the Liberian National
Transitional Government and to express our appreciation
for his insightful statement.
It was only last week that the Security Council
convened a formal open debate regarding the situation in
Liberia, which provided an opportunity for the general
membership to actively participate in the discussion of a
question of which the Council is actively seized. My
delegation sincerely welcomes the convening of such a
meeting, for it not only enhanced transparency in the
work of the Council, but also permitted Council members
to obtain the valuable input and observations of all
interested parties - most importantly from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Liberia - necessary for taking the
appropriate decision. My delegation therefore hopes that
such arrangements will in future be further encouraged.

On that occasion, the Indonesian delegation, together
with the other members of the Council, expressed its
position. As such, it is the intention of my delegation not
to repeat what has already been stated at the formal open
debate last week, but to provide a few brief additional
remarks on the draft resolution.

In spite of the recent cease-fire violations and armed
attacks against the personnel of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) and against civilians, which have caused
substantial delays in the implementation of the Abuja

 

Agreement, we nevertheless wish to reiterate that we see a
ray of hope on the horizon. We are encouraged by the
recent steps taken by the Secretary-General to prepare for
the legislative and presidential elections, scheduled to take
place in August 1996. We also note the recently concluded
agreement between the Liberian National Transitional
Government (LNTG) and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), establishing
the framework for the repatriation and reintegration of
refugees. Moreover, cooperation between UN OMIL and the
LNTG, as well as with other United Nations agencies and
local and international non-governmental organizations,
continues to prevail, facilitating support for the Liberian
judicial system and human rights groups. And, lastly, a
coordinated effort on the part of the international
community is beginning to take place to address
reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts.

In view of these considerations, my delegation
strongly urges the Liberian parties and their leadership to
see the extension of the mandate of UNOMIL as an
opportunity to strive for substantial progress on all
outstanding issues of the peace process, and to demonstrate
genuine political will to get the peace process back on track
by abiding by and implementing all the agreements and
commitments they themselves have concluded. Such
measures would allow the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration - a prerequisite for
national reconciliation - to be expeditiously undertaken.
Moreover, it is our fervent hope that within this period the
Liberian leadership will avail itself of the opportunity to
also demonstrate its respect for the role of the international,
regional and subregional organizations in the peace process.

Another aspect that my delegation considers
imperative is that this draft resolution should convey to the
parties in Liberia a clear and unequivocal message that
support for the peace process by the international
community cannot continue indefinitely. This support will
undoubtedly be contingent on a demonstrated commitment
by the Liberian parties to resolve their differences
peacefully and to achieve national reconciliation, consistent
with the objectives of the peace process.

In the light of these observations, the draft resolution
before us today enjoys the strong support of the Indonesian
delegation, and we will therefore vote in favour of its
adoption. We also look forward to the Secretary-General's
progress report concerning the progress in disarmament and
demobilization, and in planning for elections, as requested
in operative paragraph 9.

