Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the High Representative,
Lord Ashdown, and to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Jacques Paul Klein, for the
detailed information they have given us about the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Russian Federation is of the View that a main
prerequisite for success in moving the peace process
forward is ensuring stability in all of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in each one of its districts on the basis
of the Dayton Agreements.

The potential of these Agreements has not yet
been exhausted. We are convinced that it would be
counterproductive to attempt to revise, selectively
implement or erode the content of the Dayton
Agreement, which are a substantial factor in the
maintenance of regional stability.

We are pleased to note that the Bosnia-wide
elections held on 5 October were conducted in an
atmosphere of calm under Bosnian legislation and
European norms. We share the view of other
delegations and of the High Representative as to the
character of those elections.

The elections confirm the fact that, as was stated
by Lord Ashdown, in the last few years significant
changes have occurred in the country. We support the
work of the new High Representative in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as well as the priorities that he has
formulated and reaffirmed today, namely ensuring the
rule of law, economic reform, job creation and
strengthening statehood in general. It is our view that
these priority tasks should be implemented in strict
conformity with the Dayton Agreements and with the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the basis of
a consensus on the part of all Bosnian parties.

We wish to emphasize here that forcible measures
could, now more than ever, give rise to further
complications. In this regard, we value the efforts of
Lord Ashdown to establish close interaction between
the leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Governments of both entities.

A firm foundation for a unified, stable and
independent Bosnian statehood can be laid only if the
Bosnian parties engage in a patient quest for mutually
acceptable solutions. The representatives of both
entities must take active responsibility for the future of
their country. They must show greater willingness to
cooperate and to reach compromises and must find
within themselves the strength to rise above narrow
ethnic interests in order to achieve common Bosnian
goals. Only thus will it be possible to ensure the
normal operation of State institutions and bodies at all
levels and establish an effective legislative base and a
unified economic area.

Given the fragility of the political situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, we are convinced that the
international community must continue to monitor the
public security situation in the country, as well as the
work of the local police. In this regard, we welcome
the work of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) in preparing for a seamless,
coordinated transfer of authority to the European Union
Police Mission, which will begin to take up its duties
on 1 January next year. The new Police Mission will
not be beginning its work from scratch, once again
underscoring the importance of ensuring continuity in
passing the baton, so as not to waste years of
accumulated experience.

In this connection, I would like to express the
gratitude of my Government to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jacques
Paul Klein, for the great effort that he has made to
implement the mandate of UNMIBH. It is our firm
understanding that the Security Council, as the main
body responsible for peacekeeping and international
security, will, even after UNMIBH has completed its
work, continue to receive, on a regular basis, reports on
the process of implementing the police operation in
that country.

We consider the general situation in the region to
be a further important element for consolidating the
positive trends in building Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We welcome the fact that harmonious relationships are
being established between Sarajevo, Belgrade and
Zagreb. We are convinced that a lasting, positive
momentum in the development of relations between
Yugoslavia and Bosnia and between Croatia and Bosnia
is extremely important for continued stability in the
Balkans.

In this context we would like to emphasize the
significance of the Tripartite Summit, held in Sarajevo
in July, and of careful implementation of the joint
declaration that resulted.

We once again emphasize that attempts to force
the Bosnian parties to create a single army contradict
not only the peace agreements but also the constitution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The desire to force that
process would be counterproductive and could upset
the rather delicate balance that has begun to be
established in relations between the Serbs on the one
hand and the Bosnians and Croats on the other. In this
context, we welcome the continuing dialogue between
the Bosnian parties on military matters. We also
welcome the reform of the Standing Committee on
Military Matters aimed at strengthening civilian
oversight of the armed forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this respect, we would like to hear the
High Representative's assessment of how that dialogue
is proceeding.
The Russian Federation intends to continue to
provide all possible support for the building of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We are ready to continue to make a
constructive contribution to resolving the issues
remaining on the agenda in the Bosnian settlement
process.

