Mr. Rock (Canada): I am pleased today to be
speaking on behalf of the delegations of Canada,
Australia and New Zealand. We welcome the
opportunity to speak on the issue of strengthening
international law. We are grateful to the Danish
presidency of the Council for having chosen this topic
as the theme for today's meeting.

As reaffirmed by the Millennium Declaration
(General Assembly resolution 55/2), the rule of law is
of course the essential framework for advancing human
security and prosperity around the world, and it forms
the basis for relations among States. The rule of law
requires not only the elaboration of obligations but also
their implementation. As the Secretary-General noted
in his report entitled "In larger freedom" (A/59/2005),
without implementation our declarations ring hollow.
Nowhere is the discrepancy between law and
implementation and between words and action more
regrettable than when it comes to the suffering of
civilian populations.

Our heads of State or Government recently took a
step to narrow that discrepancy and to fill a critical
normative gap in international law on the need to
protect civilian populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, when
they adopted the concept of the "responsibility to
protect at the world summit last September. The
Security Council has followed up by adopting by
consensus resolution 1674 (2006), on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the first explicit Security
Council endorsement of the responsibility to protect.

Canada, Australia and New Zealand believe that
the Council, having endorsed the concept of the
responsibility to protect, must put that concept into
credible and consistent practice. The Council must be
7

timely in its engagement and vigilant in its monitoring,
and it must have the political will, when non-coercive
options are inadequate, to have full recourse to its
Article 42 powers, in order to provide protection to
civilian populations at grave risk. Where the Council
authorizes such action, we believe it should ensure that
any operation is designed to maximize the prospects of
success and that the use of military force is
proportional to the threat.

(spoke in French)

We also believe that, in order to establish lasting
peace in any conflict, it is important to bring to justice
the perpetrators of serious international crimes. The
delegations of Canada, Australia and New Zealand are
proud to have taken a leading role in establishing and
supporting responsible and fair mechanisms, such as
the International Criminal Court, to ensure individual
accountability for such crimes. But the Security
Council also has an important role to play in efforts to
end the cycle of impunity.

We welcome the action taken by the Security
Council last week to facilitate the request of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone to have Charles
Taylor's trial transferred to The Hague. We are also
grateful to the Governments of Liberia, Nigeria and
Sierra Leone for their cooperation, thanks to which
Charles Taylor will appear before the Special Court for
Sierra Leone; to the Government of the Netherlands for
its agreement to host the trial; and to the Government
of the United Kingdom for agreeing, subject to the
approval of its Parliament, to allow Charles Taylor
serve his sentence on its territory in the event he is
convicted.

(spoke in English)

The delegations of Canada, Australia and New
Zealand support efficient and effective sanctions
regimes that are appropriately targeted at individuals
and groups whose actions should be subject thereto.
We agree that recent efforts to put in place due-process
guarantees, including those related to the listing and
delisting of individuals, are essential to the credibility
of targeted sanctions regimes. We also commend the
Council's attention to the guidelines developed by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on
the humanitarian impact of sanctions.

At the same time, we contend that sanctions must
be monitored and implemented effectively. The
international community must know more about the
trade in natural resources that fuels conflicts, and about
the trafficking, financing and transportation of
weapons in violation of arms embargoes. It is our View
that, to that end, expert panels and other monitoring
mechanisms should be improved and strengthened. The
international community must have the will to act on
the information that is generated by those mechanisms.

The rule of law is an essential element in re-
establishing effective and stable governance in
countries emerging from conflict. It will therefore be
among the priorities for the Peacebuilding
Commission, which will convene its historic inaugural
meeting tomorrow, 23 June. The delegations of
Canada, Australia and New Zealand wish to recognize
and to salute the crucial role played by the delegations
of Denmark and Tanzania in the hard work needed to
create the Peacebuilding Commission. We imagine to
what extent the inaugural meeting tomorrow must
produce feelings of pride and accomplishment for
those delegations.

I conclude by observing that the rule of law will
take hold only if the international community, through
the individual and collective efforts of States, is willing
to follow through with the consistent implementation
of the international legal norms and standards to which
we have committed ourselves, many of which found
their very birth here at this table. Our commitment
must extend beyond our own individual responsibility
to implement such norms, to our collective
responsibility to assist those developing States that
face real, practical challenges in achieving full
implementation.

