Mr. Glossner (Germany): I thank the Special
Adviser and his team for their tireless efforts.
Germany fully supports the work of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) and commends the important
progress that has been made and outlined by the Special
Adviser today.

By unanimously adopting resolution 2379 (2017),
the Security Council affirmed the importance of
ensuring accountability in the post-conflict setting of
Iraq, but, more broadly, it also shed light on the wider
global need for accountability for criminal acts, whether
they are committed by States or non-State actors.
We also welcome the support provided by the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to the
work of UNITAD, in accordance with resolution 2470
(2019). UNITAD and UNAMI, in our View, share some
key similar objectives: the promotion of accountability,
the protection of human rights and the strengthening of
the rule of law in Iraq.

Germany commends the Special Adviser and his
team for the comprehensive approach that they are
taking to their mandate and investigations. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its accomplices
have assaulted many different groups and individuals,
and it is crucial that the Victims and survivors of all
origins receive equal access to justice.

In April, under the German presidency, the Council
adopted resolution 2467 (2019), which, for the first time,
enshrined within the Council's documents a survivor-
centred approach to preventing and responding to
conflict-related sexual Violence. Such a survivor-
centred approach is, of course, needed in addressing
other crimes as well. Like other Council members, we
therefore commend the Special Adviser and his team
for paying specific attention to maintaining close
relations with survivors, local communities, religious
leaders and the Iraqi authorities.

We also welcome the strong working relationship of
UNITAD with international and regional organizations
and civil society. In that regard, I would like to
especially mention the collaboration that UNITAD
has developed with the International Commission on
Missing Persons and the Commission for International
Justice and Accountability. Those organizations have
been on the ground since the very beginning and have
conducted extremely important work.

ISIL's heinous crimes and the suffering it has
caused do not stop at the Iraqi border. We therefore
further encourage the Special Adviser to look for
additional forms of transnational cooperation in the
investigations. The victims and survivors of ISIL's
crimes must have access to justice everywhere, which
is why Germany welcomes the exchange of information
and possible support for the prosecution of ISIL crimes
in other national jurisdictions through mutual legal
assistance. In that regard, Germany thanks the Special
Adviser for the exchanges he has had with the German
authorities on possible ways of cooperation with regard
to the Team's ongoing investigations. Like others,
Germany actively supports the work of UNITAD.
As the Special Adviser mentioned initially, we have
dispatched experienced personnel to the Investigative
Team, and we are looking into identifying further areas
of support.

Let me also add a few words on the cooperation
between UNITAD and Iraq. We welcome the
commitment of the Iraqi Government to pursue justice
and accountability. Justice served with due process
and in accordance with international standards is
indispensable for national reconciliation and a peaceful
and stable future, as outlined by my South African
colleague. The terms of reference worked out with
the Special Adviser and the establishment of the Iraqi
Steering Committee allow for effective cooperation. It
is clear - and the Special Adviser emphasized this point
at the beginning - that independence and impartiality
are essential for the Team's credibility going forward.

Cooperation with UNITAD holds significant
potential to strengthen the rule of law within the Iraqi
judicial system. In that regard, I would like to highlight
three points. First, we welcome the steps taken towards
agreements between the Investigative Team and the
Iraqi national authorities in order to facilitate the
transmission of relevant evidentiary material to the
Team. Secondly, we also deem it important that Iraq
incorporate provisions on international crimes in its
national criminal law. Thirdly, evidence gathered
by the Investigative Team must be used only in
prosecutions that comply with international legal
standards, which disqualifies the use of such evidence
if capital punishment cannot be excluded. In that
regard, Germany takes note of the relevant report of the
Secretary-General (A/73/253) that outlines the policy
prohibiting international accountability mechanisms
from sharing evidence for use in the context of criminal
proceedings in which the death penalty could be
imposed or carried out.
Finally, we call on the Iraqi Government to
strengthen the rule of law in judicial proceedings
against possible ISIL perpetrators. Such proceedings
must allow for fair and impartial procedures and
effective and timely judicial review, including access
to legal assistance.

The Security Council can count on Germany's
support for UNITAD and for the fight against impunity.

