Ms. Citaku: I am very proud and honoured to
address the Security Council today. I am honoured
because this Chamber has been the scene of many
important discussions leading to my country's freedom,
and I am proud because the past few weeks have shown
that Kosovo is on an irreversible path towards being
embraced as an equal member of the world's great
family of free nations.

I belong to a generation that has endured the
worst. We have witnessed genocide, massacres, rape,
exclusion and discrimination. We still have very fresh
memories of a time when we were denied education
and our schools were closed, when walls were built
to separate the privileged minority from the majority
and discriminate against them. We were denied access
to public space; we were denied the right to play. The
memory is still fresh of Serbian police beating and
arresting our youngsters just because they were playing
football.

But I am also fortunate enough to belong to a
generation that has witnessed the birth of our State. We
are a generation that has defied all odds, and while we
once struggled to exist, we have now seen what was once
considered impossible become possible. Our resilience
was tested, fought and defied, but we succeeded - not
because we had the power, but because we were right
and because we dared to dream and hope. We hoped to
be equal, to be free and to play. I am pleased to be able
to say that those are no longerjust hopes. We are equal.
We are free. And we will play.

Last week Kosovo was accepted to the Federation
Internationale de Football Associations (FIFA) and the
Union ofEuropean Football Associations (UEFA). That
is a great victory for equality and for sport. It once
again testifies to the fact that sport and talent have no
boundaries. We are proud that our young talents will no
longer feel isolated and excluded. We are proud that an
overwhelming majority of FIFA and UEFA members
supported our cause. It is nevertheless disturbing to
see our northern neighbour Serbia outraged at that
wonderful news. While it was the dream of Mr. Fadil
Vokrri, President of our football federation, to bring
people together through football, his counterpart from
Serbia delivered a politically loaded statement saying
that our belief that our fight was over and our UEFA
membership definite was just a dream. Furthermore,
the Serbian Prime Minister stated that Serbia would
fight fiercely to reverse the UEFA decision.

Serbia still wants to deny our children the right to
play and our young people the right to feel equal and to
compete and excel. I have one message for them - live
and let live. Kosovars deserve a chance. And when they
are given that chance, they shine. They come home and
make us all proud, just as Majlinda Kelmendi did last
month when she regained the gold medal for judo in
the European Championships. We are appalled by the
statements made by Serbian officials last week. Instead
of remorse and apologies for denying generations
of Kosovars their right to play and compete, we hear
rhetoric that belongs to the previous century. While
young Serbian sportsmen and women are excelling
in various sports, the Serbian Government wants to
deny the same right and privilege to Kosovo's young
people. Kosovo's acceptance into UEFA and FIFA takes
nothing away from anyone. It simply makes it possible
for Kosovo's citizens to display their amazing talents to
the world on an equal footing with everyone else.

Another important achievement for Kosovars was
the recommendation of the European Commission to
grant us visa-free travel to the European Union (EU),
allowing for the strengthening of business, social and
cultural ties between the EU and Kosovo. Kosovo
institutions had to work hard to reach this goal. We
were given 101 criteria - twice as many as the rest
of the Western Balkan countries - but hard work did
pay off in the end, which is yet another reason for us
to feel equal. We grew up in the former Yugoslavia as
a generation treated like second-class citizens. We are
now equal citizens of the European continent, sharing
the same space and the same opportunities to travel. For
us, this has added value, as one third of our population
already lives in EU countries.

While we are aware that visa liberalization is not
the solution to the many challenges we face in creating
a better environment and better living conditions
for our citizens, we are also absolutely sure that visa
liberalization will help our people move and travel
freely, experience their continent and feel equal.
Kosovar institutions and all political parties in the
Government and the opposition worked hard to achieve
this objective. While there are obvious disagreements
among members of our political class, there is no
division on our fundamental strategic orientation and
aspiration for Euro-Atlantic integration.

Our path towards European integration was sealed
on 1 April when the Stabilization and Association
Agreement between Kosovo and the EU entered into
force. As High Representative Mogherini said,

"this Agreement opens a new phase in the Kosovo-
EU relationship and represents an important
contribution to peace, stability and prosperity in
Kosovo and the region at large".

While we celebrate these great achievements - and
Kosovars have many reasons to feel proud - there
are families in Kosovo who are still mourning and
for whom the war never ended. These are the families
of the missing. For example, Mrs. Cerkezi, 17 years
after the war, continues to serve the table for herself
and the members of her family who are still missing:
her husband and her four sons. They were taken away
by the Serbian military and paramilitary forces in the
spring of 1999. She still waits for them and she needs
them back. She, along with thousands of mothers
from Kosovo, still wait for the whole truth or at least
a proper burial for their loved ones. They want a place
where they can mourn their lost family members. They
demand answers. It is imperative that Serbia open its
files and archives to help close this painful chapter in
our recent history.

The Serbian State, as has been documented,
undertook unprecedented measures to hide the traces.
They went as far as moving corpses from one mass
grave to another and erected huge constructions on
sites where the remains of human beings were buried.
That is the case of Rudnice, in the region of Raska,
where, despite the expectations raised by statements
made by the Serbian authorities that 250 corpses - the
remains of the Victims * would be identified, only 54
Albanians have been found and reburied. They were
innocent people executed in the massacres of Rezala
and Cikatova.

We cannot build peace and reconciliation by
burying the truth. The truth must be told. And the truth
must be accepted, no matter how painful or shameful
it is. Denial is not the answer. Kosovo wants good-
neighbourly relations. Kosovo wants a new chapter in the
region, but that requires the same level of commitment
from all sides. The inter- State dialogue between Kosovo
and Serbia, facilitated by the European Union, is not an
objective on its own; nor would it be a success, ifit fails
to normalize the relation between people.

On behalf of the institutions of the Republic of
Kosovo, I would like to reiterate that in line with our
Constitution we will implement every single agreement
we have reached with Serbia in Brussels. But then,
how can we say we are working towards normalizing
relations, if the Serbian President compares Kosovo to
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)? Just
last month, the Serbian President made that claim
in Indonesia, and it was not the first time such a
comparison was made.

I would like to state loud and clear that Kosovo is a
European country that aspires to become an EU member.
We share the same values, and more importantly, we
share the same aspirations as the rest of Europe. Trying
to label us as something we are not, trying to portray us
as a nation that has no European cultural identity, is not
only inaccurate; it is also unworthy of a country that is
an EU candidate.

In fact, the contrary is true. Kosovo is an active
partner of the global coalition of nations set up to
counter ISIL. Since the beginning, we have complied
with the provisions of the Security Council resolutions
urging countries to adopt legislation prohibiting the
joining of armed conflicts by their citizens in countries
outside their State territory. We have put in place the
right mechanisms, legal acts and strategies to counter
violent extremism. We have gone way beyond words.
Dozens of non-governmental organizations that fed
radicalization have been shut down. After a large
number of arrests, including of imams, people are in
trials for sowing intolerant attitudes and influencing
vulnerable persons. And this year, no single Kosovar
has joined ISIL.

Kosovo sees ISIL as a common regional threat ~ a
threat to Kosovo, to Serbia and to the rest of the Balkans.
But, unfortunately, terrorism is not the only threat
we face; equally dangerous are the keeping alive of
the Milosevic dream and hate speech and rhetoric.
Kosovo has never been and will never be a source of
hatred towards others or a source of destabilization.
We are Europeans, not only by the mere fact that we
live on the European continent, but because we are
Europeans in terms of ideals and aspirations. All levels
of our institutions, parties and civil society are strongly
committed to combating this global threat.

Members of the Security Council should visit
Kosovo and witness first-hand how proud we are of
our multicultural and multireligious society. We are a
secular Republic that has become a champion in the
region for interfaith dialogue. They will find in Kosovo
many cities where mosques, Catholic and Orthodox
churches share the same yard. But unlike our northern
neighbour, we will never use or allow religion to divide
and incite hatred.

One need only visit Pristina to see the biggest asset
we have: our young people. They represent a generation
that, unlike mine, which dreamed only of survival,
feels free and equal. They want to excel, innovate,
compete and contribute. One need only visit the
Innovation Centre of Kosovo in Pristina to find young
women and men who, through science and research, are
developing start-ups and much more, aiming to solve
global problems. This is the strong Kosovo innovation
community, oriented towards the future and based on
knowledge and new technology, that has started to be
widely recognized by the international community
and to be awarded for its excellence. One need only
visit Kosovo to see hope, but a different and better
kind from that of my generation. It is an enthusiastic
generation of hope and desire to excel and contribute to
the community and to the world.

Of course, we have problems, just like any newborn.
We still need to work hard to strengthen the rule of law
and to fight corruption and organized crime. Some
very important steps were taken recently in terms of
legislation with a law on electronic procurement and,
concretely, with the arrest of more than 50 people,
including high-level officials, involved in organized
crime. We are fully aware of the challenges that lie
ahead of us, and we are committed to addressing all of
them. It is our duty as a generation to leave behind not
only a free and independent Kosovo, as we are aware
that independence and freedom are not self-sufficient,
but are just the preconditions for the creation of other
values. Our duty is to leave behind a Kosovo that is
more prosperous, in peace with all its neighbours and
an active member of the global family. That is a goal
worth fighting for.

