Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefings by Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Mark Lowcock and by Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, to whom we reiterate our
support for the sensitive work that they are carrying out.

We express our regret that this conflict has lasted
for eight years, and we continue to bear Witness to the
unrelenting siege and violence suffered by the Syrian
people, especially those most vulnerable, like children,
who in some cases have known only this reality since
birth. Sadly, if appropriate measures are not taken, most
of them will have to live with persistent psychological
trauma. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), 13.1 million people
remain in need humanitarian assistance, of whom
approximately 5.3 million are children. There are
approximately 6.1 million internally displaced persons,
of whom 2.6 million are children, and some 200,000 of
those children live in difficult-to-access areas. We must
prevent those figures from growing larger.

We are alarmed by the escalation of violence in
south-west Syria and call for a cessation of hostilities in
the framework of resolution 2401 (2018). Any increase
in tensions must be avoided in order not to further
destabilize the region. We also reiterate the importance
of safeguarding the lives of thousands of civilians
who continue to move into the city of Idlib, including
those children and their families who are swelling the
numbers of persons internally displaced by of violence.
It is essential to avoid any kind of tension or escalation
of violence in that area so as to avoid a major tragedy.
To that end, the full implementation of resolution
2401 (2018) is indispensable. In that connection, we
highlight the different initiatives that allowed local
agreements to be reached to facilitate not only the entry
of humanitarian assistance, but also the evacuation of
people in need.

The necessary measures must also be taken to
prevent the resurgence of terrorist groups and to stop
further violence. We strongly condemn the attack on
the city of Al-Suwayda, which resulted in more than
two hundred deaths, and those responsible for those
heinous attacks must be held accountable.

We repudiate all attacks on civilian facilities, and
therefore we call on the parties to respect their obligations
under international law and international humanitarian
law, including with regard to the protection of civilians,
hospitals and educational institutions. We regret that,
according to figures from OCHA and UNICEF, more
than 2.7 million Syrian children have not attended
school since the beginning of the conflict. According
to the most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/724), 104,000 children benefited from essential
learning materials and remedial education, and 172,000
children benefited from protection and psychosocial
support services.

However, we believe that more must be done for
such a vulnerable population. We must do everything
we can to get these children back into school. We cannot
allow their first lessons in life to be forced displacement
or shelter. Measures should also be taken to keep them
from being subjected to sexual violence or recruitment.

We highlight the tireless work of the various
humanitarian agencies and workers who have put
their own lives at risk in providing the humanitarian

access that so many need. We note that, according to

the latest report, more than 218,000 people in hard-to-

reach areas were served, and that a total of 3 million

children received care from UNICEF. We also note that

more than 1 million children and mothers had access to

first aid and that around 293,000 children and pregnant

and breastfeeding mothers had received nutritional

supplements. We call on the Syrian Government to
cooperate in that matter and to coordinate more closely
and actively with United Nations agencies and their
representatives so that that assistance may continue to
increase. That is why visa authorizations are urgently
required, as well as authorizations for the entry of
convoys, including cross-border convoys.

In addition, we highlight the technical assessment
conducted by the United Nations Department of Safety
and Security and the United Nations Mine Action
Service in the city of Raqqa to ensure the clearance
of explosive remnants of war. We believe that that is a
basic and urgent action that could avoid fatalities and
allow the population to return to their daily lives. It
would also allow the displaced population and refugees
to gradually return to their homes. That return must be
safe, dignified, voluntary and informed, as it must be
throughout Syria, .

The reduction of violence on the ground must
be based on increased confidence-building among
the parties involved. Relieving the humanitarian
situation of the civilian population, especially the most
vulnerable, such as children, must be a priority on the
agenda of political dialogue and high-level diplomacy.
We reiterate that the only way to resolve this conflict
is through an inclusive, dialogue-based and concerted
political process, led by the Syrian people and allowing
for a peaceful solution.

Finally, we highlight the work that Special
Representative Virginia Gamba has been doing on
behalf of children in armed conflict and encourage her
to continue her important work in coordination with
the agencies of the United Nations, Member States, and
regional and subregional organizations, in accordance
with resolution 2427 (2018). We reiterate the full
support of my delegation.

