I thank Mr. Filippo Grandi for his briefing. The beginning of 2020 surprised us with an unprecedented situation: a global pandemic that caused upheaval in all nations' social order and health systems. None of us was prepared for the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, nor are we prepared for its still-unknown long-term consequences. Restriction of movement, the closure of borders and the suspension of asylum procedures, inter alia, are but some of the measures taken in almost every nation to stop the spread of the virus. Those measures have profound implications for migrants, displaced people and refugees, and political leadership in mitigating their negative effects on the most vulnerable is now more important than ever, in a spirit of solidarity and based on our shared humanity. Half of the global refugee population are children. They experience profound emotional and physical traumas, and their future is compromised now more than ever. Millions live in overcrowded facilities, exposed to all sorts of abuse, including human trafficking, deprivation of freedom, torture and sexual violence. Women refugees are also highly vulnerable to all forms of violence, including sexual violence. Even after they exit a conflict zone, finding safety can be elusive. It is important to react properly to cases of abuses and enable access to justice, legal remedies and reparation. Many families from Afghanistan, which has the second-largest refugee population in the world, continue to live their lives outside their country. One example is Nadia, who was born a refugee and always thinks of Afghanistan as the land of her ancestors. She is 17 years old and was born in Pakistan, where her parents fled to 40 years ago. Syrian doctors are at the front line of the fight against the pandemic in France. They could very well be in their homeland, but conflict forced them to flee and seek refuge outside it. They have to live every day knowing that today they could be useful in their country, where an outbreak of the pandemic could have catastrophic consequences. Africa's largest refugee population is from South Sudan. More than 4 million South Sudanese women and children live as refugees in bordering countries due to conflict, climate change and food insecurity. The prospect of the potentially devastating impact of a COVID-19 outbreak is deeply concerning. About | million Rohingya live in refugee camps across eastern Bangladesh, in conditions that were crowded and hot before the coronavirus and are now even more dire. They live densely packed in squalid conditions and are unable to maintain social distancing and proper hygiene, with limited access to water and health services. The COVID-19 pandemic is a crisis within a crisis for the Rohingya and many other refugees. The Dominican Republic is very familiar with the situation involving the unprecedented exodus of more than 4 million Venezuelans. The conditions that forced them to flee are, sadly, still present and are now compounded by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The situation in their host countries resulting from measures to control the spread of the virus affects them greatly and directly. We could go on and on citing different examples of how refugees live their lives day by day. Many of them left their very souls in their countries and have to endure many, many difficulties. We believe that COVID-19 has helped all of us to relate to their struggles. We stand ready to advocate for a global, sustained and inclusive dialogue aimed at alleviating the particular suffering of refugees and helping them to exercise their right to return to their places of origin or choice in a safe, dignified and voluntary manner. As a Rohingya refugee said, "No big hope before, but now zero hope". Let us rebuild that hope for them.
