First, I would like to congratulate Germany on its professional handling of this month's presidency of the Council in this new virtual setting. We thank Special Coordinator Mladenov and the other briefers, Mr. Khalil Shikaki and Mr. Daniel Levy, for their timely and important presentations. While the entire world is still fighting the relentless spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the Palestinian people under occupation face not only the challenge of the virus but also an even bigger crisis - the plans and measures of the Israeli Government to proceed with the de jure annexation of more parts of the West Bank. Let there be no mistake: the creeping annexation of the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, has been ongoing for more than five decades and has become increasingly entrenched over the years. The illegal Israeli settlement enterprise, with its network of separate roads as well as social and economic activities, the permit regime, demolitions of homes and structures, evictions of entire Palestinian families, settler violence and raids by the Israeli security forces have marked the lives of entire generations of Palestinians. The Gaza Strip has remained severed from the rest of the Palestinian territory for 13 years under an illegal Israeli blockade affecting the lives and livelihood of the 2 million Palestinians in the coastal enclave, which must be lifted. The goal of seeing Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and security along the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State, has never been at greater risk. As the Secretary-General stated at the Security Council meeting on 24 June (see S/2020/596, annex 1), we are at a "watershed moment". The prohibition on the acquisition of territory by force is absolute in the Charter of the United Nations, and any annexation, regardless of its scope, would constitute a grave breach of international law. As the Committee stated on 5 May (see GA/PAL/1432), annexation represents a serious threat to the two-State solution and threatens global peace and security. If it were to go ahead, de jure annexation would not only inflict a deadly blow to the realization of the two-State solution and the possibility of reaching a negotiated solution but also jeopardize the essence of the principles of international law and the whole legal framework that the international community has built over decades. Respect for the Geneva Conventions and for United Nations resolutions and ensuring accountability for breaches of international law, such as annexation, must be the utmost concern for the community of nations. Opposition to annexation plans by Israel was clearly expressed by most Security Council members at the meeting of the Council on 24 June, as well as by our Committee's partners among the African Union, the European Union, the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, United Nations Special Rapporteurs, renowned jurists, eminent persons, including The Elders, civil society and people from all walks of life. King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein of Jordan, among others, has warned that any unilateral Israeli measure to annex land in the West Bank would threaten regional stability. The Committee joins all those who have affirmed that the annexation of occupied Palestinian territory will not be recognized as legitimate by the international community and will also result in consequences and irreparable damage to Israel's diplomatic standing. While no open expression of repudiation for such plans has been heard from Israel since the passing of the annexation deadline of | July, it is our hope and appeal that the Israeli Government immediately abandon this unlawful plan. The Palestinian leadership's announcement that it is no longer bound by agreements and understandings with Israel and the United States, including the security cooperation, points to the fact that the situation might become untenable if annexation were to be implemented. The halting of all bilateral contacts will increasingly have a dramatic adverse impact on all aspects of Palestinian life, with destabilizing results. We call on the Quartet to assume its responsibilities, as mandated by the Security Council, to engage with the parties to revive the much-needed peace process in the context of an international framework within the well-known internationally endorsed parameters, including the Arab Peace Initiative. We reiterate our call for the implementation of all relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), particularly paragraph 5, which calls on Member States to distinguish, in their dealings, between Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and with regard to Israeli settlement activities, which are illegal under international law. We urge the Palestinians to continue with their efforts for intra-Palestinian reconciliation, and we take note of the encouraging signs exemplified by the recent call for unity between Fatah and Hamas. We welcome the pledges of $130 million for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) expressed by donors at the conference on 23 June. This is critical support for the Palestinian people, but it still falls short of actual needs, thus compelling our renewed appeal for support to UNRWA. The international community must continue to make every effort to guarantee strong and predictable financing for the Agency at a time of instability, volatility and great vulnerability for Palestine refugees and for the Middle East. The ongoing occupation and threat of further annexation are now compounded by the spread of the coronavirus pandemic, which has reached thousands of cases not only in the State of Palestine, posing serious challenges for the delivery of basic health and social services to the population, including women and girls, but is also threatening the health and well-being of Israelis. The negative shock will have profound implications for the Palestinian economy, public welfare, employment, social cohesion and financial and institutional stability. We stress that strong international donor support and targeted technical assistance will be crucial on the path to recovery. Halting annexation, however, cannot be the goal, only to go back to what is rapidly transforming into a one-State reality of occupation. Being satisfied to remain on the brink while staring at the abyss cannot be enough. Let us be mindful of the eyes of the lost generations of Palestinians and Israelis and let us take decisive action for their sake, end the occupation and achieve the two-State solution as the cornerstone for just and lasting peace and security in the region.
