I thank Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive briefing and for his tireless efforts aimed at facilitating Syria's political process. I would also like to welcome our new colleague, the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations, Ambassador Philippe Kridelka, with whom we look forward to working. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains in full support of achieving a political solution that is owned and led by the Syrian people and is in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We therefore welcome next week's third session of the Constitutional Committee, which, it is our hope, will be characterized by constructive engagement by all parties. Regarding the country's security situation, we are concerned by the continued reports of sporadic violence despite the March ceasefire agreement. We urge all parties to abide by the ceasefire and exercise maximum restraint, and we reiterate the call for a complete and immediate nationwide cessation of hostilities. Furthermore, we remind parties to the conflict that military and counter- terrorism operations, although necessary for the protection of Syria and the region, must comply with the fundamental principles of international humanitarian law and international human rights law. Distinction, proportionality and precaution ought to guide all activities. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic compounds the urgency for lasting peace and stability in Syria. Unfortunately, there has been an upsurge in cases in recent weeks, and, due to limited testing capacity, we do not know the true number of persons affected. A widespread outbreak of COVID-19 would undoubtedly be devastating to the country, especially since the health-care system has been debilitated by conflict. Nationwide calm will allow for a more robust response to the pandemic. The Syrian economy is in danger of collapse. A decade-long civil war has led to a precarious socioeconomic situation, and unilateral coercive measures have increased the burden. As always, we continue to call for the lifting of all unilateral coercive measures, which are inconsistent with international law, frustrate efforts at stabilizing and revitalizing the economy and now have the potential to undermine Syria's pandemic response. We remain troubled by the unresolved issues of detainees, abductees and missing persons. Meaningful action on these matters must be prioritized, especially in consideration of the pandemic. Furthermore, the effective resolution of these issues will certainly go a long way towards confidence-building and reconciliation, in furtherance of the political process. Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity must be respected and should never be rejected in favour of acts of aggression and foreign occupation. The hope of the Syrian people lies within the actions of the international community. We must seek common ground, we must be pragmatic and principled and we must not fail them. Before concluding, it is with profound sadness that we recall the devastating 4 August blasts in Beirut, Lebanon. We express our deepest condolences to the Lebanese people and to the families of the many Syrian refugees who also lost their lives in this terrible tragedy. We also wish Deputy Special Envoy Matar a speedy recovery.
