Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
Ms. Eveline Rooijmans, Senior Humanitarian Policy
Advisor at Oxfam, for their contributions to this debate.

The protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict remains an acute concern, and we appreciate
that Uruguay has chosen this important topic for an
open debate in the Security Council. The European
Union and its member States share the outrage
expressed by the Council in November 2015 that
civilians continue to account for the vast majority of
casualties in today's conflicts (see S/PRST/2015/23).
We also concur with the Secretary-General's view, as
expressed in his report of July 2015, entitled "A vital and
enduring commitment: implementing the responsibility
to protect" (S/2015/500), that the prevailing disrespect
for international humanitarian law on the part of some
States and non-State armed groups, and the pervasive
impunity that they enjoy for violations have become
one of the most critical challenges for the protection of
civilians.

The EU and its member States are committed
to promoting the implementation of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law
worldwide. The respect for those laws is crucial to
ensuring the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
and to providing assistance to victims in the most
effective manner. The frequent failure of the parties
to armed conflicts to comply with their obligations is
of profound concern. We are also concerned about the
increased targeting of medical missions and personnel,
again in clear violation of those obligations. We regret
that no agreement could be found on a resolution to
establish a new forum to strengthen compliance with
international humanitarian law at the thirty-second
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement in Geneva in December 2015.
However, participants agreed on the imperative need
to improve compliance with international humanitarian
law and committed to working towards that goal over
the coming years. We encourage all States to participate
in ongoing discussions on exactly how such a new
forum might work.

The EU is implementing its guidelines on promoting
compliance with international humanitarian law and is
making full use of all of the tools at its disposal. The
EU and its member States are committed to continuing
their efforts to promote dissemination of and training
in international humanitarian law inside the European
Union, as well as to continue their efforts to advocate
strongly and consistently for the respect of international
law, including international humanitarian law.

The specific protection needs of women and
children require special attention. Similar attention
should also be paid to the phenomenon of sexual
violence and the use of rape as a tactic of warfare,
affecting women, children and also men. Children are
disproportionately affected by armed conflicts, and
grave violations against children continue to increase.
The situation of children in Syria is of utmost concern.

National authorities have the primary responsibility

to ensure accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights. However, where national authorities are unable
or unwilling to take the necessary steps to ensure
accountability, other mechanisms mustbe used to ensure
that accountability. The International Criminal Court
(ICC) should exercise jurisdiction, where applicable.
The Security Council has an important role to play in
that regard, given its global mandate to make referrals
to the Court. The EU is a firm supporter ofthe ICC and
its work. However, every case that is brought before the
ICC represents, at the same time, a failure on the part of
national Governments and the international community
to prevent conflicts and atrocity crimes. Given the
magnitude of sexual and gender-based crimes in times
of conflict, the EU appreciates the special attention
accorded by the Prosecutor of the ICC to such crimes.
For a number of years already, the mandates of
many United Nations peacekeeping and other missions
have included the protection of civilians. It remains a
crucial dimension that is often decisive for the success
and legitimacy of an operation. The EU welcomes
the centrality of the protection of civilians in United
Nations peacekeeping, as put forward in the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446) and the reports of the Secretary-General.
The emphasis on the role ofpolitical processes, conflict
prevention, early warning and partnerships in those
reports is also key for efforts to advance the protection
of civilians.

However, many challenges remain in terms of the
effective implementation of protection mandates, and
we need to continue to address them. For example,
effective implementation requires better planning
support for missions, applying lessons learned
effectively and improving the understanding of how to
support host States in their efforts to protect civilians.
Operations need to be equipped with the necessary
tools to address both the root causes of crises and
their most visible consequences. Peacekeepers must
protect civilians under threat of physical violence, in
a manner consistent with the requirements of their
mandates. Different levels of threat must be met with
the appropriate and commensurate use of force, as
necessary.

In many ways, training is the cornerstone of
improving the protection of civilians by missions.
Such training should also include predeployment and
in-mission training on child protection, as well as on
sexual exploitation and abuse. The EU is supportive
of the United Nations zero-tolerance policy in that
regard. Nothing is more damning to the legitimacy of
international peacekeeping and efforts to regain the trust
of local populations than peacekeepers abusing those
whom they are mandated to protect. For its part, the
EU has provided training on the protection of civilians,
atrocity prevention, gender and child protection, human
rights law and international humanitarian law as an
integral part of the training curricula for its missions in
Somalia, Mali and the Niger.

United Nations peace operations should also
play a critical role in assisting the host States in the
implementation of the responsibility to protect, as those
operations are often in the frontline when a State is
unable or unwilling to protect civilians from the risk of
atrocity crimes. In that context, United Nations peace
operations need to be staffed and equipped in a way that
allows United Nations personnel to better interact with
the local population and civil society organizations,
including women's rights-oriented groups, with the
overarching aim of responding to warning signals and
reducing the risk of atrocity crimes. The implementation
of the Human Rights Up Front initiative should make a
positive contribution in that regard.

In cases where international efforts fail and atrocity
crimes are committed, accountability is crucial.
Where mandated or when the host State has consented
thereto, United Nations peace operations should be
equipped and staffed with the capability and expertise
to assist in transparent investigations and support the
collection of evidence in a professional manner. The
EU is committed to assisting States to strengthen their
national judicial and correctional systems, so as to
enable them to investigate and prosecute perpetrators
of atrocity crimes. Furthermore, closer cooperation
between the ICC and missions in the field is of vital
importance. When a peace operation is to be deployed in
an ICC-situation country, its mandate should authorize
it to facilitate or assist the ICC, including by assisting
authorities in the protection of witnesses and the arrest
and surrender of individuals subject to arrest warrants
issued by the Court.

To conclude, the EU remains a loyal United Nations
partner. The Security Council can count on our support
in reinforcing the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, including through support to United Nations
peace operations and through our own missions. We will
maintain our support for the promotion of compliance
with international humanitarian law and strengthened
accountability for serious violations.
