The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Pakistan.

I wish once again to welcome Mr. Holkeri, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, to this
Chamber and to thank him for introducing the
Secretary-General's report, as well as for updating the
Council on the work being done by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

My delegation also welcomes the participation of
the Foreign Minister of Serbia and Montenegro, Mr.
Vuk Draskovic, in this debate.

Pakistan reiterates its strong condemnation of the
violence in March 2004 and deplores the loss of
innocent lives and the destruction of religious and
historical sites. We once again call for bringing all
perpetrators to justice. We commend the efforts of
UNMIK, led by Mr. Holkeri, and of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) in restoring stability and order in Kosovo
during and after these tragic events.

The Secretary-General's report, however, is a
sobering assessment of the situation in Kosovo in the
aftermath of the March violence. We note with concern
its assessment that

"the situation in Kosovo remains tense, and further
violence is possible". (S/2004/348, para. 9)

The violence has been the most serious blow thus far to
inter-ethnic relations in Kosovo. Despite the
painstaking efforts of UNMIK, both past and present,
we are no nearer healing the wounds that have been
inflicted on Kosovo for so long and which we sought to
heal when resolution 1244 (1999) was adopted by the
Security Council.

Problems persist, especially in the key areas of
UNMIK's mandate to ensure sustainable returns,
community rights, freedom of movement and the
functioning of democratic institutions. Extremists from
both sides continue to obstruct meaningful progress in
these areas. Parallel structures continue to exist,
despite repeated calls for their dismantling. At the
same time, Kosovo's economic situation has continued
to deteriorate, with marginal support from the
international community. Direct dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade has not yet resumed, in spite of
commitments by both sides to do so. Above all,
security in Kosovo remains fragile, in spite of the
presence of thousands of KFOR troops.

Mr. Holkeri, we believe, is making every effort to
redress the situation, to defuse tensions and to move
forward on the implementation plan. We understand
that the implementation plan is also being revised in
some key areas to take into account the implications of
the recent events. Pakistan will continue to offer its
fullest support to Mr. Holkeri in his efforts for the
implementation of standards, in line with the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999), and to establish a
multi-ethnic, tolerant, democratic and peaceful society
in Kosovo.

Mr. Holkeri has remarked that "the recent
violence has forced us at UNMIK to take a long, hard
look at ourselves". Some, including Pakistan, have felt
that the entire process of seeking to promote standards
without addressing the status issue has been flawed in
its conception and inappropriate to prepare Kosovo for
the transition from war to peace, from socialism to a
market economy, and from international political limbo
to political and legal clarity. We need to determine
whether the failure to clarify the status of Kosovo has
fed the frustrations and grievances of both sides,
hardened positions and perpetuated the proclivity
towards violence. Continued delay in addressing the
question of political status will, in our view, increase
the complexity of the situation and the dangers of
revived violence.

Instead of transforming the "standards before
status" issue into dogma, the Council should move
with more deliberate political realism to promote peace
and prosperity in Kosovo. As Mr. Holkeri said this
morning, the time is coming when we shall have to
consider how to handle difficult choices. We agree.
The Council, in our view, should promote a "status
with standards" approach - a two-pronged approach
that, on the one hand, would hold the Kosovars, both
the people and leadership, accountable for
implementing the standards programme, to work to end
extremism and intolerance, and to create friendly and
cooperative relations with their neighbours. On the
other hand, this approach would see simultaneous
progress on clarifying Kosovo's status issue and
identifying ways of promoting self-determination for
all Kosovars, while seeking to uphold the rights and
interests of its minorities.

As a first step, the international community must
act to hold back the efforts being made to consolidate
parallel structures and to pre-empt future discussions
on political status. While the plan presented by
Belgrade has been advanced unilaterally, this is an
acknowledgement of the need to begin consideration of
the status issue. Other ideas on the status issue,
especially from the Kosovars themselves, should be
welcome. The Council and UNMIK, while securing the
implementation of standards, should begin to give
consideration to proposals on the status issue. A change
of course is essential to creating hope for peace and to
ending the tragic legacy of war and suffering in that
region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Ireland. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council and to make his statement.

