Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Madam, I wish you success in your work as
President of the Security Council for this month. We
would also like to thank Ambassador Salam and the
entire Lebanese delegation for their outstanding work
in September, which was not easy.

It is clear that the result of today's vote reflects
not so much a question of acceptability of wording as a
conflict of political approaches. That is the only part of
what was said by my French colleague with which I
agree. From the outset, the Russian delegation
undertook intensive, constructive efforts to develop an
effective response on the part of the Council to the
dramatic events in Syria. The first such response was
reflected in a consensual statement issued by the
President on 3 August (S/PRST/20ll/l6). Based on
that approach, together with our Chinese partners we
prepared a draft resolution to which, as events
developed, we made some changes, bearing in mind the
concerns of our colleagues on the Council. We would
like to thank our partners, especially Brazil, Russia,
India, China and South Africa - the BRICS States -
for supporting our text.

Of vital importance is the fact that at the heart of
the Russian and Chinese draft was the logic of respect
for the national sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria as well as the principle of non-intervention,
including military, in its affairs; the principle of the
unity of the Syrian people; refraining from
confrontation; and inviting all to an even-handed and
comprehensive dialogue aimed at achieving civil peace
and national agreement by reforming the socio-
economic and political life of the country.

Today's rejected draft was based on a very
different philosophy - the philosophy of
confrontation. We cannot agree with this unilateral,
accusatory bent against Damascus. We deem
unacceptable the threat of an ultimatum and sanctions
against the Syrian authorities. Such an approach
contravenes the principle of a peaceful settlement of
the crisis on the basis of a full Syrian national
3
dialogue. Our proposals for wording on the
non-acceptability of foreign military intervention were
not taken into account, and, based on the well-known
events in North Africa, that can only put us on our
guard. Equally alarming is the weak wording in
connection with the opposition and the lack of an
appeal to them to distance themselves from extremists.
Given the basis of statements by some Western
politicians on President Al-Assad's loss of legitimacy,
such an approach could trigger a full-fledged conflict
in Syria and destabilization in the region as a whole.
The collapse of Syria as a result of a civil war would
have a very destructive impact on the situation in the
entire Middle East.

The situation in Syria cannot be considered in the
Council separately from the Libyan experience. The
international community is alarmed by statements that
compliance with Security Council resolutions on Libya
in the NATO interpretation is a model for the future
actions of NATO in implementing the responsibility to
protect. It is easy to see that today's "Unified
Protector" model could happen in Syria. All present
should understand that the Russian position regarding
the conflict in Libya is in no way based on any kind of
special ties with the Al-Qadhafi regime, especially
since a number of States represented at this table had
warmer relations with the Libyan Arab J amahiriya.

The people of Libya have spoken regarding
Al-Qadhafi, and they have determined his fate. For us,
Members of the United Nations, including in terms of a
precedent, it is very important to know how the
resolution was implemented and how a Security
Council resolution turned into its opposite.

The demand for a quick ceasefire turned into a
full-fledged civil war, the humanitarian, social,
economic and military consequences of which
transcend Libyan borders. The situation in connection
with the no-fly zone has morphed into the bombing of
oil refineries, television stations and other civilian
sites. The arms embargo has morphed into a naval
blockade in western Libya, including a blockade of
humanitarian goods. Today the tragedy of Benghazi has
spread to other western Libyan towns - Sirte and Bani
Walid. These types of models should be excluded from
global practices once and for all.

With respect to Syria, we are not advocates of the
Al-Assad regime. We believe that the violence is
unacceptable, and we condemn the repression of
protests by peaceful demonstrators. However, the
continuation of this tragedy cannot be blamed only on
the harsh actions of the authorities. Recent events
convincingly show that the radical opposition no
longer hides its extremist bent and is relying on
terrorist tactics, hoping for foreign sponsors and acting
outside of the law. Armed groups supported by
smuggling and other illegal activities are providing
supplies, taking over land, and killing and perpetrating
atrocities against people who comply with the law-
enforcement authorities.

In universities and schools, representatives of the
Syrian intelligentsia and civil service have recently
been casualties of the terrorists. We convey our
condolences to Mufti Ahmad Hassoon, who is well
known in the East for his active efforts to lay the
foundations for tolerance and international dialogue, in
connection with the death of his 22-year-old son in a
terrorist attack on Sunday.

We must bear in mind the fact that a significant
number of Syrians do not agree with the demand for a
quick regime change and would rather see gradual
changes, believing that they have to be implemented
while maintaining civil peace and harmony in the
country. Such changes, even if they are late in coming,
are still beginning to be implemented, and we must not
overlook this. The best way to end the crisis is to
refuse to provoke a confrontation and to bring together
all responsible members of the international
community so as to induce the parties to launch an
inclusive intra-Syrian political process. This is the path
taken in Yemen, where intensive mediation efforts are
under way aimed at bringing together the belligerent
parties.

Russia is continuing to work with Damascus. We
call on the Syrian leadership to more speedily
implement the changes. They need to free those who
have been detained during the unrest and who have
committed no criminal acts. A more active dialogue
must be undertaken with the opposition and access
must be given to the international media, as well as
step up their interaction with the League of Arab
States. Judging by what the Arab League has done and
what is being shown on television, our efforts are
bearing fruit. We are continuing to work with
constructive patriotic groups of the Syrian opposition
who are concerned about the fate of their country and
who have said that they want no foreign interference in
their internal affairs.
11-52974

We believe that today's message will be correctly
understood by the opposition forces. There is no
alternative to dialogue; there cannot be. If the
opposition believes that Mr. Al-Assad's laws are
imperfect, then it must take up the invitation of the
Government to discuss them. We will indicate our
concerns to the leaders of the Syrian opposition when
they visit Moscow in the near future. Changes for a
peaceful resolution are possible, and we will be
supporting those prospects in coordination with all
constructively inclined peace partners.

If Council colleagues agree with our approach,
which is aimed at dialogue and full national
reconciliation in Syria, we will continue to work on the
Russian-Chinese draft so as to arrive at a balanced
resolution containing the vital elements for a
settlement. Our draft remains on the table.

On that basis, we are prepared to develop a
genuinely collective and constructive position for the
international community and not get involved with
legitimizing previously adopted unilateral sanctions or
attempts at violent regime change. The people of Syria
deserve peaceful change, with the support of the
international community.

