Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize
this debate at a very important juncture in the history
of Somalia. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Mahiga for the excellent work he has been doing, and
the Secretary-General for the serious attention he has
always given to Somalia. We regret that Ambassador
Lamamra was unable to participate in his briefing.

Recent developments in the political and security
fronts in Somalia have created an unprecedented
window of opportunity for stabilizing the country and
ensuring sustainable peace and national reconciliation
there. Indeed, this is proof of how serious national efforts
and focused and coordinated subregional, continental
and global endeavours can bring the desired results. It
is evident that the multi-pronged military operations by
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
Transitional Federal Government forces, with tangible
support from the defence forces of some of Somalia's
neighbours, have decisively weakened Al-Shabaab.
The progress made on the ground in consolidating the
security gains has continued, with the latest inroads
making it possible to foresee increasingly safe and
secure communication between Mogadishu and Baidoa.

These impressive developments, coupled with the
growing consensus within the international community
on Somalia, have converged to help the people ofSomalia
seize the unique opportunity that has been created. The
Security Council should be commended for adopting
resolution 2036 (2012), significantly expanding the
number ofAMISOM. uniformed personnel and allowing
for the reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment.
That resolution has undoubtedly enabled peacekeeping
forces to be deployed in the liberated areas in order to
facilitate the establishment of administrative systems
by the Somali Government as well as the provision of
humanitarian assistance and repatriation for refugees,
internally displaced persons and returnees.

Whatever we in the region or the international
community might do, at the end of the day it is the
people and the leaders of Somalia who matter the most
in achieving lasting peace and reconciliation in their
country. We have no doubt that the new leadership will
continue to deepen national reconciliation and focus on
building and strengthening the necessary governance
institutions to ensure the provision of basic services
and promote economic recovery. There is no better way
for a Government to enhance legitimacy and strengthen
credibility than by making a difference in service
delivery and in attending to the basic needs of people.

We are of the view that there is real momentum
for durable peace in Somalia. The chances for making
the process irreversible have never been as excellent as
they currently are. What remains is for there to be wise
and prudent use of those opportunities on the part of
all, including the new Government. But Somalia needs
help - genuine solidarity - that does not infringe upon
Somalis ownership of the process. The international
community has little option than to do the maximum
possible for peace in Somalia and for the economic
recovery of the country. The peace and stability of
Somalia is closely linked to regional and global peace
and stability. Accordingly, assistance rendered to
Somalia has broader significance, impinging upon the
interest of all those who value peace and stability. The
general situation in regions close to Somalia and further
afield makes it all the more critical that we appreciate
what has been gained in Somalia and that we do the best
we can to ensure that the process is irreversible.

We in the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) will continue, along with the
African Union (AU), as well as the United Nations
and its partners, to assist our brothers in Somalia in
proceeding with success along this promising trajectory.
In fact, a delegation led by the Executive Secretary of
IGAD is currently in Mogadishu to hold consultations
with the new Somali leadership.

We are convinced that a coordinated effort is what
continues to be needed to maintain the momentum
achieved so far and build on the gains that have
already been made. IGAD fully supports the request
by the AU Peace and Security Council for a four-
month technical rollover of the United Nations support
package to AMISOM, as provided for in resolution
2036 (2012), adopted on 22 February, with the inclusion
of additional civilian and maritime support components
of the Mission, to address the urgent needs arising from
the realities on the ground. We also wish to reiterate
our support for the AU's call for the Peacebuilding
Commission to take steps to contribute actively to
post-conflict reconstruction and development efforts in
Somalia.

In the same vein, we welcome the decision of the
Secretary-General to undertake an assessment that will
form the basis for coordinated and coherent United
Nations engagement in post-transition Somalia. We
believe that the review should take into account the
initiative by the African Union Commission to undertake
a strategic review of AMISOM. and the implementation
of its mandate, with a View to determining how best
the Mission can further contribute to the stabilization
of Somalia and the successful implementation of the
priorities set by the Somali Government, in close
coordination with an empowered and restructured
national defence and security sector. Once again, we
wish to stress our readiness to cooperate with the
United Nations assessment team in its effort to develop
a comprehensive United Nations engagement strategy
for Somalia.

We condemn in no uncertain terms the recent
terrorist attacks in Mogadishu. No doubt, Al-Shabaab
is retreating and is unlikely to regain strength if the
regional and the international effort to marginalize the
hardcore elements of the terrorist group is pursued in
a principled manner and in line with what is called for
by international law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

Finally, I wish to pay particular tribute to the
extraordinary sacrifices made by the Somali Security
Forces, AMISOM. and the allied forces.

