Mr. Tadic (Serbia and Montenegro) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): It
is my honour to present to the Security Council, on
behalf of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro,
our view of the situation in Kosovo and Metohija,
especially in the light of the recent report of the
Secretary-General on developments in the province
(S/2006/45).

I am also glad to see a legitimate representative
of the Albanian people from Kosovo and Metohija in
the delegation of Mr. Jessen-Petersen, but I have to
warn that it would be very dangerous if his presence
today were seen in the light of prejudging the status
process, which is to begin soon.

More than two and a half months ago, talks on
the future status of Kosovo and Metohija formally
began under the auspices of the United Nations. At that
time, the Security Council and other relevant members
of the international community clearly stated that, in
parallel with the future-status talks, the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
had to work on fulfilling the standards in Kosovo and
Metohija much more rapidly and effectively than they
had before. If the standards are not fulfilled, there can
be no institutional guarantees of individual rights and
freedoms, no economic recovery and no European
perspective for the inhabitants of Kosovo and
Metohija. Similarly, if the standards are not fulfilled,
the possibility of achieving a negotiated solution on
future status becomes far less likely.

Serbia and Montenegro accepted the position of
the Security Council that the talks on the future status
of the province should begin, despite the fact that the
standards were obviously far from being achieved. We
thus demonstrated our readiness to seek a negotiated
solution to the problem of Kosovo and Metohija. In
seeking a political compromise, however, Serbia and
Montenegro remains firmly committed to the
fundamental principles and norms of international law,
in particular those concerning the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of internationally recognized States.
Moreover, the position of my country is not only in full
accord with the principles and existing practices of
international relations today; it is also fully consistent
with all United Nations documents relating to Kosovo
and Metohija, in particular Security Council resolution
1244 (1999).

The Secretary-General's report for the second
half of last year explicitly states that, in spite of certain
positive results, the fulfilment of the standards in
Kosovo and Metohija has been far too slow and that
there have been "delays or setbacks in most areas"
(S/2006/45, para. 16) in the implementation of
standards. This situation is harmful for all the
inhabitants of the province, but its grave negative
consequences are far more serious for Serbs than for
the rest of the population. It is not only that they are
more frequently the victims of the worst kinds of
persecution and discrimination. The heart of the
problem is that great injustices have been committed
against them since June 1999 and that most of these
have yet to be rectified. About 60 per cent of the
Serbian population has been expelled from Kosovo and
Metohija during this period; they still live as internally
displaced persons in central Serbia, waiting for the
chance to return to their homes. That has not yet been
made possible. All of the province's cities, with the
exception of the northern part of Kosovska Mitrovica,
were ethnically cleansed of Serbs in 1999 and remain
so today. Yet it is hard to imagine a multi-ethnic
Kosovo without Serbs living in cities such as Pristina,
Prizren or Pee. Thus, even though there might be some
progress in the implementation of standards, if it does
not affect the crucial issue of the return of internally
displaced persons such progress is not decisive.

The Serbs who despite everything have remained
in Kosovo and Metohija live either in the northernmost
part of the province in several Serb-majority
municipalities or south of the Ibar river, in enclaves of
various sizes, where they face constant pressure and
discrimination by the Albanian majority. The situation
in those enclaves with respect to personal security and
freedom of movement is still precarious, and with
rampant unemployment and poverty the living
standards in general remain far below average. The
enclaves suffer discrimination at the hands of the
Pristina authorities with regard to the distribution of
electricity, and have recently been cut off from the rest
of the world by being denied normal access to means
of communication and sources of information. Pristina
has blocked their access to the fixed and mobile
telephone networks of Telekom Srbija, which operates
legally in Kosovo and Metohija. They have also
blocked the transmission of a Serbian-language
television station that operates out of the north of the
province. Allow me therefore to say once again: even
though there might be some progress in the
implementation of standards, if it does not affect the
crucial issue of the Serbian enclaves such progress is
not decisive.

The situation in the province being what it is,
Serbia, including the Serbs of Kosovo and Metohija,
looks forward to the future-status process both with
hope and with concern. We hope that the future-status
talks will lead to a lasting, stable and just solution, for
the present circumstances satisfy neither the Serbs nor
the Albanians, nor the international community. But at
the same time, we are concerned that the negotiations
might be undermined by an imposed independence of
Kosovo and Metohija, a solution that would both
contravene international law and destabilize the
political situation in the Balkans. I therefore wish
clearly to present the position of Serbia and
Montenegro on the two possible outcomes of the
future-status process. I want to emphasize the
advantages of a negotiated compromise solution and
the dangers of a unilateral imposed solution.

It was recently pointed out from within the
Contact Group itself that the Kosovo question must be
resolved by applying universal principles of
international law, for otherwise a dangerous precedent
would be established not only for the Balkans but for
other parts of the world as well. The legal and political
foundations of the international order cannot be upheld
in the case of some nations and States and disregarded
in the case of others. That is the lesson Serbia learned
from its troubled legacy of the 1990s, but it applies
elsewhere as well. The Serbian people demonstrated
this when, guided by the ideals of democracy, they
peacefully overthrew the regime of Slobodan
Milosevic in 2000. To argue that secession from an
internationally recognized State is an unacceptable
principle but to claim at the same time that the very
same demand should be acknowledged in the case of
the Kosovo Albanians because they suffered so much
under the Milosevic regime is to ignore not only
international law but also the political consequences of
such a unilateral decision being imposed upon Serbia
and Montenegro. That is why most countries in the
region look at the possible secession of Kosovo and
Metohija with grave concern or even openly oppose
such an outcome. The independence of Kosovo and
Metohija would lead to a unilateral change of
internationally recognized borders in the Balkans. That
would politically destabilize the region and would open
the possibility of renewing past conflicts. Only Albania
supports the demand of its ethnic kin in Kosovo and
Metohija to secede from Serbia and from Serbia and
Montenegro.

To view Kosovo as an exception and a unique
case is, therefore, dangerous and politically unwise,
however numerous the supporters of that idea may be.
If the claim to independence were recognized in the
case of the Kosovo Albanians, why should ethnic
groups in other countries that just as vocally and
passionately demand independence be treated any
differently?

In this sense, it is true that the "Kosovo case" is
more important than Kosovo itself. The solution of the
Kosovo and Metohija issue will be of enormous
significance not only for the Balkans but for European
security in general. The system of democratic values
embraced by today's world has no way to
accommodate the political aspirations of the Kosovo
Albanians while at the same time rejecting demands for
unilateral secession as a matter of principle. If,
notwithstanding this, Kosovo and Metohija should
become independent, secessionist movements in many
other parts of the world would unfortunately be
encouraged and provided with a strong argument in
favour of their cause.

The negative consequences of the sympathy that
is often shown to the Albanian demand for the
independence of Kosovo are already becoming clear.
Instead of seeing the plight of the Kosovo Serbs as
proof that the political elite of the Kosovo Albanians is
not truly committed to a multi-ethnic society, it is
becoming increasingly common to argue that Serbia
should accept the independence of Kosovo and
Metohija in exchange for an improvement of the
situation of the Serbian community. The Serbs are, in
effect, asked to accept the independence of Kosovo and
Metohija in order to be given recognition of their basic
human rights and freedoms.

I personally find this way of thinking deeply
alien. It is also alien to Serbian democracy, and I firmly
believe that it is inconsistent with the democratic
values of the contemporary world. Serbs in Kosovo and
Metohija, like people elsewhere in the world, have the
right to individual freedom and security, the right to
protect their national and cultural identity, and the right
to exercise freedom of expression, religious freedom,
and freedom of political association, as well as
property rights. These rights of Kosovo and Metohija
Serbs must be recognized. The international
administration in the province, and ultimately the
United Nations, have accepted this as an obligation of
their own, as is perfectly clear from the Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). These rights therefore
are not, and must never be, part of political horse-
trading between Belgrade and Pristina. Freedom, the
right to justice and democracy belong to every man;
they must not be made a political bargaining chip.

The first round of talks on the future status of
Kosovo and Metohija is to begin in less than a week's
time. On the agenda of the meeting in Vienna will be
decentralization, which the political leadership in
Belgrade - as well as the Kosovo and Metohija
Serbs- sees as a realistic means to restore normal
living conditions to the Serb community in the
province and to facilitate the return of internally
displaced persons. The Belgrade decentralization plan
was made public more than a month ago. It contains
minimal institutional requirements for the survival of
the Serbian community in Kosovo and Metohija. The
attitude of the Albanian side to the plan will, I think,
give a good indication of what can be expected in the
next phase of negotiations - the phase that will
address the issue of the future status itself.

In our View, that phase should be carried out
through direct talks between the two sides, with the
assistance of the international community. It should be
devoted to reaching a political compromise between
the two seemingly irreconcilable options. That is not an
easy task, but it should also be a test of the political
maturity and democratic commitment of those who will
find themselves at the negotiating table.

The general outline of Belgrade's political
platform on the future status of Kosovo and Metohija is
well known, and it is unnecessary for me to repeat it
here. But I wish nevertheless to emphasize several
points that are essential to the common future of the
Western Balkans and to its European perspective.

First, the political compromise offered by
Belgrade opens the way for a negotiated settlement of
the last great conflict in the former Yugoslavia, a way
that avoids a unilateral change of internationally
recognized borders and the political instability that
would inevitably follow. Second, the Albanians of
Kosovo and Metohija would enjoy very wide political
autonomy, an autonomy that in most matters of
everyday life would make them totally self-governing
in relation to Belgrade - on condition that they accept
the same autonomy for the Serbian entity in the
province.

Third, the resulting negotiated settlement would
be internationally guaranteed and, after an agreed
period of time - say twenty years - may be subject
to renegotiation. Fourth, the process of the integration
of Serbia and Montenegro, including Kosovo and
Metohija, into the European Union would continue in
accordance with appropriate accession mechanisms.
The specific elements of such a solution - the
particulars that would make it viable and thus establish
a suitable foundation for the rule of law and multi-
ethnic coexistence in Kosovo and Metohija - can only
be found through direct talks between the two sides.

A democratic Serbia is ready to engage in these
talks. We shall do everything we can to make them
succeed, defending our own legitimate interests while
at the same time respecting the legitimate interests of
others. If we all act in this manner - that is,
negotiations - I am convinced that the talks will
succeed and that we will be in a position to open a new
chapter in the long, conflict-ridden history of relations
between Serbs and Albanians. That new chapter would
be an important step toward the political, economic and
cultural integration of the Balkans into Europe - a
goal that contemporary Serbia shares with other
countries in our part of the world.

