Mr. Menagarishvili (Georgia): I am greatly
honoured to have the opportunity to address this
important forum on issues related to the current situation
in Abkhazia, Georgia.

But may I first express our sincere gratitude to the
United Nations, the Security Council and the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, as well as to the
group of countries known as Friends of the Secretary-
General, for their continued support of Georgia's
territorial integrity and for their active participation in the
peace process. Their contributions are truly invaluable.

The problem of Abkhazia is the most complex and
painful issue in Georgia's recent history, and its urgent
settlement is essential to restoring stability in the whole
Caucasian region. Regrettably, the peace process is
stalled, and despite our joint efforts there has been no
tangible progress in the course of negotiations which
could enable us to break the existing impasse.

I believe that the seven long years that have elapsed
since the outbreak of hostilities are more than enough to
properly assess the development of the conflict and to
precisely define the steps which would once and for all
put an end to the dispute.

Council members' profound knowledge of the
present issue makes it unnecessary for me to go into a
detailed account of the history of the conflict in Abkhazia
or to speak in detail of its roots and reasons. I just wish
to remind the Council of the danger that the separatist
trend poses to international peace. Drawing on our own
experience, we can conclude that, if not handled
adequately, these conflicts could well escalate into large-
scale confrontations, involving other countries and
regions. The example of Kosovo clearly indicates the
necessity of taking urgent measures in volatile regions to
prevent confrontation, by peaceful means, lest the use of
force be seen as the only alternative to such action.

We believe that the time has come for the world
community to take necessary measures against those who
for certain reasons seek to kindle internal disputes and
impede negotiated agreements. Thus, it is time properly
to assess the violence in one of the regions of Georgia,
Abkhazia, as a result of which 300,000 refugees and
displaced persons have been desperately waiting for six
years to return to their homes. During and after the war,
about three fourths of the entire population of Abkhazia
fled the region, among them 250,000 Georgians, 50,000

 

Abkhazians and more than 100,000 Armenians, Russians
and Jews.

I wish to stress that we are dealing here with the same
kind of humanitarian catastrophe against which the
international community voiced its firm stance in Kosovo.
We are not inclined to draw parallels. I am just trying to
focus the Council's attention on a fact that I touched upon
during my statement before the Council in January this
year, namely that it is unacceptable to classify conflicts into
"first-rate" and "inferior" ones, and to place the latter
among the so-called frozen conflicts. Unfortunately, the
conflict in Abkhazia has long been assigned to that
category.

We are strongly committed to the peaceful settlement
of the conflict in Abkhazia. At the same time, we are
confident that the demands and assessment of the
destructive policy of the Abkhaz side should become more
articulate and clear, for only this can accelerate and
contribute to the peace process.

Allow me to put forward some of the principles that
we deem it essential for the United Nations to rely upon
while handling the present situation in Abkhazia, Georgia.
The outright obstruction of negotiations by the Abkhaz side
raises question as to how long we can accept a status quo
in the region established as a result of these fruitless
negotiations. The seeming calm in Abkhazia is just an
illusion. As a matter of fact, the situation is sharply
worsening. Political, social and economic conditions are
disastrous. Abkhazia has become a scene of raging crime
and impunity. Despite the efforts of the Georgian
Government and the international community, the plight of
the displaced persons and the returnees remains
unspeakable.

I think the time has come for the Security Council
clearly to point to the unacceptability of this stagnation and
categorically to urge the Abkhaz side to take constructive
action.

I wish particularly to stress the situation of the
refugees and those who have spontaneously returned to the
Gali region. Regrettably, the violence and assaults against
the peaceful population still continue. Ethnic-related
killings, hostage-taking and executions are frequent.
Particularly worrisome are the statements of the Abkhaz
authorities alluding to the possibility of repeating the events
of May 1998. All this is happening in the context of cynical
statements by the Abkhaz authorities regarding the
"unilateral initiative" to start the repatriation of the refugees
and displaced persons. It is necessary to urgently consider
the question of the ethnic cleansing carried out against the
Georgian population and to reflect the findings in relevant
documents of the Security Council.

We have already circulated, as annexes to document
S/ 1999/814, materials relating to an international seminar
held in Tbilisi on 6 and 7 July 1999, which addressed the
topic of "The policy of genocide and ethnic cleansing in
Abkhazia, Georgia: the principal weapon of aggressive
separatism". I am confident that nobody will remain
indifferent to the facts of the violence reflected in these
materials.

On that basis, the Security Council should once
again recall the decisions of the Budapest and Lisbon
summits of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and should stress that obstruction of
the return of the refugees and displaced persons is nothing
but a continuation of the policy of ethnic cleansing. This
provision will trigger adequate action on the part of the
Security Council in line with the spirit and the letter of
the United Nations Charter.

The decision of the Abkhaz authorities to hold so-
called presidential elections in Abkhazia, Georgia, in the
autumn of 1999 is one more attempt to establish the
demographic changes resulting from the conflict. It
constitutes outright disregard of the position of the
international community, which can in no way accept the
holding of elections when more than half of the
population is unable to participate in them and has been
expelled from their homes. I believe that the Security
Council should severely condemn the intention of the
Abkhaz side to hold such "elections", declare it unlawful
and strictly warn the Abkhaz authorities that such actions
may seriously damage the peace process.

Let me assure the Council that finger-pointing is not
our purpose. Our goal is to really move the peace process
out of the deadlock. To this effect, we believe that the
Security Council should assume the leadership. First, we
would welcome the Secretary-General elaborating, with
the participation of the Friends of the Secretary-General
and based on experience throughout the world, the basic
provisions for the political status of Abkhazia within
Georgia, proceeding from the understanding that future
negotiations on a political settlement will draw upon those
provisions.

We have recently circulated the proposals of the
Government of Georgia, entitled "Basic principles for

 

determining the status of Abkhazia within the new State
structure of Georgia", annexed to document S/1999/813,
providing our views on this important matter. We have
come out with similar statements in the past, but the
Abkhaz side has flatly rejected all of them. In pursuing
such a position, the Abkhaz side is clearly disregarding the
resolutions of the Security Council, which has more than
once reiterated its respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Georgia. We strongly believe that future
dialogue on political status must be based on the
suggestions of the United Nations, which would contribute
to the constructive outcome of the negotiation process.

The most complicated issue in the peace process is
clearly the question of the repatriation of the refugees and
displaced persons. Despite our common efforts, this process
too is stalled. The main stumbling block remains the
absence of conditions of security. Past experience has
shown that, within their present mandate, the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) peacekeepers
too are unable to guarantee the safety of the returnees.

We therefore deem it appropriate to work out the
structure of an interim international administration for the
Gali district which would facilitate the repatriation of the
refugees and at the same time carry out the regulation and
management of social and economic issues until a
fundamental political agreement is reached. Such a model
would ensure the participation of the returnees in the
system of governance and would also contribute to public
confidence-building. It is also imperative to grant the
returnees a special status which would provide them with
the immunity necessary to ensure their constitutional rights.
The United Nations should also confirm the right of all the
refugees and displaced persons to the private property they
had possessed before fleeing the region.

Undoubtedly the process of repatriation should be
carried out in accordance with the timetable provided by the
Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, defining the security
conditions for the returnees in the entire territory of
Abkhazia, Georgia.

We believe that the Security Council should
categorically indicate to the Abkhaz side that the return of
the refugees and displaced persons is not just a favour
offered by the Abkhaz authorities, but constitutes the right
of all the refugees and displaced persons in accordance with
the principles of international law. The responsibility for
any violation of this right will lie with the separatist
regime.

We attach particular importance to the security
conditions of the international personnel in the conflict
zone. We believe that only under secure conditions can
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia resume
its activities in full, as set forth in its mandate. On behalf
of the Government of Georgia I wish to express once
again our readiness to do all in our power to ensure the
safety of international personnel, though we believe that
additional measures should be taken to this end.

Georgia has always supported the idea of introducing
a self-protection unit in the conflict zone. The purpose of
this unit would be the protection and promotion of the
United Nations Observer Mission. The tragic events of
May 1998 in the Gali region once again proved the
necessity of deploying such units in the conflict zone.
Unfortunately, instead of its being urgently implemented,
the idea disappeared into oblivion. I strongly believe that
this initiative should be brought up again. We think the
Security Council should require the Secretary-General to
resume consultations on the proposal set out in his 11
May 1998 report regarding the introduction of self-
protection units.

The future of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) peacekeeping operation also still remains a
problem. Georgia believes that the CIS peacekeeping
operation will be fully functional only after the
implementation of the principle decisions adopted at the
recent summits of the CIS. Unfortunately, the Abkhaz
side is blocking the fulfilment of those decisions, leaving
the CIS peacekeepers in the conflict zone with a mandate
that expired some months ago.

We have more than once reiterated our strong
commitment to the Geneva process, which appears to be
the main forum for the comprehensive settlement of the
conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia. I wish to once again thank
the Secretary-General for paving the way for this process
and to express our readiness to work actively within the
framework of the Geneva negotiations. In this respect we
welcome the holding of meetings in Athens and Istanbul,
which were effective in building mutual trust. I would
also like to express our gratitude to the Government of
Ukraine for its willingness to host a similar meeting in
Crimea.

At the same time I am confident that the Geneva
process must be intensified through more active efforts by
its participants. They will yield positive results and
prevent the process from becoming a mere discussion
club.

 

Unfortunately, cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) on resolving the conflict is still lagging.
We believe that the Security Council should stress the
importance of the decision adopted at the December 1998
Oslo ministerial meeting of OSCE, which provides
fundamental provisions with regard to the comprehensive
political settlement of the conflict in Abkhazia and which
constitutes a programme for the promotion of the
cooperation between the United Nations and OSCE.

Today I brought to the Council's attention some of our
views regarding the ways to settle the conflict in Abkhazia,
Georgia, with the assistance of the United Nations, its
Security Council and the Group of Friends of the Secretary-
General. I wish to reiterate our strong resolve to cooperate
further with the Organization and with the international
community in this respect.

We are confident that this is the only right way to
reach lasting peace in my country. But it is also important
that we make more resolute and energetic steps on this road
to peace and stability.

Let me express hope that the Council will take into
account our views and reflect them in its decisions.

