Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express the appreciation of my delegation
for the commitment with which Luxembourg has
served in its presidency of the Security Council, as can
be seen in the fact that you, Mr. President, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, are presiding over today's meeting.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing and for his call. We value the good
offices that the Secretary-General is employing. We
acknowledge the various actors that are collaborating to
reach a diplomatic solution of this crisis. We welcome
the Prime Minister of Ukraine for his participation in
today's meeting.

Argentina has been following with concern the
situation in Ukraine, particularly since we received the
note from the Permanent Representative of that country
on 28 February (S/2014/136). The Council and the
international community have given the issue intense
attention as the situation has become increasingly
complex.

The delegation of Argentina reiterates once again
that it is essential that we stick to the principles that
we undertook to uphold when we became Members of
the United Nations. In particular, we must recall our
commitment not to intervene in matters within the
domestic jurisdiction of States. In light of that, we
understand that the action of any State or international
organization must preserve due respect for Ukraine's
conduct of its internal affairs.

As a Member of the Organization, Argentina
considers it essential to highlight the primary duty
to respect the territorial integrity and political
independence of all States. My country has sustained
that principle throughout its history, even prior to the
very existence of the United Nations, and will continue
to do so unwaveringly.

We have followed with concern the evolution of
Ukraine's domestic situation and listened attentively
to the statements by the various authorities of that
country before this Council. We are concerned about
past and present violence and the possibility that it
may worsen. We regret that, despite repeated appeals
to all parties and key stakeholders to refrain from any
action that could contribute to inflammatory rhetoric
and to aggravating the situation, particularly unilateral
acts on the ground, it has still not been possible to take
substantive steps to establish constructive dialogue and
good faith with the aim of resolving the current crisis.

It is essential that the international community and
the actors in Ukraine themselves facilitate democratic
dialogue and contribute to finding peaceful solutions
to the current situation. In that regard, the Argentine
delegation wishes to emphatically appeal to all
Ukrainian parties to refrain from taking positions
and decisions that could make the situation worse or
establish faits accomplis that hinder dialogue and the
search for the necessary compromises that will make a
comprehensive solution possible.

We hope that the internal evolution in Ukraine
can take democratic paths, as that is the only way
to be inclusive. At the same time, we consider it
essential to observe strict respect for human rights
and humanitarian law. Our own national experience
in that regard teaches us that for any community,
such commitment is essential to ensuring a future of
peace and development with social inclusion and the
full operation of democratic institutions. We hope that
throughout the process due respect will be maintained
for all minorities, whether ethnic, linguistic, cultural
or religious.

International efforts have been directed towards
finding solutions through diplomatic channels. They
have crystalized in high-level meetings in Paris
and Rome, as well as in various proposals to deploy
mediation or observation missions. While those
initiatives have not been fruitful, diplomatic efforts
for a rapprochement must be redoubled to alleviate
tensions on the ground and, at the same time, open
space for dialogue to resolve the crisis. The way out of
the current crisis is political and must be peaceful and
concerted.

The international community must actively
contribute through mechanisms that the Ukrainians
consider necessary or appropriate to achieve internal
peace in the country. It is our hope that the competent
regional organizations can constructively contribute in
that regard. It is incumbent on all of us to refrain from
exacerbating internal dissent and to strictly adhere to
the principle of non-interference by military, economic
or political means in the internal affairs of sovereign
States.

As for the Security Council, we understand that our
primary responsibility is to continue making concrete
proposals that will contribute to a resolution of the
crisis and to appropriate follow-up of the situation with
a View to preserving international peace and security,
and, where appropriate, to adopt the appropriate
measures. Argentina's commitment to those goals can
be depended on.

