Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let
me begin by expressing my heartfelt condolences and
condemnation in connection with the most recent
terrorist attacks that took place during the Muslim
holy month of Ramadan in Kabul, which resulted in
considerable damage to surrounding areas and some
diplomatic facilities, including ours, as well as the
attack on a Shia mosque on 15 June.

As the Secretary-General observed during his
first visit to Kabul, peace remains the foundation for
Afghanistan's sustainable development. At the same
time, according to his report (S/2017/508), the security
situation in Afghanistan remains extremely volatile,
with 6,252 security-related incidents from 1 March to
31 May this year, a 2 per cent increase compared with
last year. This is the highest total ever recorded for this
period of time since 2001.

More than a decade after its invasion, Afghanistan,
the region and the world are no safer. The deteriorating
security situation in Afghanistan has deep roots and
cannot be addressed solely through military buildup.
The Taliban, Da'esh and its offshoots, such as the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant - Khorasan
Province, continue their heinous attacks against
the civilian population. They are reinforcing and
recruiting, and continuing complex attacks such as
those of 17 May and 31 May attacks, in Jalalabad and
Kabul. The proliferation of terrorist groups on Afghan
territory necessitates concerted international efforts on
counter-terrorism. We need to deal with this increasing
threat in a very comprehensive and resolute manner.
The sustained support of the international community
for the Afghan National Unity Government is more
than ever necessary to help the Government in its fight
against terrorism and extremism and those who have
created and continue to support them.

Our support for the Afghan National Unity
Government is unswerving. We welcome any
achievement on the path to an Afghan-owned and
Afghan-led peace process leading to lasting and
comprehensive peace in the country and the region.
The progress achieved in the implementation of the
peace agreement between the Government and Hizb-i
Islami is an indication of the Government's will to
establish peace.

Iran is indeed very eager to see a peaceful and
prosperous Afghanistan as its neighbour, as security
in Afghanistan directly and indirectly affects security
on our borders and in the region. It was in this context
that Iran welcomed and participated in the conference
hosted by the Russian Federation on 14 April in
Moscow, as well as the Kabul process meeting hosted
by the Afghan Government on 6 June.

The full text of my statement, dealing with regional
economic cooperation, combating narcotic drugs and
the problem of refugees, will be distributed.

Finally, we support the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) as well as United
Nations agencies in their efforts to provide development
and reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through
a genuine commitment by the United Nations to a
sustained partnership with that country. We must utilize
the UNAMA mandate and its good offices to strengthen
national institutions and capacities in priority areas, as
requested by the Government.

