Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming our briefers this morning and I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mladenov for
his second report on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) and for all his tireless work.

As each briefer made clear, the Middle East
continues to face an unrelenting human tragedy of
multiple conflicts and rising tensions. For many in
the region, it is a tragedy that has gone on for over
half a century. We recognize that the anniversary of
the Six-Day War holds great significance for all sides
of the Arab-Israeli conflict. For Israelis, it marks
the anniversary of a war from which Israel emerged
victorious against all the odds. For Palestinians, it
marks an enduring tragedy of 50 years of occupation,
50 years without self-determination.

Let us be clear: halfa century of Israeli occupation
in the West Bank and Gaza is a tragedy for all sides - a
tragedy for Palestinians, who yearn for independence,
and a tragedy for Israelis, who yearn for peace and
security. It is a tragedy that has been exploited, with
terrorist groups such as Hamas and Hizbullah cynically
manipulating the narrative of occupation for their
own ends.

So many decades of violence, loss, anger and
hate only prove that conflicts cannot be managed
or contained in perpetuity. This year we must move
towards peace, with the support of the region and
the international community, rather than towards an
uncertain and dangerous future. Support for a two-
State solution is the only way to ensure ajust and lasting
resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. If we are
to make that a reality, it is incumbent upon both sides
to refrain from any steps that damage the prospects of
a two-State solution.

That means the people of Israel must live free from
the scourge of terrorism and anti-Semitic incitement,
which gravely undermine the prospects for a two-State
solution. We condemn the horrific murder of Hadas
Malka, a 23-year-old Israeli policewoman last Friday.
We condemn the recent discovery of part of a tunnel
passing under two United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East schools
in Gaza. We call on Hamas to renounce Violence and
dismantle its tunnel network. They cannot be allowed
to pose a threat to Israel's security.

If the two-State solution is to become a reality,
it also must mean Israel refraining from further
settlement expansion. Only last week, the United
Kingdom's Foreign Secretary condemned Israel's
latest announcement to build over 3,000 settlement
units throughout the West Bank. The number of units
planned for construction this year is now at its highest
in a quarter of a century. Those moves undermine the
physical viability of two States for two peoples.

Despite those challenges, the United Kingdom's
long-standing position on the Middle East peace
process remains clear and unchanged. We support a
negotiated settlement leading to a safe and secure Israel
living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian
State based on 1967 borders - with agreed land swaps,
with Jerusalem as the shared capital of both States and
a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement for refugees.

But that vision has proved elusive for far too long.
The changing regional context in converging Arab and
Israeli interests presents a unique opening to develop
Arab-Israeli relations and create the conditions for
serious Israeli-Palestinian talks to resume. With that in
mind, we welcome the reaffirmation of the Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States of the Arab Peace
Initiative here today. We must support the leadership
and engagement that President Trump and his
Administration have demonstrated in reinvigorating
the Middle East peace process.

We call on the region, Israelis and Palestinians to
seize the opportunity that this presents and turn 2017
not just into another anniversary of occupation but a
new anniversary of peace. We cannot afford to fail.
As Special Coordinator Mladenov made clear, there
is an urgent need to address the dire and deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Gaza with over 65,000 people
currently displaced.
The ongoingenergycrisis isparticularly concerning.
Energy supplying Gaza will soon fall to just three
hours per day. That is having a serious humanitarian
impact, disrupting basic services, including water
treatment and essential medical operations. This latest
crisis underlines the need for de-escalation, dialogue
and a durable agreement between Palestinian actors
that results in the Palestinian Authority's full control
over the Gaza Strip.

Before I conclude, let me turn briefly to the
situation in Lebanon. We welcome the new electoral law,
ratified by the Lebanese Parliament on 16 June. It is an
important milestone towards continued governance and
stability, which paves the way for new elections. But
we must not forget the importance of ensuring stability
flowing across the whole of Lebanon. In that regard, we
are concerned about the increase in Hizbullah rhetoric
along Lebanon's southern border and we call on both
sides to abide by resolutions 1701 (2006) and 1559
(2004). Renewed conflict is in neither side's interest. We
call on all actors to take steps to de-escalate tensions.

