Mr. J agne (Gambia): Peace is a priceless commodity.
For a region of the world that has hardly known any
meaningful peace for so long, any action that is likely to
raise questions, no matter how good the intentions might
be, should be avoided at all costs in the interest of peace.
This is why my delegation cannot but express concern over
the recent developments aimed at extending the municipal
boundaries of the Holy City of Jerusalem, Al-Quds Al-
Sharif. In our view, the present stage of the peace process,
which is in a state of near-paralysis, has already given rise
to feelings of frustration and fatigue. In this context, it
would be ill-advised to do anything that would complicate
matters unnecessarily and increase tension in an already
volatile situation. We do not wish to see anything that
could derail the peace process.

Besides, the Holy City of Jerusalem, we must
remember, is home to all the three revealed religions -
Judaism, Christianity and Islam - and therefore it should
be transformed not into a theatre of conflict, but into a
terrain for cooperation. Furthermore, we would have
thought that the question of Jerusalem was scheduled for
discussion at the permanent status/final status negotiations,
in which case conventional wisdom dictates restraint and
respite until then, in accordance with the Oslo accords.

 

In these difficult times, we should all be looking for
practical ways to reactivate the peace process, as there
appears to be no credible alternative to the Oslo accords.
The latter constitute a reasonable modus vivendi for
Israelis and Palestinians, in particular, because both sides
need to live in peace alongside each other. Sacrifices and
concessions had to be made to get to where we are today,
although we still have a long way to go. That was why it
was called the "peace of the brave".

The situation having come this far, my delegation
believes that there should be no turning back. No stone
should be left unturned in the quest for a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East. That
is why we support the peace process. It cannot be
gainsaid that it has been deadlocked for quite sometime
now, but my delegation has faith in the ability of the
United States, in its indefatigable efforts as the principal
peace-broker, to give fresh impetus to the process - with
the support, of course, of the parties concerned.

Let us give peace a chance.

