Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand): Three months ago,
we welcomed the unanimous adoption of Security
Council resolution 1441 (2002) and Iraq's agreement to
abide by its international obligations on the basis of
that and other relevant Council resolutions. We
witnessed with great anticipation the resumption of
inspections in Iraq. On 27 January this year, we were
pleased to hear the reports given by Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei on the progress of the inspections. We noted
that their reports underlined the need for more time and
information so that the inspectors might accomplish
their tasks.

Subsequently, on 5 February, the Council
benefited from the presentation by the United States
Secretary of State, which helped the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) to undertake more focused inspections
in fulfilment of their mandates. And, just last Friday,
we received yet another report from the two chief
inspectors on the latest progress of inspections in Iraq,
where cooperation had been provided in certain areas,
but where immediate, active and unconditional
cooperation still needed to be forthcoming. In this
connection, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to UNMOVIC and IAEA for their difficult
tasks.

The mechanisms put in place by resolution 1441
(2002) and the progress made to date therefore clearly
serve to enhance the sanctity and credibility of the
multilateral framework and particularly the United
Nations system. Thailand thus applauds all the efforts
undertaken by all relevant parties to employ effectively
the United Nations framework in order to resolve in a
peaceful manner this threat to international peace and
security. We continue to remain hopeful that the
centrality of the United Nations in the search for a
peaceful resolution on this issue will continue as events
unfold.
Resolution 1441 (2002) provides the framework
for the peaceful disarmament of Iraq. We therefore
renew our plea to Iraq to immediately and
unconditionally provide complete and proactive
cooperation to UNMOVIC and IAEA. Iraq must
demonstrate to the world that it is faithfully and
completely fulfilling its international obligations under
resolution 1441 (2002) and other relevant Council
resolutions.

Military conflict will have consequences far
beyond the region. The inevitable disruptions to the
global economy will adversely affect the efforts of
many countries to recover from the financial crises and
recession, but of equal importance is the impact of the
military conflict on the people of Iraq. The Secretary-
General's recent initiative to promote discussion with
the Security Council on contingency planning to
provide humanitarian assistance to the people of Iraq in
the event of armed conflict correctly brings into focus
the devastating humanitarian and economic
consequences of war. In any scenario, innocent people
in Iraq, particularly women and children, will be
among the first to suffer following an outbreak of
armed conflict. It is therefore incumbent upon Iraq to
be completely forthcoming with regard to immediate,
active and unconditional cooperation with the United
Nations inspectors in order to avoid even greater
suffering and hardship for the Iraqi people.

The steps that the Security Council should decide
to take will have an important bearing on the
international community's perception of the United
Nations and its role in maintaining international peace
and security. In this regard, we must bear in mind that
the General Assembly has just recently resumed its
consideration of a draft resolution on the prevention of
armed conflict. As a Member of the United Nations,
Thailand will support whatever course of action the
Security Council decides to take on this issue. This is
our obligation under the United Nations Charter, but
we hope that, in deliberating its future course of action,
the Security Council will take into account the interests
and concerns expressed by the wider United Nations
membership and the calls to take the road of peace by
pressing forward on peaceful disarmament and
resolving all outstanding issues and all threats to
international peace and security in a peaceful manner.

