Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Jordan for
convening this meeting and the Assistant Secretary-
General for his briefing on the situation in Israel and
Palestine. In the open debate to take place here next
week, we will address at length the Israeli-Palestinian
issue. Today we want to highlight our extreme alarm at
the escalating situation and loss of civilian life in Israel
and in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
the actions by extremists at religious sites in Jerusalem.

We believe that the current state of affairs is due
to the Palestinian people's hopelessness and despair
for the historic injustice imposed upon them, as well
as to the Israeli Government and settlers' harsh and
unacceptable actions and the international community's
failure to make any meaningful contribution to a
peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

The current violence is deplorable. We urge
all involved to avoid such actions, which merely
serve the purposes of extremist elements on both
sides. At yesterday's press conference, Israeli Prime
Minister Netyanahu stated his readiness to engage in
negotiations without preconditions. It is our hope that
such negotiations will take place and that their basis
will be just and acceptable to the Palestinian leadership.

Recent developments in the Middle East are a cause
for great concern. If the surge in violence between
Israelis and Palestinians gets worse, the ramifications
could be disastrous for the whole region. We strongly
appeal to both sides to disown the extremist elements
within their ranks and to reinforce political dialogue.
At this time, it is especially important for religious and
community leaders to increase their interaction with a
view to promoting peace and reconciliation. The main
responsibility of the Security Council should be to set a
course to revive the peace process, and strive to adopt
a resolution that sets parameters for negotiations and a
framework for a final status agreement. It is imperative
that we reinvigorate the peace process in order to end
the occupation and achieve a just and lasting solution
on the basis of two States living side by side in peace
and security, a quest, which, unfortunately, with the
accomplished facts on the ground and the expanding
settlements, seems increasingly to be mere rhetoric.

Finally, we are ready to consider the draft
statement that France will submit to the Council, in the
expectation that it will have some effect on the situation
on the ground.

