After the most brutal political and military event of the twentieth century, the political leaders of a group of countries, full of determination and still shaken by the terrible effects of a war filled with totalitarian and anti-Semitic ideologies, decided to establish an organization in order to unite in fellowship to fight for peace and security in the world. A number of States soon joined the Organization, which today has a total of 193 members out of the 194 nations recognized as independent States. In other words, almost all the political authorities of the world converge in that association of nations. Those authorities, executed through their leaders, can generate well-being in humankind, but can also bring about its destruction. Political powers therefore cannot be exercised in an authoritarian and unlimited way. They are limited by the rule of law, where laws govern and regulate their exercise, based on principles such as legality, legitimacy, democracy, equality and due process. The Charter of the United Nations states that one of the objectives of the Organization is "to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace". We have previously stated before the Council that there can be no peace where there is no justice. That means that for there to be peace, the principles of the rule of law and international norms must be respected and implemented fairly. Therefore, the spirit of the drafters of the Charter of the United Nations was clearly that the International Court of Justice should have a leading role alongside the Security Council in the maintenance of peace. However, the relationship between the two organs has remained largely inactive and minimal over the years. On several occasions, the Dominican Republic has highlighted and promoted the importance and necessity of strengthening conflict prevention. We therefore believe that the Security Council should increase opportunities for cooperation with the Court in that area as a peaceful mechanism for the settlement of disputes. Emperor Justinian is quoted as having said: "Justice is the constant and perpetual will to render each his due." The International Court of Justice is necessary and instrumental in strengthening the rule of law. It is therefore indispensable to fulfilling the mandate of maintaining peace. I am pleased to note that most of the border disputes that arose in Latin America in recent decades were submitted to the jurisdiction of the Court. History has well told us that many of the armed conflicts that took place in the past had their origin in territorial disputes. Let us take such cases as good examples, where the parties found in the Court a peaceful, albeit adversarial, setting for the settlement of disputes. It is pleasing to think of the wars that this has prevented. We urge the members of the Council to enhance the jurisdiction of the Court and to explore new forms of cooperation, particularly in the areas of peacekeeping operations and transitional justice. Finally, the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to peace and expresses its support for the International Court of Justice. We urge the international community to advocate for a present and a future where peaceful coexistence is the rule and war the exception.
