Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
welcome today all the Ministers to the Council.
Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab had wanted to make
the intervention on behalf of the United Kingdom
today, but he had to return to London for urgent
parliamentary business.

The United Kingdom is a staunch supporter of
the African Union (AU) vision for silencing the guns
in Africa, and as we have heard today, real progress is
already under way towards achieving that noble goal,
driven primarily by African leaders, civil society and
communities. It is important that we see an integrated
United Nations approach across its three pillars in
support of that goal.

The African Union and the African regional
economic communities are indispensable partners
in maintaining peace and security on the African
continent. The United Kingdom therefore applauds
the joint efforts of the African Union and the United
Nations in fostering dialogue and mediating peace
negotiations across Africa. Those efforts, together with
those of subregional organizations, have borne real
fruit in 2019.

They have supported the transition to the civilian-
led Government in the Sudan, and we were glad that all
members of the Security Council were eventually able
to support the African Union's position in the Sudan
and, of course, the recent Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
We also hope that all members of the Council will lend
their full support to the implementation of the peace
agreement in the Central African Republic and refrain
from any destabilizing bilateral activity there.

I hope that Chairperson Mahamat and Secretary-
General Guterres will continue to exert their good
offices in the region in the coming months. That is Vital
to helping resolve and prevent conflict, for example,
by encouraging progress on the implementation of
the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and supporting
the recently announced national dialogue process in
Cameroon. Cooperation and coordination on a range
of peace and security issues is a vital element of the
United Kingdom-AU strategic partnership. In Somalia
the United Kingdom has deployed military personnel
through the United Nations to support the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), in addition to its
extensive bilateral support to the Somali security forces.

We recognize the African Union's vital role in
peace enforcement activity. That is why we support,
in principle, access to United Nations-assessed
contributions for future AU-led African peace support
operations on a case-by-case basis and subject to
certain key conditions. In that context, I hope that all
Member States, especially those which most support
this proposal, will back posts designed to support the
necessary standards of compliance in AMISOM. in the
Fifth Committee this year.

The United Kingdom's support for Africa's peace
and stability is perhaps most obvious in its defence
and security partnerships. Our armed forces train
thousands of their African counterparts through long-
term training programmes. Just this summer, United
Kingdom forces provided military training to the latest
Malawian battalion about to deploy to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and, as our own deployment to
South Sudan ends in 2020, we will begin contributing
British troops to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.

The United Kingdom's experts are also working
across the continent to help build African capacity to
tackle a range of security threats. To name just a few
examples, those include terrorism in Somalia, Nigeria
and Kenya, the illegal trade in drugs in Tanzania and
wildlife trafficking in Malawi and Zambia. We are also
supporting African security forces to prevent sexual
Violence in conflict and to implement the broader
women and peace and security agenda.

There can be no meaningful global debate on
those topics that does not include the voices of African
women and girls, and they will be central to the global
conference that we will host November in London on
preventing sexual Violence in conflict. Women and
girls also have a wider role to play in preventing and
resolving conflicts and building sustainable peace. We
know that research demonstrates that peace processes
that are inclusive of women are 35 per cent more likely
to last for a period of 15 years or longer. Women are
at the heart of many of the initiatives that we support
to find political solutions to conflict in Africa, such
as the African Union's FemWise network and the
Commonwealth Network of Women Mediators.

However, we must look beyond the current crises.
The African Union's own Agenda 2063 recognizes
that stability, security, good governance and inclusive
economic development are inextricably intertwined.
Africa's long-term stability and success will depend,
in part, on whether the 20 million young Africans who
join the job market each year see meaningful prospects
for filling their enormous potential. They will struggle
to do so wherever conflict, corruption or the impacts
of climate change constrain human capital, investment
and entrepreneurship.

As one of the biggest development donors in Africa,
we will continue to focus on working with African
partners on issues that will improve the lives of African
citizens. That includes job creation, quality education,
health care and access to family planning and climate
resilience. We will also provide support to mobilize the
high-quality private investment that the region needs,
including through a major United Kingdom-Africa
investment summit to be held in London in early 2020.

The United Kingdom will remain committed to a
holistic approach to supporting peace and security in
Africa, while recognizing the mutually reinforcing
links among security, prosperity and good governance.
We will also continue to work with and through
partnerships across the region, while acknowledging
that it is Africans themselves who shape their
continent's future.

