Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, it will come as no surprise to you, Mr.
President, that I associate myself with the statement
that you will be making on behalf of the European
Union.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2005/740) and Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland for his presentation.

Following your wise recommendation, Sir, I shall
not read out the full text that we have prepared; the
written version will be circulated to delegations. I shall
limit myself to summarizing a few points.

First of all, this annual meeting on the protection
of the world's civilian populations has become very
important for the work of the Security Council. We
owe that largely to Jan Egeland. I believe that every
year we become a bit more aware that if we want a
strategic vision of global affairs, we need to have
several cards at our disposal. We need a card on the
balance of power; we need a card on crises; we
undoubtedly need a card on non-proliferation and one
on energy. But we also need - and this has been Jan
Egeland's contribution for several years - a card on
geopolitics and attacks on people's rights.

Secondly, our most recent draft resolutions on
this issue date back to 1999 and 2000. I believe it is
useful, now that we have experience, to take account of
the shortcomings that we see. We therefore fully
support the British presidency in its intention to submit
a new draft resolution to the Council. What should be
included in such a draft resolution? We will have many
ideas to contribute during the discussions, but right
now I should like to mention three points.

My first point concerns the responsibility to
protect. Because that is something that has emerged
since our 2000 resolution - namely, at the September
summit - I have noted some misunderstandings about
it in certain statements by previous speakers. I believe
that what the British presidency proposes is not a
reopening of the debate on that subject; we all agree
that the concept will be refined, as agreed at the
summit, within the framework of the General
Assembly.

That said, the Security Council is not exempted
from taking into account the major political and
philosophical progress represented at the meeting of
heads of State or Government: a basic agreement on a
balanced vision of what is now called the responsibility
to protect. We believe that it would not be unusual for
the Security Council to refer to that notion, because it
commanded a consensus among our heads of State or
Government. Of course it is a notion that should guide
the work of the Council, particularly in its role in the
protection of populations.

Secondly, a very important development since
2000 has been the establishment of the International
Criminal Court. That is particularly important because
the Council utilized one of its prerogatives recognized
in the Rome Statute to transfer the situation in Darfur
to the Court's jurisdiction. In my View, that means that,
now that that has been done - and it was a unanimous
decision by the members of the Security Council - all
of us, regardless of our position on the Rome Statute,
have an obligation to cooperate with the Court so that
it can carry out its role with regard to the matter of
Darfur.

I also believe, more generally speaking, that the
precedent represented by the transfer of Darfur to the
International Criminal Court is perfectly in keeping
with the recommendations made by the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change. That is to
say, the International Criminal Court is among the
instruments at the disposal of the Security Council to
manage certain crises. Here again, it is not necessary to
be a party to the Court to recognize its usefulness,
particularly when it is activated by the Council under
certain circumstances.

Thirdly, the protection of civilians requires that
we devote special attention to the most vulnerable in
armed conflicts - for example, women and children.
As we all know, my delegation feels a special
responsibility with regard to the issue of children in
armed conflict. The Security Council has taken
decisions concerning that subject, in particular, in
establishing a monitoring mechanism. In the coming
months, it is important that that follow-up and
assessment mechanism begin to function. We believe
that that should be one of the tasks to which the
Council should be the most attentive and most vigilant.

Those are the few points that I wanted to make by
way of summary. I would refer delegations to our
written contribution for the remaining points.

