Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Angelo,
for his briefing on the work of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT). We welcome the Permanent
Representatives of the Central African Republic and
Chad participating in today's meeting.

We are concerned about the situation in the
Central African Republic and Chad. We welcome the
progress made in the peace process in the Central
African Republic. We note that the Central African
Liberation Movement for Justice has committed to
laying down its arms and entering into a dialogue with
the Government. We appreciate the unremitting efforts
of the Government and other participants. We hope that
the country's presidential elections can be conducted
smoothly and according to plan, and call on the
international community to provide the necessary
material and technical assistance.

We support the strengthening of MINURCAT, in
coordination with the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in the Central African Republic, and
hope that it will help to provide more substantive
assistance to the Government of the Central African
Republic in maintaining peace and stability and
promoting economic and social development.

We are following the situation in Chad closely.
We appreciate the consensus reached between the
Chadian Government and the opposition parties on the
legislative framework for the elections and the
National Independent Electoral Commission. We
encourage both parties to maintain their dialogue and
to reach a comprehensive political reconciliation. We
note with pleasure that, on 26 July the three
rebel groups - the Union des forces pour la
democratie et le developpement, the Mouvement
national pour le renouveau and the Front pour le salut
de la re'publique - signed a peace agreement with the
Government of Chad, and we appreciate the good
offices of Libya in this regard. We condemn the Union
des forces de la resistance (UFR) for its attacks in early
May against eastern Chad, and urge UFR to settle its
disputes through political means and negotiation.

China is deeply concerned about relations
between Chad and the Sudan. We hope that both sides
can maintain restraint and prevent the situation from
deteriorating further. We hope that both sides can
address their concerns and problems through dialogue.
The international community, for its part, should make
greater efforts to promote peace and negotiation. Not
long ago, the Chinese Government's Special
Representative for Africa, Ambassador Liu Guijin,
visited both Chad and the Sudan in an effort to help
improve relations between them. We will continue to
work with the international community in order to help
ease the situation in the region.

China is satisfied with the progress in the
deployment of MINURCAT. We appreciate its efforts
to help the Government of Chad set up the
Detachement inte'gre' de securite, which we believe will
help improve the security situation and environment in
the refugee camps in eastern Chad. We hope that
MINURCAT will pursue these efforts and cooperate
closely with the host countries in order to complete its
planned deployment as soon as possible.

