Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to thank Ms. Samar, Mr. Yamamoto
and our colleague Ambassador Saikal for their
respective statements.

I must first of all refer to the brutal terrorist attack
committed on Wednesday in Kabul against a medical
facility and reiterate on this occasion our condolences
to the people and Government of Afghanistan.
Uruguay categorically condemns this and all terrorist
attacks. We are troubled by the increasing frequency
of indiscriminate attacks against medical facilities. We
call for full compliance with resolution 2286 (2016) on
the protection of the sick and wounded, and of medical
personnel and facilities. Moreover, we recall that attacks
on hospitals and medical personnel are a violation of
international humanitarian law and may constitute war
crimes. We insist that those crimes not go unpunished
and that the perpetrators be brought to account.

Uruguay supports the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
endorses the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to extend its mandate by a further year. My delegation is
troubled by the deteriorating security conditions in the
country, which have been described by the Secretary-
General as the worst since the deployment of UNAMA.
In 2016, we saw the highest number of victims in a
single year since 2009. We are also troubled by the lack
of progress made toward peace between the Afghan
Government and the Taliban, a group that has increased
its activities, as well as its influence over part of the
Afghan territory.

The United Nations and the international community
must maintain their support for Afghanistan, given
the long road that still lies ahead in restoring and
consolidating lasting peace and in rebuilding the
country. The strengthening of democratic institutions
is a priority in order to achieve stability. I therefore
wish to highlight the progress made in the electoral
process, the preparation of next year's parliamentary
elections and the Government's efforts in the fight
against corruption.

While the strategy and action plan on the elimination
of violence against women for the period 2016-2020,
adopted by the Government, is a positive step, we are
concerned that ajoint commission comprising members
of the lower and upper houses of the National Assembly
approved a revised text of the law on the elimination
of harassment against women and children. The plan
awaits implementation and presidential approval.

The situation of human rights in Afghanistan
has deterioated over the past year. As ever, girls and
children suffer disproportionate violence in conflicts.
During the September 2016 debate on Afghanistan
(see S/PV.7771), my delegation made a reference to
the practice of child marriage and to the need to adopt
new legislation to prevent such practices. We welcome
the recent news that this practice has finally been
criminalized in Afghan legislation. What will be much
harder is to enforce the law and, most important of
all, to make it a cultural blueprint for condemning the
practice as aberrant.

Uruguay encourages the Government of Afghanistan
to pursue reconciliation, acting with leadership to
overcome short-, medium- and long-term challenges
and making the reforms necessary for the reconstruction
of the country in a climate of peace, security and
economic development.

In conclusion, we reiterate our thanks to all
United Nations personnel and all those involved in
the provision of humanitarian aid in the country, who
continue to work despite extremely difficult conditions
and being subject to frequent attacks.

