Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The situation today makes it vital for us to
exchange opinions and assessments of the contemporary
threats posed by the activities of terrorist groups.
We would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov, of the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism, and Ambassador Umarov, Chair of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, for their briefings. We also thank Ms. Coninsx,
the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, and congratulate her
on her maiden briefing to the Security Council.

An unprecedented number of radicals high
on terrorist ideology, including many residents of
extremely affluent States, have set out for the areas of
conflict in Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan, Libya and other
parts of the world. They return home or relocate to
other countries in search of so-called safe havens on
the assumption that they will not be held accountable.
In that regard, it is essential that States fulfil their
obligations with regard to countering foreign terrorist
fighters strictly and rigorously. Three years ago, in
addition to its already extensive counter-terrorism
toolkit, the Council unanimously adopted resolution
2178 (2014) on this specific issue. The decision had
wide support from the States Members of the United
Nations. Nonetheless, when it came to implementing
it, it turned out that many States do not get around to
improving their counter-terrorism systems until there
is a flare-up on their own territory. A good example of
that has been the commitment to criminalizing various
aspects of foreign terrorist fighter activities laid out in
paragraph 6 of resolution 2178 (2014).

As the results of the Counter-Terrorism Committee's
monitoring have shown, in a number of cases neither
the process of formulating legal bans on travelling
abroad with the intention of committing an act of terror,
or on giving any kind of assistance to foreign terrorist
fighters, has even begun. Furthermore, terrorist crimes
as such have not actually been outlawed everywhere.
It would be naive to think that terrorists leaving Syria
and Iraq en masse have not noticed such loopholes.
There are also gaps in the area of international counter-
terrorism cooperation. The legal assistance and
extradition mechanisms effectively almost cease to
function, frequently becoming hostages to bureaucracy,
not to mention to attempts to politicize them. There are
also serious difficulties linked to tracking terrorists'
movements across borders, in many cases compounded
by the fact that the borders themselves are porous.

Besides that, the scope of the information about
foreign terrorist fighters that States exchange,
bilaterally and multilaterally, does not measure up to
that of the current threat. That is not because the right
mechanisms do not exist. INTERPOL has advanced
systems. The International Counter-Terrorism Database,
founded in Russia, is gaining traction and provides
the greatest possible flexibility for posting and using
information. In such circumstances, it is becoming
increasingly obvious that the effectiveness of efforts in
this area depends first and foremost on whether there is
a genuine desire to cooperate.

We must maintain a comprehensive approach
to dealing with the issue of foreign terrorist fighters
returning from conflict zones. It is crucial to ensure
that they are held criminally responsible. The
principles whereby punishment will be assured and also
commensurate with the crime should be the foundation
of these efforts. We can and should use the reintegration
and rehabilitation of terrorists as tools in this, but
within the framework of the penal system. In our view,
it is pointless to see rehabilitation programmes as some
kind of alternative to criminal prosecution.

As for the practice of qualifying terrorists by
categorizing them as violent extremists, that could
lead to the possibility of terrorists generally, and
foreign terrorist fighters in particular, avoiding
criminal responsibility, among other things, and could
ultimately increase the terrorist threat. Right now, it is
also especially important to ensure that foreign terrorist
fighters come under the remit of the counter-terrorism
sanctions regime for the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and Al-Qaida. That raises questions about some
countries' reluctance to agree to Russia's request to
the Sanctions Committee for listing two individuals
who have participated in those terrorist organizations'
activities. That kind of apparently politicized approach
undermines the Committee's effectiveness.

The fight against the terrorists who flocked to the
conflict zones in the Middle East and North Africa
is coming to an end, and it is the Russian aerospace
forces' successful operation in Syria that has been the
key contribution to that effort. Nonetheless, we cannot
fight terrorism by military means alone. My country has
initiated more than 2,000 criminal proceedings related to
the issue of foreign terrorist fighters and has succeeded
in identifying 112 agents who purposely recruited new
members for terrorist organizations. We are taking
every possible step to ensure that the requirements of
resolution 2138 (2014) are fully implemented.
At the same time, the challenges of today mean that
we have to continually improve our anti-terrorism and
anti-extremism legislation. Recent updates of Russia's
anti-terrorism laws have touched on issues related to
disseminating extremist materials and inciting people
to terrorism through the Internet, and committing
crimes in situations of armed conflict. In formulating
such changes to the law we analysed the most up-to-
date world practices.

One ofour priorities is combating terrorist ideology,
and we are actively involved in producing anti-terrorist
propaganda. We distributed more than 79,000 messages
with counter-terrorism content in Russia in 2016 alone
and blocked more than 37,000 Internet sources that
contained terrorist or extremist materials. We believe
that it is essential to develop active cooperation in this
area based on the principle of the State and the private
sector's mutual responsibility.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize
that, given our experience in counter-terrorism,
our delegation stands ready to continue working
substantively to improve the Security Council's counter-
terrorism tools and the mechanisms for monitoring
their implementation.

