Ms. Coleman (United States ofAmerica): I wish at
the outset to thank our briefers.

As we approach the constitutionally mandated
end of President Kabila's term, on December 19, the
United States is increasingly concerned about the risk
of widespread violence and instability. We thank the
African Union for facilitating the national dialogue
that led to the October 18 accord, which was a good
start but, unfortunately, lacked the buy-in of major
opposition parties, lacked adequate guarantees to
ensure a transfer of power and included in unnecessary
delay in the timeline for presidential elections, a delay
until April 2018.

The ongoing mediation efforts by the Congolese
National Conference of Bishops (CENCO) are an
important step towards improving the agreement and
make it more inclusive. CENCO's efforts represent
the best hope for reaching a consensus agreement
among key stakeholders that ensures timely elections
and a peaceful transition of power in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The United States is not alone in its support for
CENCO's efforts or in our concern for the increasing
risk of instability and violence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. During the Security Council's
visit to Kinshasa, Council members agreed that the
only way ahead was on a clear consensual path that
could forestall violence and allow for elections and
a transition of power. I would particularly like to
thank France and Angola for their leadership during
the Security Council trip to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Angola. The type of direct, united
messaging that we heard during that visit was exactly
what was needed.

The Security Council knows what is ahead if a
consensual way forward is not found. The violence and
loss of life that we have repeatedly seen in Kinshasa
surrounding previous electoral periods and the deadly
events of September 19 and 20 remind us ofthe need for
consensus on holding presidential elections in 2017 and
guaranteeing the country's first democratic transition
of power. To ensure a smooth, peaceful transition, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must take several steps.

First, the Democratic Republic of the Congo needs
to protect political space and respect for human rights,
including the rights to peaceful assembly and freedom
of expression. When the Government cuts off legitimate
means of expression, it forces individuals to use more
confrontational methods to have their voices heard.

Secondly, it is now time for President Kabila to
make a clear, public statement that he will not seek a
third term.

Thirdly, the Democratic Republic of Congo also
needs increased electoral safeguards to ensure free
and fair elections, such as changes in the leadership
of the Independent National Electoral Commission,
guarantees for a transfer of power and an electoral
timeline that holds presidential elections in 2017. On the
technical side of the electoral process, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has known
since 2011 the timing for elections and the need to revise
the voter rolls. We are highly sceptical of the recent
conclusion by the Commission that an election cannot
be held until December 2018. A range of technical
experts have indicated that presidential elections could
take place in 2017. The Government's failure to move
forward with undertaking and completing this task
is not a technical problem. It is a problem of political
will. We support CENCO's efforts to revisit the
electoral calendar.

The Security Council preaches the mantra of
preventive diplomacy, but to put these words into
practice, the Council must maintain its pressure on the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo stakeholders to come
to a consensual agreement on the way forward. We must
also continue to press for respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and we must continue to press
for a clear timeline and a path forward that ensure that
elections proceed and that President Kabila steps down.

