Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would first like to
join others in expressing our appreciation to Joint
Special Representative Jeremiah Mamabolo and
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for their
comprehensive briefings.

We note recent incidents of violence in Darfur,
including clashes in Kalma camp. Yet we have all said
time and again that the overall security situation in
Darfur remains relatively stable. My delegation draws
reassurance from a significant decline in intercommunal
conflicts, made possible by the active engagement of
State and local authorities supported by the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). The gradual return of internally displaced
persons, as attested to in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/20l9/305), is particularly encouraging. My
delegation cannot overstate the importance of their safe,
voluntary and dignified return. We concur with the
observations that those trends showcase the stabilizing
impact of UNAMID. Indeed, continued improvement in
the security situation has enabled a phased withdrawal
of UNAMID and the implementation of the plan for
its eventual exit in 2020, in line with resolution 2429
(2018). Against that backdrop, my delegation would like
to make three important points.

First, it is imperative to promote further progress in
the Darfur peace process. We regret that no meaningful
progress has been made over the past few months. It is
deeply troubling that clashes involving certain groups
that repeatedly rejected the peace process increased
during the reporting period, and Darfuri armed groups
continue to maintain their destabilizing presence outside
the Sudan. My delegation stands by its conviction that a
military solution is not an option in Darfur. All parties
should end hostilities and direct their energy to the
negotiating table rather than the battlefront. The plight
of the civilian population should be reason enough
to revitalize the process. We therefore welcome the
declaration of a nationwide ceasefire and the invitation
extended to all armed groups to participate in the peace
process and contribute to rebuilding the country.

Secondly, the sustained engagement of the
international community based on mutual respect
and national ownership is key to preventing a relapse
into conflict. UNAMID will continue to play an
instrumental role in protecting civilians as well as
supporting capacity-building with respect to the rule of
law and human rights. As we proceed with UNAMID's
withdrawal, it is important to enable the Sudan to bear
the primary responsibility for security in Darfur.

Also critical to preventing a relapse into conflict
is the promotion of socioeconomic development.
That would require sustainable financing support
for reconstruction and peacebuilding efforts. With
1.9 million people still displaced across the country and
1.2 million refugees from the region residing within its
borders, humanitarian assistance becomes a daunting
but essential task.

Indonesia is very concerned that the situation in the
Sudan continues to be compounded by the impact of
the worsening economy crisis and food insecurity. The
release of $26.5 million from the Central Emergency
Response Fund a few days ago to provide life-saving
assistance to the Sudanese people could not be timelier.
However, they still need much more.

That brings me to my third point. My delegation
continues to observe very carefully the recent situation
in the Sudan. Indonesia reaffirms its principle of
non-interference and respect for Sudanese sovereignty
and territorial integrity. In that regard we welcome the
role of the African Union as the regional mechanism,
including its Peace and Security Council, concerning
the situation in the Sudan.

After years of conflict, Darfuris deserve peace,
stability and prosperity. Momentum in realizing that
hope has been created. It is our conviction that we all
must work together to preserve and capitalize on what
has been achieved thus far in Darfur. For Indonesia,
that would be our clear priority. No party should take
advantage of the situation in the Sudan to let Darfur
backslide into conflict. All stakeholders must exercise
calm and maximum restraint and act in a way that
supports the climate of peace in the country.

I should like to conclude by commending the
critical work of UNAMID in Darfur. Indonesia is
proud to be part of UNAMID, represented presently
by 472 peacekeepers. We reaffirm our support for our
Sudanese brothers and sisters in taking ownership
of their destiny and in their quest to find a peaceful
solution in their country.

