The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Denmark.

Like others, I should like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2005/335) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, for his
briefing, which I particularly appreciated for its fine
balance, discerning detail and forward-looking thrust.

I have full respect and admiration for the
impressive results achieved by Mr. Jessen-Petersen and
his staff during his tenure. I also commend the Kosovo
Force (KFOR), the UNMIK police and the Kosovo
Police Service for having shown great skill and
professionalism in maintaining a secure and stable
environment through a challenging period. Their
continued presence and professionalism will be needed
for some time to come.

I would also like to thank Mr. Covic for his
statement and for his presence here today.

The representative of Luxembourg will shortly
make a statement on behalf of the European Union, and
Denmark fully associates itself with that statement.

I should like to tell members that last week I
visited Belgrade and Pristina and had the opportunity
to discuss the situation in Kosovo in general, and,
specifically, standards implementation, with the central
players on the ground. I made the point, which has also
been made so clearly by most speakers today, that we
are not there yet. Standards implementation must not
slow down and will have to continue for a long time
yet. In a number of key areas, not least with regard to
decentralization, returns and the direct dialogue with
Belgrade, much more needs to be done, and quickly.

We also need to see progress with regard to
Kosovo Serb participation in the political process.
Belgrade should soon come forward with a clear signal
in that regard. Standards implementation and the
commitment to securing a multi-ethnic, democratic
Kosovo will also be a long-term requirement for
Kosovo's integration into the European Union.

In general, however, we have seen tangible
progress in the reporting period. More important, we
have seen a clear demonstration of political will and
capacity to maintain momentum in the continued
standards process. We acknowledge that major
shortcomings still exist which need to be addressed.
But in the light of the progress, the assessment of the
Danish Government is that it is now possible and
recommendable to move on to the next phase, to a
comprehensive review this summer, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999) and relevant presidential
statements of the Security Council.

I am happy to see the Secretary-General reach the
same conclusion in his report. I fully share his analysis
that we have seen intensified efforts to implement

standards, which reflect the recognizable political
maturity and commitment of the Kosovo leaders. I urge
the Secretary-General to move ahead now as he
suggests. My Government will do its utmost to support
him and the Special Envoy he will name in their efforts
in this next and crucial phase.

We hope, and we are optimistic, that the
comprehensive review will lead to a decision to start a
negotiation process in the autumn that will determine
Kosovo's final status. It should be stated clearly that
there is no automaticity for the start of such talks. The
outcome of the review will be decisive in that regard.
But we also feel strongly that the time has come to
move on. Kosovo's unresolved status is in nobody's
interest. It creates political insecurity, discourages
returns, feeds extremist designs, scares off foreign
direct investment and maintains the inhabitants of
Kosovo, irrespective of ethnicity, in the grip of massive
unemployment and economic misery. It is simply not
sustainable.

I share the view expressed by many today that
there will be no going back to the status quo ante. We
should not prejudge the outcome of the status talks, but
obviously we will not see a return to the pre-March
1999 situation. Just as a reintegration of Kosovo into
Serbia or a territorial division of Kosovo can be
excluded, so can a union of Kosovo with another
country, or a solution dictated unilaterally by one of the
parties.

One of the most dreadful decades of Balkan
history ended five years ago. We should now put it
behind us. The time has come to start an inclusive and
regionally-based process with a view to solving one of
the last outstanding issues following from the violent
conflicts of the former Yugoslavia. Once an agreement
on Kosovo's final status has been found, we can look
forward to a more peaceful and prosperous future that
the peoples of South-Eastern Europe deserve. Then we
can look towards close regional cooperation between
former foes and towards the common integration of
these truly European countries into the Euro-Atlantic
institutions where they so rightfully belong.

I urge the Secretary-General to start our journey
down that road now and to take the first step today.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Luxembourg, whom I invite to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

