Mr. Yacouba (spoke in French): I should like to
thank everyone present for the close attention paid
to our briefings, which has given rise to some very
relevant questions.

First, to respond to the question asked by the
representative of France, I would note that there are
two linguistic aspects here. I will not go into detail,
but as far as the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
is concerned, we deployed to northern areas, in addition
to those who chose to go, individual police officers who
speak the local language, in order to facilitate contact.
We included all neighbouring countries, so we were
able to find police officers who speak the relevant local
languages.

As far as technology is concerned, I think that it
has been fairly well developed. It is a very important
issue, because unfortunately there is an urgent threat,
and we have no reliable human sources of information
that would make it possible to confirm the nature of
the threat. But these surveillance methods make it
possible better to protect personnel and populations
and safeguard the mandate. The acquisition of drones
is being considered as well as all of the rules that apply
to their use, which are currently being developed. That
is all I can say about this issue.

The representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela asked a question about recruitment. I can
provide the example of our experience in MINUSMA.
With the Police Division, we have already identified
specific elements that are of interest to us and of which
we inform the Division. The latter in turn contacts the
police-contributing countries, and we subsequently
interview to recruit the people whom we believe will
truly be appropriate to work in context of our Mission.

The representative of Spain referred to community
policing and asked how we dealt with it in connection
with our Mission. We are of the mind that security
should not be imposed. The community needs to
tell us what its issues are. Accordingly, because of
the lack of police in some northern and central parts
of the country, we took the initiative to strengthen
cooperation with those units through patrols. We do
not carry that out alone, but with the help of the other
components of the Mission through the development of
certain quick-impact projects. We try to ensure that the
impact of the quick-impact projects is all-around, will
benefit the entire community and rebuild trust between
the population and the Malian forces because, in some
regions, trust is lacking. We are however trying to
gradually restore that trust.

The representative of the Russian Federation also
asked a question that is really a question concerning
terminology. The intelligence that we are discussing in
this context comes from a criminal source. No other
word in French better describes it. When we refer to
"criminal intelligence", that is something else. That
kind ofintelligence is indispensable, so as to know how
to ensure the protection of people when we know that
we are going to deploy them to an area. When we say
that a population is under threat, before we go and help
them, we need to know, first of all, the dangers that
we will face. In that regard, I believe that gathering
this kind of intelligence is of the utmost importance.
We use that intelligence to strengthen the capacity of
the Malian forces. If the population does not want to
provide information, it is because it is not protected. We
therefore have to consider how we protect an informer,
and all of that is linked to essential security aspects.

The representative of Egypt brought up the issue
of the All Sources Information Fusion Unit (ASIFU),
which is a concern. In all respects, we are very happy
with ASIFU, a unit at the core of the Mission. It carries
out very relevant analyses that are always tied security
issues. The information provided by ASIFU is shared by
all MINUSMA structures in connection with carrying
out activities. It is one thing to carry out activities in a
specific area, but if the area in question is unfortunately
unaccessible owing to security issues, one needs to be
informed. That information is not kept solely within
MINUSMA. The leadership of MINUSMA, for
example, holds regular meetings with the Government
authorities. Within the force, we have regular meetings
with the Chief of Staff of the armed forces. I have
regular meetings with the Malian forces, as well. We
use that opportunity to exchange all information with
the various components. In that regard, I believe that
there is no problem.

That is the crux of what I have to say. We
stress the importance of the support of the Security
Council to further raise awareness of the work of
police-contributing countries.

