Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Thank you, Sir, for
organizing this debate on an issue of great importance
to this Organization, one addressed recently by the
heads of States and Governments at the world summit.
I also wish to express my appreciation to the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Jan
Egeland, for his presentation of recent problems and
challenges concerning the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

Before making my national comments on this
issue, I would like to associate myself with the
statement that you, Mr. President, will make later on
behalf of the European Union.

The fifth report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2005/740)
is of high quality. It reflects all the developments and
achievements in the field of civilian protection since
the adoption five years ago of the last Security Council
resolution on the subject, resolution 1296 (2000). It
also identifies gaps in the existing framework and
makes concrete and realistic recommendations that, if
implemented, could effectively meet current protection
needs and concerns.

The facts contained in the Secretary-General's
report are particularly alarming. During the past five
years civilians not only continued to be caught up in
violent conflicts, but targeted attacks, forced
displacement and sexual Violence, particularly against
women and children, have become some of the most
disturbing features of these conflicts.

Another disturbing fact is the continuing denial
or obstruction of access to vulnerable populations by
United Nations humanitarian personnel. This has
serious implications for the protection and survival of
thousands of people in need. All this indicates that the
current level of protection of the civilian population
needs to be enhanced by developing and improving
existing means.

The draft resolution that you, Mr. President, took
the initiative to pursue, which we fully support, is an
important document. It addresses a complex range of
current protection issues and identifies key areas of
action by Member States, the United Nations and
United Nations bodies that would ensure better
protection and respect for the civilian population. We
wish to comment on some of these issues, which are
also elaborated upon in the Secretary-General's report.

We firmly believe that respect for international
humanitarian law, human rights law, refugee law and
international criminal law provides the best protection
for civilians in situations of armed conflict.
Governments and non-State actors have the obligation
to comply strictly with these laws. It is, however,
disquieting that many States have not yet ratified all
the treaties relating to the protection of civilians,
particularly the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols of 1977.

As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
the restoration of law and the tackling of impunity are
vital in preventing further violence. Indeed, the fight
against impunity, both at the national and international
levels, can prevent the commission of serious crimes
against civilians in the future and can help societies
come to terms with past abuses. Domestic justice
mechanisms are critical in pursuit of accountability.
However, if national authorities are unwilling or unable
to prosecute violators, the role of the international
community is vital. The referral by the Security
Council of the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court is a bold step towards putting an end to
impunity and consolidating peace, security and justice
in that society. We believe that the draft resolution
should incorporate the elements to which I have just
referred.

The early prevention of atrocities against
civilians is an obligation of the State concerned.
However, if that State is unwilling or unable to protect
its civilians from such crimes, we believe that the
Security Council has the political and moral obligation
to take effective action and alleviate the human
suffering. In this respect, we would like to underline
the importance of the relevant paragraphs of the World
Summit Outcome document concerning the
responsibility of the international community to protect
populations from genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and ethnic cleansing. The draft resolution
should reflect these developments. In this respect, we
want to emphasize the importance of early warning
mechanisms in preventing the commission of such
crimes.

The draft resolution under discussion devotes
special attention to the physical protection needs of
civilians in armed conflict, particularly those of women
and children and of displaced persons and refugees. It
condemns in the strongest terms sexual violence, the
forcible recruitment of children and child abduction
and calls on States to bring the perpetrators of such
horrendous acts to justice. It also invites the United
Nations to better address protection concerns in its
peacekeeping mission mandates. We fully support that
approach.

Likewise, we support the Secretary-General's
suggestion that peace agreements should include
commitments concerning the cessation of all attacks on
civilians and of forcible displacement; the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants; the facilitation of humanitarian access; the
safe and sustainable return of refugees and internally
displaced persons; and the safety of humanitarian
personnel. In our view, the draft resolution should take
the same approach.

Humanitarian access to those in need and the
removal of obstacles that prevent humanitarian workers
from delivering humanitarian assistance or protecting
the civilian population constitute another important
aspect of civilian protection that is tackled in the text
of the draft resolution being discussed. We believe that
future peacekeeping operations should have a clear
mandate and the necessary resources to better facilitate
the provision of humanitarian assistance to those in
need.

Lastly, we believe that regional organizations can
play a critical role in the field of protection. That is
particularly true of the African Union and its role in
the Darfur crisis. However, we agree with the
Secretary-General that the recent escalation of violence
in the Darfur region underscores the particular
constraints faced by the African Union. We fully
subscribe to the call for adequate support for that
regional organization.

In conclusion, the draft resolution, which is still
being negotiated, offers a good opportunity to improve
and strengthen the tools at the disposal of the United
Nations for more effective protection of the safety and
the well-being of civilian populations in armed
conflict. We have to seize that opportunity and try to
elaborate a text that responds to the protection
concerns and challenges of our times. We will
cooperate and contribute to that end.

