Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of Lithuania to convene today's
open debate on the protection of journalists in armed
conflict. We welcome Foreign Minister Linkevicius
as he comes to New York to preside over today's
meeting. I wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Eliasson, for his briefing. China has listened
attentively to the statements of the representatives of
non-governmental organizations.

Journalists and media workers in armed conflicts
constitute a special group. Devoted to their professional
mandates and missions, they provide the public with
their first-hand information at risk to their lives in
armed conflicts. At the same time, they are defenceless
and vulnerable civilians, constantly faced with the
risks of being attacked, kidnapped and even deprived
of their lives. We pay tribute to these journalists
and media professionals who defy risks to their own
safety when they venture into the foreground of armed
conflict to provide coverage. In the past, numerous
innocent journalists and media professionals have
been attacked or even killed in armed conflicts. China
strongly condemns any and all atrocities committed
against journalists and media workers in armed
conflicts, particularly deliberate attacks on and murder
of journalists. We wish to extend our condolences to
fallen journalists, media workers and their families.
China calls upon the concerned parties to conflicts to
put a true end to deliberate attacks and other atrocities
against journalists and media workers. We support the
international community in taking effective actions
to protect journalists from being harmed in armed
conflicts. I wish now to make the following five points.

First, protecting journalists in armed conflict
is an important part of the protection of civilians.
Journalists not involved in hostilities and conflicts
should be protected under international humanitarian
law, just like other civilians. The relevant Security
Council resolutions and presidential statements on the
protection of civilians have set forth the basic principles
and created an important framework for protecting
journalists from the harm of conflicts and as such they
should be effectively observed. The comprehensive
implementation of the aforementioned resolutions and
presidential statements by the international community
is an effective means for promoting the protection of
journalists in armed conflicts.

Secondly, parties to conflict should seriously
shoulder the important responsibility of protecting
journalists in armed conflicts. They should, in line with
their obligations under the Geneva Convention and other
international law, effectively fulfil their responsibilities
to protect journalists and prevent and stop atrocities
from occurring. On the other hand, journalists and
media workers should observe professional ethics and
practice fairness and objectivity in their coverage. They
should respect local cultural traditions and customs,
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of countries,
observe the laws and regulations of host countries and
refrain from becoming a party to conflicts. However,
under no circumstances is any party allowed to inflict
deliberate harm or atrocities upon journalists when they
lawfully perform their working duties, no one, by law,
is allowed to inflict deliberate harm or atrocities upon
them. At the same time, when journalists and media
workers enter areas of armed conflict, we hope they
adopt an elevated sense of self-protection so as to avoid
unnecessary casualties.

Thirdly, the international community should
coordinate its fight against attacks and atrocities against
journalists. The international community should,
on the basis of respect for the judicial sovereignty
of the countries concerned, step up its fight against
deliberate attacks and atrocities against journalists in
armed conflict, as these acts contravene international
humanitarian law. A zero-tolerance policy should
be adopted against deliberate attacks and atrocities
committed against journalists in armed conflict, and
perpetrators should meet with severe punishment. The
United Nations should also strengthen its cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, taking
advantage of their unique strengths so as to form
international synergies.

Fourthly, the proper handling of atrocities
committed against journalists by terrorist extremist
forces is one of the important priorities in protecting
journalists in armed conflicts. In recent years, there
have been frequent instances of deliberate killings
and atrocities committed against journalists by some
terrorist and extremist forces. The international
community should attach the highest priority to this
problem by intensifying its fight against terrorism. At
the same time, it is essential to strengthen coordination
and cooperation in order to eliminate the fertile soil in
which terrorist activities are bred and from which they
are spread so as to eliminate the real threats faced by
journalists in their work.

Fifthly, the various United Nations agencies should
share out and coordinate their responsibilities and
jointly promote the protection ofjournalists in armed
conflict. China appreciates the efforts of UNESCO,
the Human Rights Council and other agencies to
safeguard and promote the lawful rights of journalists
and strengthen their protection in armed conflict. It is
hoped that the various United Nations agencies will
work according to their respective mandates to form
synergies in order to jointly create a safe environment
for protecting journalists in armed conflict.

The Security Council shoulders the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security, working effectively in the fields of
peacekaing, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It has
made positive contributions to attaining the goal of
protecting civilians in armed conflict, in particular
journalists and media workers. China is ready to work
with the international community to push forward the
comprehensive implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions and presidential statements and
contribute to realizing the goal of protecting journalists
and media professionals in armed conflicts.

