Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the delegations
ofthe United States, United Kingdom and France for the
initiative to hold today's briefing, and the presidency
for promptly responding to their request. We are also
grateful to Special envoy Staffan de Mistura for his
candid assessment and his courage.

The latest turn of events is extremely disturbing,
especially on the heels of last week's high-level
meeting on Syria in this very Chamber (see S/PV.7774).
We condemn the decision of Damascus and its allies
to stage an offensive against eastern Aleppo. It is a
flagrant violation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions and the most recent Geneva arrangements.
Ukraine is not privy to all the details of the most recent
rounds of negotiations among all the parties involved
in the Syrian issue. However, what matters in this
situation is the fact that the actions ofthe Syrian regime
and its allies go against the very core of international
humanitarian law. They violate every fundamental
principle of human decency. Is that the state of affairs
that the Security Council is prepared to accept as a fact
of life, or is it something that the Council can finally
master the courage to counter? The latter is dependent,
ofcourse, on the political will ofjust a couple of Council
members, first and foremost on Russia.

More than 200 civilians were killed and 300
wounded in the last 48 hours of sustained aerial and
ground bombing of besieged eastern Aleppo. It speaks
volumes of the true intentions of Bashar Al-Assad
and his Russian allies, and there is no doubt that
such casualty numbers are not final. We agree with
the Secretary-General's comments yesterday on the
situation in Syria. We are also appalled by the chilling
military escalation in Aleppo. The recent statement by
the Syrian delegation at the General Assembly that

"the victory was even greater because the
Syrian army was progressing in the war against
terrorism" (see A/71/PV16)

appears particularly cynical and revealing.

Available information on the use of incendiary
weapons and advanced munitions, such as bunker-
buster bombs, in the ongoing fighting around Aleppo
sheds greater light on destructive Russian involvement.
Throughout the year, the Ukrainian delegation has
repeatedly voiced reservations and doubts about the
true nature of Russian involvement in the Syrian
conflict. On repeated occasions, we have been proved
right - which, by the way, does not make us happy.

In this case, we would have been delighted to have
made a mistake. I am not going to repeat what we
have said on numerous occasions. I will just say that
any hopes of reaching a workable arrangement with
Russia and the Al-Assad regime at this moment are
misplaced. As long as these two parties are resolutely
bound to a military solution, any pause in the fighting,
any ceasefire agreement, any political hesitance or
unwarranted benefit of the doubt will be mercilessly
exploited by the hawks in Damascus and Moscow to
improve their military positions and to strengthen their
negotiation positions.

As we speak, Russia has just completed
redeployment of additional Sukhoi Su-25 jets designed
for close air support to Syria. Let us also convey a
clear message to those planning to retake eastern
Aleppo. The idea that a regime victory would lead to an
enforced stability in Syria is a dangerous fantasy. The
realization of the so-called Grozny scenario in Syria
is not possible and not sustainble. I will remind the
council that Grozny is the capital of Chechnya, the city
that was razed to the ground by the Russian military
in 1994 and 1995 during the First Chechen War. Those
days, the Russian military commanders used to say
that it was aimed to force terrorists out of the city with
minimal casualties among civilians. Sounds familiar,
does it not? If recent history is any guide, there are no
prospects for a military solution in Syria. Those who
think otherwise will have to face consequences of their
actions on the battlefield and international arena alike.
Is it worth more and more Syrian lives? I doubt it.

