Mr. Yacouba (spoke in French): I believe that
Mr. Lacroix has addressedthe crux ofthe questions. I will
therefore answer some of the more specific questions.

The first question concerns the attacks and the issue
of explosive devices confronting the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). It is an issue of major concern
to the countries of MINUSMA and host countries, as
well as for Headquarters in New York. We have held
several video-teleconferences to address the issue, and
a working group was established to reflect on how to
avoid the damage and loss.

In that regard, the first issue concerns training,
including predeployment training whereby all
formed units - whether formed police or military
units - are provided with information regarding
asymmetric attacks, especially those involving
explosive devices and mines. Above all, they must
undergo complementary training under the auspices of
United Nations Mine Action Service. The importance
of such training has been witnessed on the ground,
where, despite the high number of incidents that have
been reported, many deaths have been avoided simply
because people have followed the proper protocol. Even
now, in cases where accidents have often occurred, the
latter have been attributed to a failure to follow protocol
according to instruction. There is therefore a problem
concerning command, which has been identified, and I
believe that corrective measures have been implemented
at the force and police component levels.

There is also the issue of passive protection
measures. I am speaking of attacks on camps
and convoys. Equipment has been scaled up, but
unfortunately some units lack the equipment especially
designed for such attacks. We have seen armoured
vehicles equipped with armour that fails to protect them
against mines. Headquarters has drawn the attention of
contributing countries to the problem on the ground so
that measures can be taken to address those issues.

We are therefore not only focusing on raising
awareness, but also on the intelligence dimension. The
latter entails conducting an investigation whenever there
is an incident involving an explosion. In each police
unit, we have an investigative branch that takes over the
necessary tasks after an explosion. MINUSMA carries
out an internal investigation, and the Malian authorities
carry out their own. Regardless of whether the attacks
target MINUSMA or Malian personnel, according to
our mutual agreement, we exchange information.
Accordingly, we have established a criminal
database, so that we can trace explosive devices and try
to identify who laid them and where they came from.
With broader cooperation in the subregion and with
enhanced inter-service cooperation, we hope that we
will be able to trace them to their source and cut the
supply line. That is, in essence, one ofthe first problems.

The second aspect is the lack of trust between the
population and the security defence forces. That is
indeed a major obstacle, because ifthat is absent, then the
police, the gendarmerie and the national guard - who
are supposed to protect the population - do not in fact
enjoy its trust. That leads to an underlying problem that
can be addressed only through security sector reform in
order to foster trust between the security forces and the
people. And to do that, the Malian forces must comprise
the entire range of national viewpoints.

Additionally, the forces must be accountable before
the law. We must do away with impunity, corruption and
other aspects that the people find contemptible within
the security and defence forces. They are fully aware
that we have, with their assent, created a programme
of local policing that seeks to make sure that the local
population is kept at the core. Therefore, security
cannot carried out against the population; rather, the
people themselves contribute to their own security and
to the implementation of development projects.

We explain to them that this is about a virtuous
circle. We carry out awareness-raising campaigns to
explain our mandate to the population. We explain our
role and mandate to the people, as well as the need to
work with the Malian forces. They will generally share
their concerns and, I believe, the Government has
agreed to participate in this local policing approach. On
4 October, at the national police level, at the fifty-seventh
anniversary of the creation of the police, in front of the
entire Government and Parliament, the Government
committed itself to the local policing approach.

What will it accomplish? The population is
now suffering from the lack of trust in the Malian
security forces, as it is the extremisst that impose their
law and way of life. But with the joining of the two
structures, they will be able to act against the negative
elements - the extremists.

On the question of the vision for the future, I think
that Mr. Lacroix has answered it. I wanted to add
that it should include a republican police force that is
accountable before the law.
With regard to the third question, the aspect of
communication has been addressed. I only wanted to
add that, at the level of formed police units, there are
units that patrol and escort humanitarian workers but do
not speak the local languages. Through the recruitment
of local interpreters, the staff of the formed police
units - if, for example, they speak Arabic 4 must
learn a local language as well in order to be able to
better interact with the local population. In any given
community, an English or French speaker will have to
learn the local language to interact with the people and
gain their trust.

Another key aspect when it comes to communication
is ensuring that people understand our mission. When
they do not, they are reluctant to engage with us. We
regularly carry out awareness-raising campaigns to
explain our mandates. I would say that in Gao, for
example, we have been fairly successful in that regard.
At a certain point, we even had people in Gao who
wanted to take the law into their own hands and set up
prisons. Once they understood our role, with the support
of all stakeholders - the entire community, including
women and elders - they themselves abandoned the
actions they intended to take. They understood the
relevance of our role.

