Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank both Under-
Secretaries-General for their respective briefings.
Through them, I should also like to pay tribute to and
thank all United Nations personnel and humanitarian
workers on the ground in Syria and neighbouring
countries who are risking their lives to try and make
the situation better for the ordinary people of Idlib
and Syria.

I agree very much with a lot of what my colleagues
said today. I therefore will not repeat it. I thank the
representatives of Germany and Belgium for insisting
on this meeting, which is much needed. I will not go
into the political process, as the French Ambassador
has said everything I would have said. On this occasion
he therefore speaks for the United Kingdom as well.

I want to start with the situation involving the attack
on the Turkish observation post personnel in Idlib.
They have been targeted by Syrian regime shelling. I
look forward to what our Turkish colleague can tell us
about that later. However, I want to recall that Turkey
has been one of the countries trying to help resolve the
situation in Idlib, and the reward that it gets for that is
to have its personnel fired upon.

That is not just a sad commentary on the state of
affairs in Syria, it is an absolute inversion of Member
States' responsibility to contribute to the maintenance
of international peace and security. As the Under-
Secretary-General said, the damage that is being done
to Idlib and its civilians far outstrips any degradation
or necessity in respect of terrorist forces, like Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham, and I think that she referred to a
pointless stalemate.

That is exactly what it is. People are being killed,
but no advantage is being gained at all militarily. Other
speakers have drawn attention to the fact that there is
no military solution, and I agree very much with my
American colleague on that. Along with the Polish
representative, I want to call that out as a clear violation
of the Sochi agreement and call for all parties to respect
that agreement and go back to that ceasefire.

In fact, I have to say that I find it incredible that
President Putin agreed to the Sochi agreement with
President Erdogan. Why the Russian Federation cannot
persuade the Syrian authorities to follow it is therefore a
mystery to all ofus. But, again, it is an inversion ofwhat
ought to be happening. I hope that when Special Envoy
Lavrentiev and Deputy Foreign Minister Vershinin go
to Syria this week that they will be able to press the
Syrian authorities on that and that they will be able to
have success.

Like other speakers, I would like to turn also to the
situation against international humanitarian law and
the situation of the bombing of the hospitals. That is
a situation that is accelerating, and it is exponential. I
look forward to what the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs can tell us next week, after
its briefing.

But in the meantime, I would like to hear some
answers from the Russian and the Syrian representatives
here today. I keep asking these questions, and I keep not
getting answers; but I am going to carry on asking them
because they are absolutely critical. If people believe,
as we will hear later today from both representatives,
that they want to resolve this conflict, then they need to
begin to address these questions.

My first question is, are the attacks on hospitals
deliberate? If they are deliberate, then I would be
grateful for an explanation as to how such attacks meet
the international humanitarian law core principles of
distinction, necessity and proportionality. I would also
be grateful to know why no warning was given to the
hospitals, because under article 19 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention the protection to which civilian hospitals are
entitled shall not cease unless they are used to commit
acts harmful to the enemy. But the critical clause is that
protection may, however, cease only after due warning
has been given, naming a reasonable time limit.

I would therefore like to know if those warnings
were given and if time limits were set. If not, then why
not? If, on the other hand, the attacks on the hospitals
are not deliberate, what steps are being taken by the
Syrian and Russian authorities to avoid such attacks in
future? What are the weaknesses in their deconfliction
systems that are allowing the attacks to happen? I have
one last question: which units from both the Syrian
military and the Russian military are involved in those
attacks? I think that would be a very helpful piece of
transparency for the Council to have.

For the United Kingdom's part, we will continue
to provide significant humanitarian assistance to help
keep people alive. But there is no doubt that restoring
a ceasefire and ensuring that all parties respect it is
actually the critical thing that needs to happen. That is
the thing, not humanitarian assistance, that will make
the biggest difference to the people in Idlib.

Ihave two points on looking ahead. Ivery much share
what the French representative said about reconstruction
and elections. We provide humanitarian assistance. We
will not provide reconstruction assistance. We will not
be able to contribute to the eventual rehabilitation of
Syria into the world community of nations without a
viable, meaningful and sustainable political process.

Lastly, again like the representative of France,
I would like to reiterate that if chemical weapons are
used again against civilians in Syria, we will join our
colleagues in responding swiftly and appropriately.

