Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We too
would like to express our thanks for the convening
of this meeting and for the important briefings by
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, the respective
Heads of the police components of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), and the Municipal
Adviser from Bangui.

First and foremost, we want to recognize the
relevant functions that police personnel play in United
Nations peace operations and their capacity to act in
the maintenance, consolidation and upholding of peace
in the countries where they are deployed. In that vein,
the Strategic Guidance Framework for International
Police Peacekeeping of the United Nations Police
(UNPOL) constitutes a central tool for generating
common action guidelines that can be replicated in
management, recruitment and training processes and
in performance evaluation mechanisms. In that regard,
we want to emphasize the fundamental role of the work
of promoting, protecting and respecting international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
a principle that is incorporated into each of the aspects
of UNPOL's work. That is particularly evident in the
strengthening of national institutions and capacities
aimed at restoring and maintaining security and
public order and at ensuring access to justice and
accountability for crimes.

In the case ofMINUSMA, the protection ofcivilians
and the most vulnerable is an essential function that
also helps to reduce intercommunal violence and restore
the presence of the State throughout the country. Police
Commissioner Yacouba referred to some strategies for
contributing to expanding the numbers and presence of
police in various areas across the country. I would like
to ask him what the main difficulties are in achieving
that objective.

We also underscore the importance of fostering
capacities for improving involvement and interaction
with civil society and its respect, with a view to building
greater trust among the population. That is central to
helping create conditions that support ongoing political
processes, such as for example the efforts to explain
national agreements to the local population in the
Central African Republic, an imperative in the current
context, with a view to reducing the persistent violence
across the country and at the same time promoting the
involvement of local authorities. In that regard, I would
like to ask Ms. Fitah-Kona what her experience was of
the police personnel deployed in Bangui in their efforts
to generate a close relationship with the local population
in order to come up more efficient plans for prevention,
early warning and police intelligence. How could those
links be strengthened in order to attain those objectives?
Also, as some other delegations have pointed out, the
contribution of women to these processes has moved
from being merely a useful recommendation to a
paradigm of efficient and necessary implementation,
particularly in ensuring rapprochement with local
communities and civil-society organizations, both of
women and young people.

We appreciate the information shared by the Police
Commissioner of UNISFA, Ms. Gahonzire, on the
coordination with joint security committees to address
the presence of armed groups. We would like to ask her
about the role played by female police in that context,
particularly in promoting dialogue and rapprochement
with local communities. Another central element
of UNPOL's role is providing support in combating
organized crime, which erodes the institutionality
required to sustain peace and often has a transnational
scope and in many cases fosters corruption and forms
a nexus with terrorism. Given all that we have heard,
we would like to ask Mr. Abdounasir, the Police
Commissioner of MONUSCO, how he has been
coordinating at the regional and subregional levels with
a view to generating effective synergies to tackle that
scourge, which also entails disrupting the dynamics of
logistical support.

We would like to conclude by reiterating our tribute
to the thousands of police personnel who carry out
complex and important work for peace and security in
various missions mandated by the Council in conflict-
affected countries, particularly those who have
sacrificed their lives in the cause of peace.

