Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in convening this open debate on respect for
the purposes and principles ofthe Charter of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. My delegation is also grateful for the concept
note (S/2016/103, annex) that has been prepared to
assist our discussions today.

Peru would like to affirm its solemn commitment to

the purposes and principles ofthe Charter of the United
Nations and to an international order based on the rule
of law, which are indispensable tools for creating a more
peaceful, prosperous and fair world. There can be no
doubt that the establishment of the United Nations has
contributed greatly to the maintenance of international
peace and security, and that thanks to the work of the
Security Council, we have not slid back into war on a
global scale, as was the case during the first half of the
twentieth century.

Despite those achievements, however, my
delegation recognizes that in some instances the
Council has not effectively fulfilled its role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. In that
regard, I would like to briefly discuss the importance
of continuing to work to achieve comprehensive reform
of the Security Council, particularly with regard to its
methods of work and specifically the use of the veto.
That is becoming increasingly relevant in view of our
imperative need to prevent atrocity crimes. The fact
is, at times when a State has been unable to fulfil its
sovereign responsibility to protect its people, we have
seen situations in which the international community
has not known how to respond effectively and in
which the Security Council has been unable to fulfil
its primary responsibility. In that regard, I would like
to reiterate that the Government of Peru believes that
the responsibility to protect was not conceived to
undermine, but rather to strengthen, the sovereignty of
States and the principle of sovereign equality enshrined
in the San Francisco Charter.

My delegation also believes that it is necessary
to limit the the unrestricted use of the veto by the
permanent members of the Security Council where it
may impede this organ from taking action on situations
that may involve war crimes and mass atrocities. Peru
therefore joined the political declaration sponsored
by France and Mexico to restrict the use of the veto.
We also endorse the code of conduct promoted by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, of
which we are a member. On the other hand, we call for
the Security Council to make a special effort to shift its
approach from reacting to conflicts to preventing them.

My country believes that strict adherence to
international law and the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations is essential for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
underscore the importance we place in the principle of
the peaceful settlement of disputes. In that regard, we
believe that the establishment of a judicial body with
consultative competence, such as the International
Court of Justice, is a reflection of the importance
that the Charter attaches to the promotion of the rule
of law at the international level. As a such, by way of
its decisions and advisory opinions, the International
Court of Justice contributes to the promotion and
clarification of international law as a genuine option
for preserving peace.

Although Peru acknowledges the primary role of
the Security Council in maintaining international peace
and security, we also believe it is essential that this
organ utilize all the available tools provided for under
Chapter VIII, concerning cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations. Similarly, Peru believes
that Security Council actions authorized in Chapter
VII of the Charter should be adopted only after the
Council has implemented non-coercive measures. In
that connection, Peru reiterates its support for certain
sanctions regimes established by the Council, although
we believe that the working methods of the committees
charged with the application of sanctions should be
improved with a view to making sanctions regimes
more effective.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize Peru's
commitment to the building of peaceful and inclusive
societies at the domestic and international levels,
to which the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) will make a contribution. My country will continue
to be a partner in the building of an international
community that promotes the participation of all States
without discrimination and in which international
relations are based on mutual respect, good faith,
cooperation, respect for the rule of international law
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts. Forging such
an international community is the best guarantee for
maintaining international peace and security.

