Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Advancing
the cause of comprehensive peace in the Middle East
remains one of the most important foreign policy
endeavours of the United States. Our commitment to
this goal in unwavering. Only through negotiations can
this objective be realized - an approach that we
strongly encourage the international community to
support. The immediate resumption of negotiations
towards a two-State solution is the only realistic way
forward. It is in the interests not only of the United
States, but of Israelis, Palestinians and all of the
region's people. We call on all members of the Council
to underscore that message publicly and with the
parties.

Waiting to resume talks benefits no one. The
status quo does nothing to meet the legitimate needs of
Israelis or Palestinians. As Secretary of State Clinton
has said, we believe that, through good-faith
negotiations, the parties can mutually agree on an
outcome that ends the conflict and reconciles the
Palestinian goal of an independent and viable State
based on the 1967 lines, with agreed swaps, and the
Israeli goal of a Jewish State with secure and
recognized borders that reflect subsequent
developments.

Despite the difficulties and the complex political
circumstances in the region, we are committed to
relaunching negotiations and to the cause of
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. National
Security Adviser James Jones and Special Envoy for
Middle East Peace George Mitchell both conducted
talks in the region this month. Senator Mitchell also
travelled to Europe to consult with the Quartet and
other key partners. High-level Egyptian and Jordanian
delegations made helpful visits to Washington.

With the Israelis and the Palestinians, we have
consistently pursued a two-pronged approach: first, to
encourage the parties to enter into negotiations to reach
agreement on all permanent-status issues and,
secondly, to help the Palestinians build the economy
and the institutions that will be necessary when a
Palestinian State is established. The two objectives are
mutually reinforcing. Each is essential, and neither can
be attained without the other. Special Envoy Mitchell
will be following up with the parties in the coming
days, and he will return to the region in the near future.

The Quartet has long called on all parties to
uphold their Road Map obligations. A freeze on
settlement activity is an Israeli obligation under the
Road Map, and United States policy on this remains
unchanged. We do not accept the legitimacy of
continued Israeli settlements. That said, we also
believe that the settlement moratorium recently
declared by the Israeli Government is a significant step
that could have a meaningful effect on the ground.

United States policy on Jerusalem also remains
unchanged. The status of Jerusalem, and all other
permanent status issues, should be resolved through
negotiations. We disagree with some Israeli actions in
Jerusalem affecting Palestinians in areas such as
housing, including the continuing pattern of evictions
and demolitions of Palestinian homes. Neither party
should take actions that could unilaterally pre-empt, or
appear to pre-empt, negotiations.

The United States recognizes that Jerusalem is a
deeply important issue for Israelis and Palestinians,
and for Jews, Muslims and Christians around the
world. We believe that, through good-faith
negotiations, the parties can agree to an outcome that
realizes the aspirations of both parties for Jerusalem
and safeguards its status for people around the world.

We call on the Palestinian Authority to fulfil its
Road Map obligations to ensure security, reform its
institutions of governance and refrain from any acts of
incitement. In that regard, we express our strong
concern that a Palestinian Authority official recently
attended a ceremony commemorating a terrorist who
was responsible for an attack that claimed the lives of
many Israeli civilians.

We were pleased to see the letter from the
Secretary-General (S/2010/39) reporting that his staff
continue to work constructively with the Government
of Israel on issues related to the Gaza Board of Inquiry,
as well as to note that the financial issues have been
resolved in a matter satisfactory to the Secretary-
General. At the same time, we call on Israel to reopen
its border crossings with Gaza, with appropriate
monitoring to address security concerns. That would
allow for greater movement of people and

humanitarian and reconstruction materials -
consistent with resolution 1860 (2009) and the 2005
Agreement on Movement and Access - thus
alleviating the hardship and stress that civilians in
Gaza face.

Hamas has yet to accept the principles established
by the Quartet that are the building blocks of an
independent Palestinian State: renouncing violence,
recognizing Israel and accepting previous agreements
and obligations, including the Road Map. Nor has it
shown a greater interest in building a future for the
Palestinian people than in its own hateful rhetoric and
violence. We are also concerned about Hamas
interference with international efforts to deliver
humanitarian assistance in Gaza, continued arms
smuggling and the launch of terrorist rocket attacks
against Israel - which, it is important to recall,
precipitated the Gaza conflict just over a year ago. We
call for the immediate release of Gilad Shalit, who was
abducted by Hamas and held since 2006.

A key component of international support for the
Palestinian people comes through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). We thank Commissioner-General
Karen AbuZayd for her devoted service to UNRWA
over the past nine years and we welcome the
appointment of Filippo Grandi of Italy to that post. We
also welcome the appointment of Margot Ellis of the
United States as UNRWA's Deputy Commissioner-
General.

The United States is UNRWA's largest single
donor. In 2009 we provided more than $267 million,
including more than $116 million to the General Fund.
Unfortunately, the Fund still faces severe and chronic
shortfalls, which are estimated at $140 million for this
year. We appreciate the efforts of donors that have
provided sizable emergency support, but there is no
substitute for predictable annual contributions to the
General Fund. As such, we welcome the renewed
commitment of the Arab League, whose members have
pledged collectively to provide UNRWA with no less
than 7.8 per cent of its General Fund. It is imperative
that those pledges be delivered.

Let me conclude by turning briefly to the
situation in Lebanon. We thank General Claudio
Graziano for his service with the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and we welcome General
Alberto Asarta Cuevas, who begins his new assignment
tomorrow. We also recall the important contribution
that all troop-contributing countries are making to this
vital effort. We call upon all parties to fulfil the
provisions of the Security Council's resolutions 1559
(2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006).

