Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): In their statements today, a number of
delegations deliberately referred to the situation in my
country in a misleading, provocative and distorting
manner. They adduced a number of false allegations to
serve their aim of supporting radicalism and terrorism
in Syria and across the broader region and to detract
attention from the core matter under discussion today:
the situation in the Middle East. We remain firm in
our conviction, reiterated time and again before the
Council, that the objective for our discussion of this
item should be to bring to an end the Israeli occupation
of Arab lands, not to discuss the internal situation of a
certain State.

I will not respond to the statements made by enemy
States that shelter, arm and train terrorists and facilitate
their infiltration of Syrian territory across our borders
with neighbouring States. They spread devastation,
radical terrorism and Wahhabi extremism in Syria and
seek, in particular, to bring about the failure of any
peaceful solution under Syrian leadership. I mention in
particular the regimes of Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Turkey
as well as some well-known Western Governments
whose conduct is in blatant violation of the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of international law, in particular the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes.

Israel occupies territories in Palestine, Syria and
Lebanon. The beginning of that occupation coincided
with the birth of this international Organization.
For more than half a century, successive Israeli
Governments have perpetrated systematic and
documented violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law that amount
to war crimes and crimes against humanity. There has
been more than half a century of settlement campaigns
that undermine - as recognized by everyone,
including Israel's supporters - the prospects for the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State
within the 1967 borders and of peace and security in
the region. There has been more than half a century
of complete disregard by Israel for the relevant United
Nations resolutions seeking to bring to an end its
occupation of Arab territories. There has been more
than half a century by Israel of State terrorism, racist
laws, desecration of Islamic and Christian holy sites,
and the eviction of Palestinian citizens from their
homes, including women and children. There has been
more than half a century of blind support by influential
States, both within and outside of the Security Council,
for the continued Israeli policy of occupying Arab
territories.

For more than half a century, part of our land has
been occupied and Syrian citizens have been chafing
under the yoke of Israeli occupation. In the occupied
Syrian Golan, Syrian citizens continue to suffer.
Their suffering has been overlooked once again by the
Secretariat in its briefing today.

Israeli settlement campaigns continue in the
occupied Syrian Golan, where Syrians are subjected to
the most horrendous policies of racial discrimination,
detention and torture. They are deprived of their
natural resources and of education meeting the Syrian
national curriculum. They are also prevented from
carrying their Syrian identity cards. If a Syrian citizen
in the occupied Syrian Golan refuses to carry an Israeli
identity card, he or she is prevented from entering an
Israeli hospital if he or she falls sick. Syrian citizens
in the Golan Heights are prevented from following the
Syrian curriculum in their studies.

Those facts are well-documented, well-established
and well-known to all present. Since all present claim
to be against occupation and to seek its termination,
why has the United Nations failed, in humanitarian,
political, economic and moral terms, to fulfil its
responsibility to bring Israel's occupation to an end?
While it is true that the United Nations, including the
Security Council, has succeeded in adopting hundreds
of resolutions calling for the cessation of the Israeli
occupation, what is frustrating is that none of those
resolution has been implemented, including resolution
497 (1981), on terminating the occupation of the Syrian
Golan. It is useful to recall here that all resolutions,
as well as international law, have been elaborated to
be applied. The Charter of the United Nations, as well
as other international instruments, have been adopted
to be respected. United Nations resolutions have been
adopted to be implemented. Accordingly, we have
learned, and in turn we teach young diplomats, to come
to the Organization to perfect the art of diplomacy.
We try to convince them that the resolutions of this
international Organization must be respected and
carried out. That is supposed to take place seriously and
applied to everybody without exception. I do not believe
that any of the States Members that have acceded to the
Organization for noble goals have come just to adopt
resolutions that remain dead letters, or merely to cite
those resolutions and laws in their statements or have
them apply to some and not to others in accordance
with so-called double standard policies.

I should like to ask, given that, after so many years,
the United Nations has been unable to end the Israeli
occupation of our occupied territory and return the
rights of its people, what, in the Council's view, is the
alternative? How can we regain our occupied territory
in Palestine, the Syrian Golan and South Lebanon?
We believe that what is needed today to preserve the
credibility of the international Organization is for some
very well-known States to end their policies of double
standards. Member States should match words with
deeds by taking concrete measures that force Israel to
abide by United Nations resolutions in a manner that
will help to end the occupation and the unprecedented
bloody tragedy being experienced by Arab citizens
and Palestinians living under occupation for so many
decades.

It is paradoxical that Israel was established by
a resolution of the Organization (General Assembly resolution 181 (II)). Regardless of our views on that
resolution, Israel, which is indebted to the Organization
for that resolution, currently, does not carry out any of
the resolutions adopted by the United Nations when it
comes to ending its occupation of Lebanese, Palestinian
and Syrian land. Israeli occupation forces provide
assistance to terrorist groups in the buffer zone in the
occupied Syrian Golan by transferring injured terrorists
through the separation wall to Israeli hospitals to be
treated. It then returns them to Syrian territory, again
through the separation wall, to continue their terrorist
activities in that critical region.

We should pay due attention to ensuring
that such Israeli assistance to terrorists does not
constitute a flagrant violation of the Disengagement
of Forces Agreement, the mandate of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
or international law - or that it endanger the lives
of UNDOF personnel and undermine the work of the
forces. That is precisely what has happened many times:
terrorist groups have abducted UNDOF peacekeepers,
targeted their positions and fired on them. We have
informed the Department for Peacekeeping Operations
of all the full details of such events, including the
very serious matter concerning a Qatari intelligence
conspiracy and the abduction to Jordan of a Filipino
peacekeeping battalion. We requested an independent
official investigation in a statement I made at the
General Assembly on behalf of my Government,
which I have reiterated in a number of statements at
the Security Council. Strangely, months later, we
continue to await a response from DPKO. To date, we
have received no reply, either from the Secretariat or
from DPKO. However, as the saying goes, every cloud
has a silver lining. That Qatari-Israeli collusion with
Wahabi/Takfiri radical terrorists, who wreak havoc
along the separation line in the Golan, is indicative of
the policy of double standards and its collusion against
the safety and stability of Syria and its people, as well
as that of United Nations personnel.

