Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): The Philippines
is indeed proud to see a member of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations in the Security Council
presidency for the month of August. The Philippines
congratulates the Malaysian presidency for convening
this open debate, which will deepen our discourse on
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

The prevailing global security environment,
characterized by persistent inter- and intrastate
conflicts and frequent violent extremist activities,
makes it even more incumbent upon us to find urgent
and concrete measures that will ensure that weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) are not propagated and
never used. The mere existence of those destructive
weapons makes the world highly vulnerable to their
use, whether by intent, miscalculation or accident. It is
therefore imperative to remain focused on the ultimate
goal of ridding the world of those weapons.
The international community has made great strides
in the area of non-proliferation with the adoption and
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) and other related initiatives, such as the Nuclear
Security Summit process, which complement other
existing global legal instruments. The changing face
of international conflict, however, necessitates tougher
measures and stronger international cooperation
that will guarantee effective implementation by each
individual State. In that regard, we welcome the open
consultations on the comprehensive review of the status
of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) convened
by Spain last June. We look forward to the outcome of
the review in December, when we will have identified
and recommended ways and means to improve the
resolution's implementation.

Resolution 1540 (2004) encourages all States to
prepare, on a voluntary basis, national implementation
action plans. More than a decade since the resolution's
adoption, we have come to realize that the national
action plan is a vital, indispensable tool if States are to
be fully prepared to address the proliferation of WMDs.

The Philippines has in place its own chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) action plan
aimed at reducing the threat of, and damage from, CBRN
incidents of accidental, natural or intentional origin,
including terrorist acts. Our CBRN national action plan
provides a unified approach to build the capacity of
the Philippines to respond to the risks associated with
CBRN materials. To make our CBRN national action
plan more effective, we recently signed into law a bill to
further strengthen our regime against the proliferation
of WMDs in our country. The Strategic Trade
Management Act will stop the spread of WMDs through
responsible management of trade and investment in
strategic goods and the provisions of related services.
We consider strategic goods as products that, for
security reasons or due to international agreements,
are considered to be of such military importance that
their export is either prohibited altogether or subject
to specific conditions. Such goods are generally
suitable to be used for military purposes or for the
production of WMDs. Our law requires establishing
a national strategic goods list to describe specifically
the strategic goods subject to authorization. The list
will be in conformity with international commitments
and non-proliferation obligations pursuant to bilateral
and multilateral treaties, international conventions and
international non-proliferation regimes.

Many Member States have pointed to the necessity
of international and regional cooperation being key
in our fight against WMDs. For countries that do not
yet have the highest level of detection capability to
intercept WMDs, continuous assistance in training and
resources from regional and international partners will
be essential. We also urge the Committee established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)
to put in place an improved matchmaking system
to ensure prompt and effective response to requests
for assistance.

Finally, the Philippines has banded with 14 other
Member States to further promote CBRN risk mitigation
and security governance in the United Nations. As
mentioned earlier by the representative of Morocco,
in late September the Group of Friends of CBRN Risk
Mitigation and Security Governance will host a high-
level side event that will focus on CBRN risk mitigation
in the context of combating terrorism. The Group,
which has grown to 15 members, stands ready to work
with the 1540 Committee and other like-minded groups
to focus the spotlight on the risks of CBRN materials
falling into the hands of terrorists.

