Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Our remarks
today will address only the Israeli-Palestine conflict.
We will comment separately on other Middle East
issues when the opportunity arises. Today's open debate
is particularly important because it gives Council
members and the wider United Nations membership the
opportunity to reflect on the long-awaited report issued
by the Middle East Quartet on 1 July. I want to begin by
paying tribute to the clarity and gravity of the briefing
provided by the Secretary-General. We endorse his
assessment fully.

The Quartet report confirms what we all know,
namely, that current trends on the ground pose a
major threat to the continued viability of the two-State
solution - a solution that would see a secure Israel and
an independent Palestine living side by side in peace.

That is the Vision that was called for long ago when
the State of Israel was first established. It is one that
the Council has been working towards for many years.
Unless and until it is achieved, it is unlikely we will
ever have true peace in the region.
The Quartet report lays bare the reality that much of
the West Bank has been appropriated by Israel. Seventy
per cent of Area C, which constitutes 60 per cent of
the West Bank, is either occupied by Israeli settlers or
otherwise taken by the Israeli State. Meanwhile, Israel
is systematically denying Palestinian development. To
any dispassionate observer, the Quartet's conclusion
that those developments are steadily eroding the
viability of the two-state Solution is unanswerable. It
also reflects what New Zealand and others have been
saying in the Security Council for a long time. That
is not to justify the Violence and incitement, to which
the report also rightly calls attention. Terror tactics and
intimidation are reprehensible, whoever carries them
out. Leaders on both sides have responsibilities in that
regard.

We acknowledge the concerns that have been
expressed about the report. Some have expressed
disappointment that the recommendations do not go far
enough. Both parties have accused the report of lacking
balance. Certainly from New Zealand's perspective,
the report does not go as far as it would have liked.
But we nonetheless believe that it provides a useful
analysis of the most significant threats to the peace
process. It is especially noteworthy that four significant
stakeholders - the United States of America, the
Russian Federation, the European Union and the
United Nations - have put their names to the common
diagnosis of the current situation.

The report also contains recommendations with
which it is hard to disagree. It reinforces the need
to address the wide range of critical issues facing
Israelis and Palestinians, including halting settlement
activity, strengthening the capacity and authority of
the Palestinian Authority, addressing the situation in
Gaza and reducing tensions and preventing violence
and incitement. That must provide a useful basis for
further discussion. But of course, no Quartet report on
its own will change the realities on the ground. What is
required is for the parties to demonstrate the political
will to negotiate with each other and make the difficult
compromises necessary to reach an agreement. We
welcome all efforts to generate that political will and
momentum. The Security Council has a fundamentally
important role to play in that regard.

We were deeply disturbed by Israel's recent
decision to advance plans for 800 new housing units
in settlements in East Jerusalem and the West Bank.
Such settlements are an affront to the Council and
the Quartet, and take us further from peace. But they
must not divert the Council from carrying out its
responsibilities. We hope that the Council will be able
to adopt a short and balanced statement in response
to the Quartet's report. Such a statement must affirm
the centrality of a two-State solution. But any Council
statement, like the report, cannot be the end of our
ambition. Like the report, any statement can only be
a useful but necessary waypoint. It is not sufficient in
itself to resolve the conflict.

The time is coming - indeed, many would say that
it has long come - when the Security Council must
live up to its responsibility and play its part to support
the parties back to negotiations, including by providing
guidance to the parties on the issues that must be
resolved. As we have said, if the goal is to generate the
political will to negotiate, we believe that it is important
that the international community engage in a balanced
way that reflects and addresses the real concerns of
both parties, whether it is through the Security Council,
the Quartet, the Arab Peace Initiative, an international
conference or any other initiative.

We also pay tribute to the efforts that Egypt is
carrying out, particularly highlighted by Minister
Shoukry's recent Visit to Israel. The proposal to host
confidence-building talks between the two sides would
be an important step to encouraging the parties and their
domestic constituencies to move back to negotiations.
New Zealand remains committed to Council action, at
the right moment, aimed at making the promise of two
States, Israel and a Palestinian State existing side-by-
side in peace, a more realistic possibility.

