Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (Spoke in French): I
congratulate the Burkina Faso presidency of the
Security Council on having organized this public
debate on drug trafficking as a threat to international
security. Luxembourg fully supports the statement
made by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.

My country agrees with the analysis that
organized crime linked to drug trafficking represents a
serious threat to international peace and security and a
significant impediment to sustainable development. We
must urgently react to the serious problems posed by
the ever-strengthening links between drug trafficking,
corruption and other types of organized crime, such as
human trafficking, illicit arms trafficking, cybercrime
and money-laundering, including that used to finance
terrorism. The international community must step up
its efforts to assist countries, subregions and regions
affected by the scourge of drug trafficking, and the
activities of the United Nations should be at the centre
of these joint efforts.
The problem of narcotics trafficking should, in
future, be part of a comprehensive approach to
conflicts and an integral part of peacekeeping
operations, peacebuilding strategies and, in more
general terms, our development policy. In this regard,
we welcome resolutions 1829 (2008) and 1876 (2009),
on Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau, respectively.

In my capacity as President of the Economic and
Social Council, I should like to emphasize, in this
context, the potential for cooperation among the
Council, especially through its Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission in the fight against drug
trafficking and its impact on stability, governance and
socio-economic development in countries emerging
from conflict.

Faced with the growth in drug production and
trafficking, the Political Declaration and Plan of Action
on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,
adopted at the fifty-second session of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, have reiterated once again the
importance of simultaneously reducing supply and
demand, as well as the need to strengthen and step up
joint efforts at the national, regional and international
levels to deal with these global problems in a more
comprehensive way pursuant to the principle of
common and shared responsibility.

If international action is to have its full effect, we
need the support of all the States Members of our
Organization. And those efforts begin with the national
implementation of existing international instruments.
My country has ratified all the international
conventions relating to the fight against drugs and
transnational crime, and, specifically, the United
Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. In implementing
that Convention, Luxembourg is among the few
countries to have followed up on article 5 and
established a fund to combat narcotics trafficking by
reinvesting confiscated drug money in projects aimed
at fighting drug trafficking. For example, at the request
of the Minister of Justice of Mali, between 2010 and
2012 Luxembourg will co-finance through this fund a
project aimed at fighting the rise in organized crime,
and in drug trafficking in particular, and its
destabilizing effects in Mali and the subregion.
In the context of our cooperation and
development policy, my country, in addition to its
regular contributions to the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, is also carrying out a number of
bilateral projects in the area of counter-narcotics
trafficking, including projects that integrate aspects of
peacebuilding. Luxembourg is sincerely convinced that
we must address the dimensions of peace, security,
development and human rights in an integrated way,
giving the same attention to each.

