Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and thank him for his statement. I
also thank Special Representative Lamberto Zannier
for his briefing and Mr. Skender Hyseni for his
remarks.

As the tragic incident of 2 July in Mitrovica
clearly showed and as the Secretary-General recalls in
his report (S/2010/401), the security situation in
Kosovo is stable but fragile. The risk of further
violence caused by ethnic tensions is palpable and
continues to be a reason for concern, particularly in
northern Kosovo. It is mainly the responsibility of both
parties to ensure that Kosovo is a place where ethnic
tolerance and multiculturalism allow for peaceful
coexistence among communities. They must therefore
refrain from all acts of provocation and any action that
may further aggravate instability.

For its part, the international community must
remain fully engaged in Kosovo. The Security Council
and the Secretary-General, especially through his
Special Representative, as well as individual Member
States, must continue to follow the situation closely
and maintain their efforts to promote stability, dialogue
and reconciliation.

The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has a special role to play
in this regard under resolution 1244 (1999). The fact
that the Mission is accepted by all parties on the
ground makes it particularly well placed to spearhead
efforts to assist them in overcoming their differences
and to bring communities together on issues of mutual
interest.

In this context, we reiterate our call on both
Belgrade and Pristina to cooperate actively with
UNMIK and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier, especially in order to
advance practical arrangements that may benefit the
ordinary citizen. We are concerned by the Secretary-
General's assessment that insufficient progress has
been made in this regard. Also worrisome is the
observation contained in his report that relations
between the Mission and the Kosovo authorities are at
arm's length. It must be recalled that UNMIK is the
overall authority established by the Security Council in
the territory.

We welcome the Secretary-General's initiative
designed to seek ways to make the role of UNMIK as
effective as possible and to further promote
cooperation between Belgrade and Pristina. One such
area of possible cooperation would be the
reconstruction of the Serbian Orthodox sites damaged
or destroyed during the violence of March 2004.
Providing the necessary funds for the Reconstruction
Implementation Commission to complete the
reconstruction of all the destroyed Serbian Orthodox
sites would certainly contribute to rebuilding
confidence between the communities, as the Secretary-
General rightfully suggests. Restoring such confidence
will be key to increasing the number of returnees,
which continues to be low, according to the report
before us. It is troubling to learn that harassment of
Serbian returnees has not ceased and that Serbian sites
of religious and cultural importance continue to be
vandalized.

Brazil takes note of the advisory opinion
delivered in The Hague by the International Court of
Justice on 22 July concerning the unilateral declaration
of independence by the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government of Kosovo. While the Brazilian
Government is still examining the opinion with the
diligence it deserves, we note that the Court has not
questioned the fact that resolution 1244 (1999) remains
in force. Brazil is therefore of the view that said
resolution continues to be the key parameter guiding
the presence of the United Nations in Kosovo and
those who operate there under overall United Nations
authority.

We also believe that resolution 1244 (1999)
continues to offer conditions conducive for the dispute
to be settled through negotiations with a view to
reaching a legitimate solution under the auspices of the
Security Council, consistent with its authority and
primary responsibility in matters pertaining to
international peace and security. We therefore reiterate
our call on the parties to resume negotiations on all
outstanding issues as soon as possible.

