Mexico thanks Belgium, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom and Viet Nam for calling for today's debate on climate change and security. The issue is of the utmost relevance, since the negative effects of the phenomenon - catastrophic many times over - threaten the very survival of the human species. We are certain that this meeting will make it possible to move forward in the discussions on the effects that climate change may have in some cases in countries in conflict and post-conflict situations. Although the Security Council is not the body responsible for responding to the global threat of the phenomenon, the effects of climate change can accentuate the risk of instability. We are talking not just about extreme events, such as droughts or floods, which may be aggravated by the impacts of climate change, but also about long-term forms of environmental degradation, such as sea-level rise or loss of agricultural productivity. All of these have had devastating impacts on people in some regions. We support the Secretary-General's various approaches to signalling the importance of investing in prevention in its various facets, which will be less costly for the international community than responding to conflicts themselves. In that regard, the United Nations system's analytical capacities must be strengthened in order to better understand how climate change can increase risks that potentially have a negative impact on security in specific situations. The institutional architecture is moving in the right direction with the establishment of the partnership mechanism in the Department of Political Affairs and Peacebuilding. Its work in tandem with the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Environment Programme will help us to refine the kind of comprehensive analysis that the Security Council requires. Climate change is a phenomenon with multidimensional consequences. Therefore, the response to it must also be multidimensional. The reality on the ground calls for coherent, coordinated and integrated action. In cases where the Council has suggested a link between climate change and security, not only are peacekeeping operations and special political missions present but so is the development system. In this context, we must work together so that risk analysis includes the trends that the development system observes on the ground, and vice versa, so that identified development challenges are addressed in a preventive manner and do not become security problems. Ultimately, structural causes of conflict must be addressed. Just as the response to climate change must be guided by the best available scientific knowledge, as stated in the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, the Security Council must have the best analyses, on a case-by-case basis, and in specific situations that fall within its competence. That is how the Council's decision-making can be efficient and effective, taking into account the reality on the ground. We believe that this phenomenon represents a major challenge to development that needs to be addressed in a comprehensive manner and in accordance with international commitments in this area, in particular the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement. The attention that the Security Council can give to the issue in specific contexts must complement the work being done in the multilateral climate change system, which aims to be more ambitious with regard to mitigation, adaptation, financing, technology and capacity-building. Mexico is an active player in those areas and is committed to meeting the objectives of the Paris Agreement. Finally, Mexico considers it essential that the Security Council raise awareness of the effects of climate change on certain conflicts and that it empower the parts of the United Nations system with the best capacities and tools to address the risk factors and implement the necessary responses. Working together in a truly comprehensive and coordinated manner is the best way for us to address the challenges that some of the effects of climate change present, in certain specific cases, to international peace and security.
