Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome the presence in
the Chamber of the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of South Africa, Mr. Aziz Pahad. We thank him
for his thorough briefing on developments in the peace
process in Cote d'Ivoire and on the mediation efforts
made by the President of South Africa, Mr. Thabo
Mbeki. We also thank the representative of Nigeria for
his valuable statement on behalf of the African Union.

The Russian delegation welcomes the outcome of
the Pretoria meeting of the Ivorian parties and the steps
that they have taken to break the impasse and advance
the peace process through the practical implementation
of the agreements reached in the capital of South
Africa. We hope that the parties will comply
unconditionally with their obligations by implementing
the key provisions of the Agreement.

The major objectives now are to implement the
National Assembly amendment to article 35 of the
Constitution, which sets out the requirements for
presidential candidates, and to launch the disarmament
process. Resolving those issues will create the
conditions necessary for implementing measures to
overcome the de facto split in the country and will help
in the organization of the presidential elections planned
for October. Everything possible must be done to hold
the elections on time since their postponement,
especially an indefinite postponement, would threaten
very serious negative consequences.

We deeply appreciate the work of President
Mbeki in the Cote d'Ivoire mediation mission
established under the auspices of the African Union. To
a large extent, it was his personal effort that led to the
positive outcome of the Pretoria meeting of all Ivorian
parties.

Significant assistance to the Ivorian settlement
process will be provided by the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and the French forces
supporting it. The mediation efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States also play an
important role in the peace process. Nevertheless, as
important as external assistance to the Ivorian
settlement process is, the greatest responsibility for
seeking and implementing difficult decisions for a
settlement of the crisis lies with the Ivorians
themselves. We call on the parties to the conflict to
maintain the positive momentum of the Pretoria talks
until the end of the process and to demonstrate the
political will fully to comply with their commitments
in the peace process.

With respect to the Security Council, the Russian
delegation is prepared to consider further tasks for the
United Nations, including the United Nations
Operation in cote d'Ivoire, to support the settlement
process.

