Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): We would like
to start by again thanking Mr. Lacroix for his very
pertinent and in-depth briefing, as always, in addition to
conveying our thanks to the Police Commissioners who
briefed us today, as well as to our briefer from Bangui.

In line with the presidency's instructions, we will
try to be a bit more interactive in terms of engaging
on this very important issue. We would like to start by
recognizing the important role that the United Nations
police plays in promoting stability and long-term
development in conflict-affected countries. We also
note its significance, which is amplified by changing
conflict dynamics. In our view, there is therefore a
growing role for United Nations policing, and we
further recognize the success stories in many post-
conflict countries.

As a police-contributing country (PCC) ourself,
we strive for increasing the role of women not only
in peacekeeping but also in terms of police serving in
peacekeeping missions and conflict countries. We have
achieved a gender parity of 50 per cent, which exceeds
the provisions of the current strategy that works towards
greater gender parity in police and peacekeeping troops.

We welcome the continued efforts of the United
Nations to build its police capabilities, as well as
the contribution that they can make to local law-
enforcement capacity. We regard that as a very
important element in terms of responding to local
priorities and building local capacity. We also commend
efforts undertaken by the Police Division to promote
greater female representation, as mentioned earlier,
which is an important element that we strive for. This
is conducted through regional female senior police
command development courses to improve senior
leadership training overall. We would like to appeal
to the Secretariat to work with PCCs to increase the
number of female police officers.

The continued presence of United Nations
police on the ground gives them the responsibility
to ensure effective transitions from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, which is an important bridging role that
police play in terms of bringing normalcy to countries
that are affected by conflict. I believe that the sight
of police can bring a sense of normalcy back to the
public and the population in terms of peace, justice
and addressing criminality, which are sometimes
overlooked in the bigger picture when it comes to
peacekeeping and bringing stability to countries. We
would like to acknowledge the critical role that the
United Nations Police continues to play in ensuring
stability and sustaining peace in local communities. It
is important to ensure that the Police Division is better
placed within the United Nations system to meet that
growing demand.

Finally, we would like to thank the Police
Commissioners and the Police Division for the good
work that they are doing in the field and to pose two
questions to our commissioners.

First, we would like to ask the Commissioner of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
a question that particularly relates to female officers
in the field. Could she give us an indication, from her
vantage point, as to the challenges that women police
officers in peacekeeping missions face? And how can
the Council assist in addressing those challenges?

Secondly, we have a question for the two
Police Commissioners from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Building on the reforms of the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, in their View,
what more can the United Nations do to ensure that
the United Nations Police is better equipped to carry
out these duties? Their views on that would be very
much appreciated.

