The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ukraine.

We are disappointed by the results of the voting on
the draft resolution on chemical weapons use in Syria
(S/2017/172). Ukraine co-sponsored and voted in favour
of the draft resolution and, in that regard, I wish to
reiterate some elements of our position on the subject.

Against the background of increasing challenges
and threats to international peace and security, Ukraine
advocates strict adherence to the provisions of key
international instruments in this field, including the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction (CWC) and the 1925 Geneva
Protocol. The use of Chemical weapons in Syria,
confirmed in the reports of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, is a blatant Violation of
international law, and all responsible for such crimes
should be brought to justice.

Ukraine therefore supports the introduction of
further restrictive measures by the Council, under the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, in response to the violation of the CWC and
Security Council resolution 2118 (2013). The inability
of the Council to address breaches of the Convention
will lead to further impunity and is a matter of grave
concern to my delegation.

Despite the results of the voting, I commend the
efforts of those delegations involved in the preparation
of the draft resolution, which sought to impose new,
targeted, sectoral sanctions against the Syrian regime for
the use of toxic chemicals as weapons, and to redouble
international efforts to prevent the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant from using chemical weapons in
future. The ongoing firm stance of those delegations
in defending and restoring respect for international law
is indispensable and will not be in vain. Let us remain
mobilized. The time for justice will come.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

