Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from Chinese): This has been a troubled year for Afghanistan,
with a multitude of major incidents and events taking
place in the country. China is deeply concerned by the
fact that fighting has continued in Afghanistan and that a
political solution to the conflict remains elusive. We
condemn the harm done to United Nations personnel and
the murder of Iranian diplomats. We view with sympathy
and disquiet the havoc that has been wreaked on the
economy and security of the people and the country of
Afghanistan.

Afghanistan is a multi-ethnic country where ethnic
problems have deep roots in history. With the
involvement of outside forces, the complex of tensions
and contradictions becomes even more entrenched. In the
past several months one faction in the country has won
military victories, but the conflict has not ended as a
result; it has only entered a new phase. We believe that
any military advantage can only be temporary, and
Afghan history and the present-day reality both show that
military means will not contribute to the settlement of the
conflict. The resumption of United Nations-sponsored

 

negotiations among all the Afghan factions is the only way
to resolve the Afghan conflict.

China sincerely hopes that the Afghan factions respond
positively to the appeal of the international community and
endeavour through negotiations to establish a broad-based,
representative Government and to restore peace and stability
as soon as possible. At the same time, we expect the
international community to make concerted efforts to
prevent outside forces from meddling in the Afghan conflict
so as to create external conditions that will allow the
silencing of the guns in Afghanistan.

The Chinese delegation appreciates the mediation
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Brahimi, and of the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan, and it supports the United Nations continuing
to play its central and leading role in the matter. China is
ready to actively participate in and cooperate with the
peacemaking initiative planned by the "six plus two" group
and hopes that this initiative will create conditions for the
resumption of talks among Afghan factions once winter sets
111.

After years of prolonged war and turmoil, the Afghan
people now thirst for peace and stability. The settlement of
the Afghan question ultimately lies with the Afghan people
themselves. We hope that the international community will
exert a positive influence and that any action taken by the
Security Council will contribute to the resumption of talks
among the Afghan factions with a view to agreement on a
plan for a political settlement.

It was based on this position of principle that the
Chinese delegation took part in the consultations on the
draft resolution. We are grateful to its sponsors for taking
on board amendments proposed by my delegation. We
appreciate the flexibility, patience and genuine willingness
for cooperation they demonstrated during the consultations.

We will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

