Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I should like once again to express our
gratitude for the tireless efforts deployed by your country
and delegation in the Security Council.

I should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa. I wish
also to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on this important occasion.

We have listened with great interest to the statement
made by Ambassador Salim Ahmed Salim, the Secretary
General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), and
to that of the Permanent Representative of Algeria,
Abdallah Baali, on behalf of the Chairman of the OAU.

The Secretary-General has again shown us the
correlation between peace and development, which is
essential if we wish to overcome the deep-seated causes
of the majority of the conflicts in Africa and elsewhere in
the world. The report also underlines the necessary
connection between efforts to achieve, maintain and
consolidate peace.

In the past two years, the United Nations, the OAU,
subregional organizations and various African leaders
have undertaken a series of initiatives aimed at resolving
the conflicts described in the report. In our View, a
comprehensive approach is necessary that would contain
the following elements.

First, the role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of peace is indispensable, and its authority
must be strengthened. In this context, the concept of
human security is essential.

Secondly, close cooperation between the Security
Council and African regional and subregional
organizations is imperative. This cooperation is
particularly relevant with regard to preventive and early-
warning mechanisms.

Thirdly, minimum conditions for development must
be created in order to overcome the causes of conflict and
to deal with their humanitarian consequences. For that
reason, we believe that cooperation is imperative between
the activities of the Council and of other bodies of the
United Nations system, in particular the Bretton Woods
institutions.

We must assess and give impetus to the efforts
undertaken by the large majority of African countries to
consolidate their democracies, promote human rights,
reform their economies, attract investments and improve
the standard of living of their peoples. The declaration
approved last July in Algiers at the OAU Summit is clear
evidence of this.

We are witnessing a positive trend in the resolution
of conflicts. Complex questions such as those related to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone
have taken once again the path of negotiation at the
urging of regional leaders and with the support of the
Security Council. That support must be renewed with a

 

significant United Nations presence in the field in order to
maintain and consolidate the hard-won peace.

In the case of the Central African Republic, we note
with satisfaction that on 19 September last, presidential
elections were held that international observers found both
peaceful and fair. The United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic certainly played a key role in the
holding of those elections.
In the Western Sahara, with the cooperation of
Morocco and the Frente POLISARIO, the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) continues to work to hold a referendum on
self-determination in conditions of freedom, transparency
and impartiality.

In the case of Eritrea and Ethiopia, we hope that peace
is at hand.

All of these steps towards peace must be supported by
the Security Council.

Argentina has participated in and encouraged the
process of decolonization in Africa since its inception.
Today my country is gratified at the consolidation of the
rule of the law and the opening of African economies. To
our mutual benefit, we have increased our commercial and
technological exchanges and strengthened our political and
cultural relations.

At the multilateral level, Argentina, together with
interested African countries, promoted the creation of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the South Atlantic. In October
1998, the Fifth Meeting of the Member States of the Zone
of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic, held in
Buenos Aires, brought together 21 African countries and
three Latin America countries.

The Plan of Action adopted at that meeting is designed
to implement the objectives of the Zone relating to the
peaceful solution of disputes, the promotion of democracy
and human rights, the fight against drug trafficking,
cooperation for development, humanitarian assistance and
the protection of living resources.

Argentina, to the extent of its ability, has been, and
will continue to be, present in Africa in the context of
peacekeeping operations and in humanitarian assistance
efforts, either directly or through the "White Helmets". We
are also working on a set of cooperation programmes in the
fields of agriculture and livestock, computer science, State
reform and privatization, all of which are mutually
beneficial. We reiterate our offer to provide training
through our Peacekeeping Academy in Buenos Aires.

Finally, I should like to reiterate once again our
desire actively to participate in United Nations efforts in
Africa and to cooperate fully in the initiatives and
recommendations of the Secretary-General.

