Mr. Tokunaga (Japan): Allow me at the outset to
join others in expressing our tribute to Ambassador
Holbrooke. He was the Assistant Secretary of State for
East Asian and Pacific Affairs in the late 19705 and had
many friends in Japan. He was very highly regarded.

At the outset, I would like to pay tribute to the
Honourable Joseph Biden, Vice-President of the United
States of America, for taking the initiative to convene
this timely meeting.

Today, Iraq is at a critical juncture, just a step
away from establishing a new Government. It is
important for us to express our support at the
ministerial level for the efforts made by the
Government and the people of Iraq to build their nation
and regain an international standing equal to that which
their country held prior to the adoption of resolution
661 (1990). It is also opportune to discuss how the
Security Council should involve itself with Iraq. On
behalf of the Government of Japan, it gives me great
pleasure to share with you our Government's views on
those issues.

Political stability is very important for the
success of nation-building in Iraq. We hope to see the
early establishment of a Government through an
inclusive process that involves Shiites, Sunnis and
Kurds. The international community should continue to
encourage such efforts.

It is necessary for the new Government in Iraq to
continue its efforts to improve the security situation on
the ground. The withdrawal of the United States
combat troops and the transfer of security
responsibilities to the Iraqi Government in August were
significant steps. The overall security situation in Iraq
has improved since then. Japan welcomes that trend
and hopes it will continue.

The circumstances in Iraq have changed
drastically since 2003, and Japan supports the
aspiration of the Government of Iraq to regain an
international standing equal to that before the first Gulf
war. Iraq has now carried out national elections on its
own and is now a fully democratic nation. In order to
encourage the Iraqis to continue in that course, my
Government fully supports the resolutions and the
presidential statement that we adopted today aimed at
closing, one by one, the issues left over from the days
of the former regime.
At the same time, we hope that the new
Government of Iraq will work with the Government of
Kuwait to find solutions to pending issues between the
two countries on the basis of mutual trust.

Japan believes that the international community
should continue to support the peacebuilding efforts in
Iraq under the ownership of the Iraqi people. In that
context, we support the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, which is playing an
important role in promoting political dialogue, national
reconciliation and humanitarian assistance.

Japan, for its part, has almost completed the
implementation of the $5 billion assistance pledged at
the International Donors Conference for the
Reconstruction of Iraq, held in Madrid in 2003, as well
as debt relief of $6.7 billion. Our assistance has
focused on rebuilding livelihoods and improving
security. Japan intends to continue its assistance aimed
at promoting economic and social development in Iraq.
The Government of Japan will work closely with the
private sector on reconstruction and development
projects in Iraq to support the efforts to rebuild the
country's economy.

I would like to reiterate the significance of the
Security Council sending a unified message at the
ministerial level to encourage Iraq's nation-building
efforts and efforts to achieve the international standing
it had before the first Gulf war. Strong support from the
international community is important for Iraq to
continue on its path to stability and development. I
would like to conclude by expressing the determination
of my Government to remain actively engaged in this
endeavour.

