Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for giving a
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Afghanistan
this morning. Japan also welcomes very warmly the
appointment of Mr. Kai Eide as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and expresses
its commitment to supporting him in meeting important
challenges.

This year marks the halfway point in the
implementation process of the Afghanistan Compact.
As Chair of the Group of 8 (G-8) this year, Japan
hosted the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
(JCMB) last month to review the progress to date and
to discuss the way forward. As the participants noted,
there have been tangible achievements in the
reconstruction of the country since launching the
Compact. This could not have been done without the
combination of the best efforts of the Afghan
Government and the commitment of the international
community.

With the finalization of the Afghan National
Development Strategy now in sight, the nation-building
of the country is expected to shift from the
reconstruction phase to the development phase. Japan
is fully committed to supporting the efforts of the
Government and people of Afghanistan. Nevertheless,
various challenges lie ahead on this path.

The security situation is most worrying. To create
stability, which is essential for economic development,
international forces need to remain committed to the
daunting task of eradicating terrorism in the country.
Japan applauds the dedicated efforts of many countries
in providing forces and personnel.

Success also hinges upon the strengthening of the
capability of the Afghan National Security Forces. For
Japan's part, I am pleased to report that Japan has
rejoined the international fight against terrorism by
resuming its refueling activities in the Indian Ocean.

Japan also attaches importance to the
disbandment of illegal armed groups as a means to
improve the long-term security situation. We are
pleased to note that 161 illegal armed groups have been
disbanded to date. Registration of firearms has been
progressing as well. The establishment of a unit for the
disbandment of illegal armed groups in the Ministry of
the Interior will also be a step forward in nationalizing
that process. Building on this progress, disbandment
operations must be further enhanced and accelerated.
Japan remains committed to supporting the efforts of
the Afghan Government in that area as well.

Another area of concern is narcotics. As the
recent survey of United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime indicated, the situation of opium poppy
cultivation will continue to remain worrisome this year.
We welcome that the Tokyo JCMB meeting endorsed
the Afghan Government's implementation plan of
counter-narcotics measures, placing greater focus on
actions at the provincial level.

To address these challenges, a holistic and
comprehensive approach is essential. Japan has
extended $1.36 billion in assistance to Afghanistan in
line with its own holistic initiative called the
"Consolidation of Peace in Afghanistan", which
encompasses the political process, security, governance
and reconstruction. As a part of these efforts, Japan
recently announced an additional $110 million
assistance, focusing on projects in border areas shared
with Pakistan and Iran. A project to enhance the
capacity of the Afghan Government for border control
is also included.

Coordination is, of course, another requirement.
For efficient and effective assistance, coordination of
assistance activities is of vital importance. The
08-26870

coordination of the military strategy, the political
process and the development strategy is needed to
ensure that each element successfully takes root. The
role of the United Nations here is significant, now
more than ever, for coordinating between the efforts of
the Afghan Government and international actors. We
very much look forward to working closely with the
newly appointed Special Representative in this regard.

As for the mandate of United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, we stress the importance of the
smooth extension of the mandate at this critical
juncture to demonstrate that the international
community is united in supporting the activities of the
United Nations. Japan supports the recommendation of
the Secretary-General to extend the current mandate
for 12 months. We also welcome the Secretary-
General's approach, namely, to focus on several key
areas, including the readiness to take a further
coordination role within the existing mandate.

Japan, in its capacity as Chair of the G-8, will
pursue synergy between the discussion in the G-8
summit process, as well as those reviews and
discussions taking place in the United Nations and
other forums, so that we may better support the efforts
to consolidate peace and stability in Afghanistan.

