Ms. Samson (Netherlands): I should like to thank
Malaysia, as President of the Council for this month,
for organizing today's open debate. I should also
like to thank today's briefers, in particular Special
Representative Ms. Zerrougui, whom we wish to
reassure of our continued strong support.

The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement of
the European Union.

Each year thousands of children are abducted
in armed conflicts, taken from their secure home
environment, leaving behind destroyed families and
destabilized communities. Their future is often filled
with horrific crimes such as systematic violence,
rape, indoctrination, forced conversion and forced
recruitment as child soldiers. We need to step up our
efforts to protect children, especially when they are the
most vulnerable, that is, in armed conflict situations.
Because of the abhorrent consequences of abduction,
such as child recruitment and sexual exploitation,
abductions should trigger increased attention from the
international community.

In this intervention I should like to focus on the link
between the indoctrination and the recruitment of child
soldiers and will touch upon prevention, monitoring
and reporting and accountability.

States are primarily responsible for protecting their
populations from atrocity crimes. Special focus should
be placed on protecting the most vulnerable groups,
such as children. The Netherlands remains strongly
committed to the principle of the responsibility to
protect. We believe that prevention is at the core of
the responsibility to protect. We have a growing tool-
box of prevention instruments to work with, allowing
for tailor-made approaches. We have a responsibility
to take the necessary measures to safeguard children,
especially in areas where rebel groups are active.

When prevention fails, as it has in several cases
mentioned in the annex to the Secretary-General's
report on children in armed conflict (S/2015/409), the
monitoring and reporting of abductions are crucial. The
reference to such cases in the report of the Secretary-
General provides a strong political signal. It forms the
basis for condemning abductions and clearly shows
the international community where to focus its efforts.
We therefore reiterate our full support for designating
abductions as a fifth criterion for listing in the annex to
the Secretary-General's annual report.

We need to ensure accountability for Violations
of international humanitarian law in general and for
violations that affect civilian populations and children
in particular. Whereas the International Criminal
Court (ICC) can play an important role, the primary
responsibility to hold perpetrators accountable lies
with States. Therefore, national capacity has to be
strengthened where needed. We need to be aware
of the fact that often perpetrators were once victims
of abduction themselves. Tragically, in many cases
abductees are recruited and become perpetrators
themselves when they are forced to commit atrocities
against their own families and friends. It is therefore
crucial to consider alternative non-judicial measures
and a comprehensive package of psycho-social support
for children who escape from rebel groups.

The Ongwen case at the International Criminal
Court is an extreme example of an abductee who turned
into a perpetrator. After being abducted at age 10, he rose
through the ranks of the Lord's Resistance Army and
became one of the top commanders and has now been
indicted by the ICC for atrocious crimes. The dilemma
of victims becoming perpetrators raises important
questions about how to ensure accountability. More
importantly, it confirms the importance of preventing
abduction and child recruitment, as that can reinforce
conflicts.

As long as the root causes of conflicts are not
addressed, children remain vulnerable to abduction
and recruitment. We believe that children are often
deliberately used as weapons in conflicts. Children
are specifically targeted by extremist groups, such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Boko
Haram, indoctrinated with extremist ideology and then
deployed as fighters. We should address those new
threats and risks in an overall child-protection strategy
and interrupt the cycle of abduction, indoctrination and
recruitment of children.

In conclusion, I should like to underline and reiterate
our support for the Safe Schools Declaration and the
underlying guidelines, which usefully complement
existing international law and include incentives for
all actors involved in armed conflict to respect student
safety and the right to education. In addition, let me
reiterate our strong support for the United Nations
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign. Momentum is
building, and the goal of the campaign is within reach.
Such initiatives directly contribute to a better situation
for children in conflict and deserve strong support from
all of us.

