Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your delegation
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month. I wish you and your team every
success. I would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
presenting the forty-fourth report on the implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2013/646, annex). We welcome the adoption earlier
today (see S/PV.7055) of resolution 2123 (2013),
authorizing the renewal of mandate of the European
Union-led force Operation Althea.

We note that the security situation in the country
continued to remain stable during the reporting period.
According to the report of the High Representative,
the intensity of the political crisis in the Federation
entity diminished. It is particularly encouraging that
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have continued
their path towards completing the "5+2" agenda, which
is necessary for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. In that regard, we note the regular
meetings of the ministerial working group established
earlier this year with the purpose of solving the
State- and defense-property issue and the drafting of
legislation on the matter. We encourage the Government
to continue its efforts to that end.

Among the achievements registered were also
regular meetings of the Federation institutions, the
adoption of a number of new laws and amendments to
existing laws by the Government and the Federation
Parliament, and the holding of the first post-war
census of population and households in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

During the reporting period, important progress
was made towards unblocking the long-delayed
appointments to the Federation Constitutional Court
and its Vital National Interest Panel. We commend
the High Representative for his efforts in that regard.
There were also some positive developments on the
economic front during the reporting period, although
the overall economic situation remains complex, with
a high number of persons unemployed and a difficult
fiscal situation. We agree with the High Representative
that much more should be done to realize the country's
full potential for significant growth.

Despite the aforementioned positive developments,
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to face a number
of challenges. We once again express our concern
about the continuation of direct and open challenges
to the fundamentals of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
including in particular the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Azerbaijan condemns divisive rhetoric advocating
the dissolution of the State and any action or attempt
to challenge the functionality of the State, its
constitutional responsibilities and the core provisions
of the General Framework Agreement. We would like
to emphasize in that regard that neither the General
Framework Agreement nor general international law
contains any provision invoking the claimed right
to self-determination for the purpose of unilateral
secession from or dissolution of the State. We agree
with the High Representative that those issues deserve
the special attention of the international community.

Another issue of concern requiring attention is
non-enforcement of the decisions of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That constitutes
a violation of the General Framework Agreement,
undermines the rule of law and erodes respect for the
authority of the highest judicial body in the country.

In conclusion, we reiterate our call on all
stakeholders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to engage in
constructive dialogue with a view to addressing the
pressing challenges, overcoming the political stalemate
and strengthening the stability and unity of the country.
It is also important that the Security Council and the
broader international community continue to support
progress towards stability and development in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the efforts of the country's
political leadership to that end.
