Mr. Shalgham (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere thanks to
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting
as a follow-up to developments in Libya. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Moraes Cabral for his work
and his response to Libya's concerns with regard to
many issues under the consideration of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), which he chairs. Allow me also to thank
Mr. Ian Martin for his ongoing continuing efforts to
cooperate with us in all fields and for his
comprehensive and clear report from Tripoli.

In this very Chamber, last February, the Council
adopted, first, resolution 1970 (2011) and then
resolution 1973 (2011) in order to protect unarmed and
innocent Libyan civilians. That effort was crowned
with Libya's freedom in expression of the desire of our
people to regain their sovereignty, as well as that of
other Arab peoples, from Tunisia and Egypt to Libya
and Yemen, where we have seen a transfer of authority,
and now to Syria, which is paying with blood in the
face of repression. In that country, ugly crimes against
humanity and against the Syrian people who, just like
the Tunisians, Egyptians and Yemenis, refuse to bow
until they achieve their freedom, are being perpetrated.
I thank the Council again.

Today, there is a new State in Libya. Elections,
both individual and by lists, as Mr. Martin said, will
take place in June. New elections will take place
despite the problems, the proliferation of arms, the
bloodshed and the issues that we are uncovering every
day. Lists of individuals and a new constitution will be
drawn up. The upcoming elections do not seek to
establish a Government or a parliament. The elections
will lead to the drafting of a constitution for a new and
democratic civil State, where there is the rule of law -
a State of peace and development for the well-being of
Libyans.

On 21 February 2011, Muammar Al-Qadhafi said
that we would hand out weapons and set Libya ablaze.
That happened. The vehicles of the Al-Qadhafi regime
were in the street, distributing weapons for people to
kill each other. Millions and millions of dollars and
dinars were handed out and people were turned against
each other. However, the awareness, enthusiasm and
solidarity of the Libyan people enabled us to overcome
very many problems.

We again thank the United Nations in the person
of Mr. Ian Martin, who is making so many efforts to
help us. However, we need more assistance from the
international community. Tens of thousands are
entering Libya from the southern Sahara every day.
Some leaders of the Al-Qadhafi regime are now in
various other States - Tunisia, Egypt, Algeria, Chad,
Mali and the Niger. We know that some of them are
plotting. In the past few days, a number of armed cells
have been detained. They were plotting to sabotage and
bomb Tripoli. Al-Qadhafi agents are sending funds to
Libya for acts of sabotage. I appeal to those States to
cooperate with us. I sent to the Council, under the
presidency of South Africa, as well as to Mr. Moreno-
Ocampo at the International Criminal Court, a flash
drive containing recordings of telephone calls during
which Mr. Baghdadi Ali Al-Mahmoudi personally gave
instructions for such actions. He is now in Tunisia.
There are also other people wanted by INTERPOL
residing in other States. Those persons must be brought
to justice. They are a danger to my country.

We are working to convene a meeting among the
countries of the Sahel and North Africa to agree a
unified strategy to combat terrorism in the Sahara.
Libya is the first victim of the absence of the State, and
we appeal to the Council to help us with funds. We
need our frozen assets to be released.

With regard to those funds, we are working
towards transparency. We now have a committee for
transparency in Libya. We have dozens of free
newspapers that are speaking out every day. There are
television stations working transparently every day.

Transitional justice measures are being adopted,
and those bodies have begun working. There has been
much talk about detention centres and torture.
However, the transitional Government has detained a
number of former ministers and senior officials. They
have been given every possible provision - health
care, visits, et cetera - Al-Qadhafi's second is among
them, and he is able to be in contact with the outside. I
have personally met with a number of detainees. They
are being cared for. Mr. Abdul-Ati Al-Obeidi, the
former Minister for Foreign Affairs, like others, is
being visited by his family and others.

However, let me say that there are areas where
the State has not been able to gain control. There are
no police or courts in those areas. We cannot be
responsible for all excesses everywhere. We are against
such acts and we hold their perpetrators responsible.

We need the United Nations to help us to ensure
the success of the elections in June, which will serve as
the foundation for a democratic and modern Libya based
on equality and where the rights of women are
12-24698
protected. The role of women is a major component of
proportional representation. We need a "zebra" list of
candidates - a list of six alternating male-female
candidates - so that we can ensure proper
representation for women in Libya, who make up more
than 50 per cent of our population.

Let me reassure the Council that we are working
seriously and actively for a State of democracy and
freedom to replace the regime that the Libyan people
uprooted at the price of their blood.

