Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I
should like to congratulate you very warmly, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
October. I should also like to thank you - and all
previous speakers - very sincerely for the very kind
words addressed to me.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria fully associates itself with the statement to be
made later by the representative of Denmark on behalf
of the Union. But I should also like to make some
comments in my national capacity.

One year ago, the great majority of United
Nations Members voiced their unreserved support to
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001). It is now clear that
the activities of the Counter-Terrorism Committee have
yielded significant tangible results. Indeed, the
majority of States Members of the United Nations and
a large number of international and regional
organizations have committed themselves actively to
the common endeavour to enhance the capacity of
States to combat terrorism. They have done so in the
context of the continued threat to international security
from a variety of terrorist organizations.

Bulgaria would like to pay tribute to the very
important and positive contribution of the Chairman of
the Committee, Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, who
has wholeheartedly and with great skill dedicated
himself to the cause of combating terrorism. We are
very grateful to him for his personal commitment, and
for the commitment of the United Kingdom Mission,
and we are glad that he is ready to continue with his
work.

My delegation would also like to thank the Vice-
Chairmen of the Committee, Ambassadors Koonjul,
Lavrov and Valdivieso, who, together with the entire
Committee, have worked in a truly transparent manner
that, in my opinion, is one of the most important and
successful aspects of the functioning of the Committee
during its first year.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee has, to a large
extent, been the foundation of a global coalition against
terrorism. We note that 174 countries Members of the
United Nations have submitted their national reports.
We take this opportunity to appeal to the countries that
have not yet submitted their reports to do so, although
we acknowledge the difficulties that they may
encounter in doing so. It is time for those experiencing
difficulties to request assistance from the Counter-
Terrorism Committee so that they can comply with
resolution 1373 (2001).

It is very important to ensure that there are no
missing links in the chain of the United Nations system
with regard to this struggle, because terrorist
organizations are inventive and are known to exploit
any gaps or weaknesses in the network of cooperation
among States.

Another important element in the fight against
terrorism is the ratification of the 12 international
conventions that address counter-terrorism issues.
Bulgaria is proud to be one of the 24 countries to have
ratified them all. The implementation of the provisions
of those international instruments is also of critical
importance.

In the coming months, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee will be considering the next cycle of reports
submitted by Member States under resolution 1373
(2001). We should acknowledge that the
implementation of the provisions of that resolution is,
as Ambassador Greenstock just said, a process whose
end cannot really be anticipated. It is a very lengthy
undertaking, and we are far from having reached the
stage where all States Members of the United Nations
are in a position to say that they are in full compliance
with resolution 1373 (2001). It is clear that the capacity
of Member States to comply with resolution 1373
(2001) is very uneven.

Bulgaria supports the CTC's next 90-day work
programme. It seems appropriate that the Committee
should focus its attention on the existing lacunae, by
which I mean identifying areas in which Member
States need technical assistance. Maximum use should
be made of the capacity and resources that are
available in the United Nations system and in other
international organizations and institutions. We believe
that that is a very important aspect.

Another point that I wish to raise is that Member
States should encompass in their legislation and their
administrative practices the issues of criminalizing
terrorism and terrorist acts and halting the financing of
terrorism. This is an extremely complex set of issues,
and we applaud the Committee's efforts to work
closely with the International Monetary Fund, the
World Bank and the Financial Action Task Force on
Money Laundering.

Bulgaria has often stated and today reiterates that
the regional and subregional dimensions are of critical
importance in combating terrorism. Very often,
regional and subregional organizations are truly the
best adapted to the fight against terrorism, especially
with regard to the financing of terrorism and to the
links between organized crime and terrorism.

In that connection, I would recall that my capital,
Sofia, was the site of a regional forum last June
devoted to combating terrorism, with the participation
of representatives of all South-Eastern European
countries, of the European Union, of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and of
the United Nations. This was, in our view, an
extremely useful and positive event. Among the
measures agreed at the conference was, for example,
the implementation of a unified travel document format
for citizens of the region's countries.

As I have previously emphasized, we feel that the
OSCE is a regional organization that could play a more
important role in fighting terrorism. For example, I
could cite OSCE Permanent Council decision 487 of
2002, whereby the OSCE requires its members to fill
out and submit to the Financial Action Task Force a
self-assessment questionnaire on compliance with
recommendations for combating the financing of
terrorism. My country wished to set an example of
promptness in that regard, and, at the beginning of
September, Bulgaria submitted that questionnaire to the
Task Force.

The exchange of information among States from
all regions seems to us a very important element in the
fight against terrorism. It is very important to expand
the legal framework of such exchanges. As an example,
I should like to mention the legal agreement concluded
between two neighbouring countries, Bulgaria and
Romania. My country is continuing its legislative
efforts in the fight against terrorism. The Bulgarian
Parliament recently adopted a law against the financing
of terrorism and is preparing to adopt, in the coming
weeks, important amendments to the law against
money-laundering.

Finally, I should like to pay tribute to the work of
the experts appointed to advise the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, to thank the outgoing experts for their
work and to reiterate that my delegation and my
country will continue to give their full support to the
Committee's work.

