The Secretary-General: The Secretariat briefed
the Council this morning on the deplorable events of
the past two days in Kosovo. The overall security
situation throughout Kosovo is still highly unstable.
The number of fatal casualties now stands at 31. I
cannot emphasize strongly enough my deep
disappointment and sadness at this resurgence of
violence, which has already left many people dead and
hundreds wounded.

We cannot close our eyes to the fact that this
violence is ethnically motivated, with communities
attacking each other. Such violence must be strongly
condemned. The deliberate targeting of houses as well
as religious sites - such as churches, cemeteries and
monasteries - is shameful and inexcusable, as are the
subsequent attacks against mosques in other parts of
Serbia and Montenegro.

We must also condemn, in the strongest possible
terms, deliberate attacks on representatives of the
international community - in particular the staff of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the troops serving with KFOR.
The situation in Mitrovica has become sufficiently
serious to warrant the relocation of international staff
from Mitrovica to a safer place in the region.

The recent events have highlighted the fragility of
the structures and relationships in Kosovo. It shows
that despite the progress that has been made since
1999, we have not come far enough. Mutual respect
between different communities is still not the accepted
norm that it should be. It is clear that we need to study
very carefully the implications for Kosovo's future.

Our first priority must be to restore safety and
security. I thank NATO for its decision to reinforce its
troops in Kosovo.

The violence must cease. The leaders of Kosovo's
communities and the representatives of its Provisional
Institutions must work with the international
community, with each other and with the people of
Kosovo to restore calm. Allow me in particular to
remind the leaders of the Kosovo Albanian community
that as the largest ethnic group, they have the
responsibility to protect and promote the rights of all
people within Kosovo, particularly its minorities.

I trust that the Security Council will give the
situation the urgent and serious attention it requires.

