Mr. Kolby (Norway): Let me commend you for
the manner in which you have conducted the
presidency during this month, including the
unprecedented degree of openness, of which our
meeting here today is an illustration. For non-
permanent members in particular, openness and
transparency in the way the Security Council conducts
its business is of pivotal importance. We welcome the
initiatives you have taken in this regard.

In particular, we emphasize the usefulness of
open briefings, allowing the full United Nations
membership better and more equal access to
information regarding developments in international
peace and security and related United Nations
operations and assistance efforts. With regard to open
meetings, which we support, it is important that we
maintain a focussed approach without lengthy
repetitions, while hearing from Member States
particularly involved in, or affected by, the issue at
hand. Moreover, debriefings from Council missions, et
cetera, can often be given by the chair without a
mandatory round of Council members' commentary.
Above all, our culture should be one of sharing
information and viewpoints on an interactive and
integrative basis.
In this regard, my delegation had hoped that the
important resolution adopted this month on cooperation
with troop-contributing countries could have gone
further in incorporating proposals and signals put
forward by a number of those countries during what we
saw as a very useful consultation process. At the same
time, we acknowledge that careful consideration is
needed for new mechanisms and arrangements. My
delegation will continue its efforts to further this
process.

In order for the various delegations - whether
currently members of the Council or not - to be able
to digest information provided and establish positions
on what often tend to be issues that are complex in
nature, there must be sufficient time between the
issuing of reports and the scheduling of meetings to
consider issues in a substantive manner. Lately, there
have been instances in which documentation was made
available only 24 hours prior to consideration by the
Security Council. This clearly is not sufficient and
must be avoided in the future. For non-members it is
especially important that the nature of upcoming
meetings be made clear in order to facilitate their
participation.

It is paramount that resolutions and statements by
the President of the Security Council reach the
Governments, groups and individuals for which they
are intended. Recent steps taken to transmit the
contents of Council action to the parties in conflict
must become standard practice. Special representatives
of the Secretary-General and other diplomatic channels
need to be fully utilized in this regard. Also, the
international community at large should, as far as
possible, seek to reinforce Council action in conflict
areas.

Council missions to conflict areas are important
to our work. It is indeed the most direct way of
conducting dialogue and impressing the Council's
encouragement and/or warnings upon belligerent
parties. Furthermore, Council missions - such as
those recently carried out to the Great Lakes region and
to Kosovo/Belgrade - have proved beneficial in
providing Council members with deeper insight and
updated information on crisis situations.

Following the mission to the Great Lakes region,
the Council, in our view, has arrived at an increasingly
common analysis and approach to the conflict
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
based on its underlying causes. Significantly, this was
reflected in the balanced and comprehensive resolution
adopted on the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) earlier this month.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General's Special Representative Mr. Haekkerup and
the Kosovo Force Commander (KFOR) Lieutenant-
General Skiaker for facilitating the useful meetings in
Kosovo and to thank President Kostunica and Yugoslav
authorities for the constructive talks in Belgrade.

We should be ready to consider similar Council
missions in the future to other conflict areas.

Let me take this opportunity to again thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for its effective facilitation
and for having brought to a successful conclusion the
initiatives put forward by my delegation this month
regarding HIV/AIDS and the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The presidential statement welcoming
the successful holding of the special session of the
General Assembly on HIV/AIDS and encouraging
further action to address the problem of HIV/AIDS
was, in our view, a timely and appropriate step by the
Council.

Likewise, the letter from the President of the
Security Council to the Secretary-General inviting
further advice for the Council's consideration regarding
the protection of civilians in armed conflict is intended
to bring forward a matter we consider to be of great
importance. We welcome our fellow Council members'
indicated willingness to jointly pursue this matter
further.

Finally, Mr. President, I would like to join you in
congratulating the Secretary-General on his
appointment to a new term.

