Mr. Quinlan (Australia): We express our thanks
to the Under-Secretary-General of Political Affairs,
Mr. Feltman, for his briefing this morning.

As we know, the deepening crisis around the conflict
in Syria is quite rightly an overriding preoccupation. It
should be, but we should of course not also be deterred
from the imperative of reinvigorating the peace process
between Israel and Palestine. Australia supports all
efforts to achieve lasting security for Israel and the
establishment of an independent and viable Palestinian
State. A durable two-State solution will only be achieved
through direct negotiations without preconditions
on the basis of the 1967 boundaries and with agreed
land swaps. There is a window of opportunity now to
re-engage in the peace process, which we simply must
not miss.

Australia welcomes United States President
Obama's visit to the region and the work being done
by United States Secretary of State Kerry. United
States leadership is crucial. Prime Minister Netanyahu
has confirmed his new Government's commitment
to a peaceful two-State solution, to sit down at the
negotiating table without preconditions, and to work
together to end the conflict. And President Abbas said,
the Palestinians were prepared to implement all their
commitments and obligations. Those declarations need
to be translated quickly into actions by all parties.
There are some signs of a more conducive environment
for Israelis and Palestinians to re-engage in direct
negotiations. We welcome the restraint shown by Israel
following recent rocket attacks from Gaza and urge
all sides to abide by the November ceasefire. Equally,
we welcome the restraint shown by the Palestinian
Authority in refraining from taking unilateral action
in international forums. Of course, more needs to be
done by both sides. In particular, illegal settlement
activity directly undermines the prospects for peace
and threatens the viability of a Palestinian State.

Continuing donor support to Palestinian economic
development is crucial, as is ongoing economic reform
by the Palestinian Authority. We regret Prime Minister
Fayyad's resignation at this important juncture.
We appreciate his role in building the institutional
foundation for a future Palestinian State and his efforts
in promoting economic development and in driving
reform. The Authority must not allow his achievements
to be lost, and we must continue to support its efforts.
We look to Israel to take immediate steps to ease
restrictions and allow the development of a sustainable
Palestinian economy. We welcome the resumption of
tax transfers, but the clearance oftax revenues needs to
be improved on a sustained basis.

We urge the Palestinians to cease all acts ofviolence
against Israel, resolve their internal differences and
unite for peace. The ongoing stalemate in the peace
process is, of course, not in the interests of Israel, the
Palestinians, the region or the international community,
and it is well past time, but still possible, for that
stalemate to be broken.

Just as the stalemate in the peace process has
implications for regional stability, so too does the
deepening crisis in Syria, where Palestinians are
among those who are suffering from the conflict. There
are approximately 500,000 Palestinians in Syria, many
now facing displacement and discrimination. Like other
Council members, Australia was chastened by last
week's briefings on the humanitarian and human rights
situation in Syria by senior United Nations agency heads
(see S/PV.6949). The situation in Syria is now clearly at
a tipping point. The scale of the humanitarian crisis, its
impact on the Syrian people and its destabilizing impact
on its neighbours and the region must be of decisive
concern to the Council. The cost of further inaction is
unbearable for the Syrian people themselves. It is also
unbearable for Syria's neighbours, especially Lebanon
and Jordan, but also Turkey and Iraq, which are facing
destructive pressures from refugee flows, spillovers of
violence and cross-border violations.
There were 3,000 refugees per day in January, 5,000
in February, 8,000 in March, and more this month. One
in four of the people living in Lebanon are Syrian. One
in five of the people living in Jordan are Syrian. As the
violence worsens, the effects become exponential and
our ability to cope collapses. All parties, in particular
the Syrian authorities, must cooperate fully with the
United Nations and other humanitarian agencies to
allow access for these organizations and to remove
obstacles to the provision of humanitarian assistance.
As Under-Secretary-General Amos told the Council on
18 April, this needs to include cross-border access. The
safety of all humanitarian personnel, medical workers
and medical facilities must be ensured.

In the face of this growing humanitarian
catastrophe and the direct threat to the security and
stability of Syria's neighbours, the Council must act
decisively to meet its Charter responsibility to maintain
peace and security and to help end the conflict in Syria.
Mr. Brahimi has made clear to the Council how it can
support his efforts, including through building on the
agreement reached by the Action Group in Geneva last
June. It is well past time for the Council to respond to
Mr. Brahimi's plea and act firmly so that a political
solution can be realized and the crisis brought to an
end.

We call on both the Syrian Government and
the opposition Syrian National Coalition to engage
in meaningful genuine dialogue for an orderly and
inclusive transition towards a future Syria that is
democratic and exercises the rule of law. Respecting
international humanitarian law, reaching out to minority
communities, and rejecting and extremist ideology will
be instrumental to the future Syria.

We remain seriously concerned over all allegations
of the use of chemical weapons in Syria, and call on the
Syrian Government to allow immediate and unhindered
access for the Secretary-General's investigation into
those allegations. Should they be substantiated, the
Council must be prepared to respond swiftly and
credibly.

We are now in the third year of the Syrian conflict.
The Council simply cannot continue to fail to do what
we all know we need to do by beginning to end this
catastrophic situation.

