Mr. Gatan (Philippines): My delegation
welcomes today's debate on the issue of children and
armed conflict and joins the rest of the international
community in seeking ways to prevent and eliminate
the exploitation and devastation of the lives of children
when they are involved in armed conflict.

My delegation also welcomes the Secretary-
General's report on children and armed conflict
(S/2007/757), which attempts to provide information
on various situations where children's lives are
adversely affected because of conflict and strife. We
condemn violations against the rights of children and
express our readiness to contribute to solutions that
will appropriately and effectively address the problem.

The Philippines would like to reiterate that it is
our Government's policy to consider children as zones
of peace, as stated in section 22, article X, of Republic
Act No. 7610, otherwise known as "An Act Providing
for Stronger Deterrence and Special Protection Against
Child Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination", and
also intended to protect children against dangers
arising from armed conflict. For this reason, measures
have been adopted to protect children from harm and to
ensure their safety and well-being. Children rescued
from conflict are accorded special treatment by
Government forces.

A memorandum of agreement on the handling
and treatment of children involved in armed conflict
was signed in 2000 to further ensure that the rights of
children are protected, and, in 2001, the President
issued Executive Order No. 56, entitled "Adopting the
08-23756

Comprehensive Program Framework for Children
Involved in Armed Conflict". This directs national
Government agencies and local government units to
implement its provisions. Also, by virtue of that
executive order, an Inter-agency Committee on
Children in Armed Conflict was created; it is
functioning today as the key body that coordinates the
efforts of the Philippine Government in making sure
that children are not affected by or involved in armed
conflict and that, if they are so involved because of
their use by non-State actors, they are properly
rehabilitated and reintegrated into society.

The Inter-agency Committee has focused on three
areas, namely improved monitoring and reporting of
cases of children in armed conflict, improved
institutional coordination, and the effective
rehabilitation of children affected by armed conflict
and their reintegration into the community. Following
recent consultations among the relevant government
agencies and non-governmental partners during a
strategic planning exercise conducted in June 2007, the
Committee has been able to identify the current
challenges faced in addressing the issue of children in
armed conflict as well as the necessary next steps
towards resolving it.

The Philippines recognizes the need for enhanced
monitoring and reporting. It is envisioned that an
operational database monitoring system on children in
armed conflict, shared among the front-line agencies -
namely the Department of Social Welfare and
Development, the Human Rights Commission, the
Office of the Presidential Adviser for the Peace
Process, the Commission for Indigenous Peoples, the
Department of Education and the military - should be
made functional and should be primarily maintained by
the Department of Social Welfare and Development. In
support of the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005), the Government is now
developing a procedure for data collection which will
include information pertaining to the six violations
against children enumerated in that resolution.

The Philippines recognizes that institutional
coordination among the front-line agencies, as well as
with the community when it encounters incidences of
children in armed conflict, is essential in order to
effectively address the issue of children in armed
conflict and to ensure that the rights of such children
are upheld. We are already implementing a
comprehensive communications plan on the protection
of children, designed for concerned sectors, namely the
Government, the private sector, civil society and even
non-State armed groups, and intended to draw support
and synchronize efforts to protect the children.

On the matter of rehabilitation and reintegration,
the Department of Social Welfare and Development
continues to provide victims with residential care
services and other social services such as financial
assistance, legal assistance, counselling, skills training,
values formation and spiritual enrichment, livelihood
services, home life services and educational services.
The Government is creating an even more
comprehensive and holistic rehabilitation and
reintegration programme in conflict areas with
provision for the constant monitoring and evaluation
that are necessary for perfecting the programme.

My delegation takes note of the specific reference
in the report of the Secretary-General to the Philippines
and acknowledges that there is indeed room for
improvement in the documentation of violations of
children's rights. This has already been recognized as a
concern, and efforts are under way to strengthen
coordination among the agencies that come into direct
contact with children in armed conflict.

My Government looks forward to the visit of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. It looks forward also to a
positive outcome of her visit. We will extend our full
cooperation to her so that her findings and
recommendations can contribute to the achievement of
the aim of the Philippine Government to address gaps,
if any, in providing protection on a nationwide scale to
children affected by armed conflict. It is also our
fervent wish that the visit will lead to a recognition that
my country's adequate policy measures could lead to
the early deletion of the Philippines from the list of
annex II countries.

The Philippines has been more than willing to
cooperate on the issue before us today. We would like
to call upon the Working Group of the Security Council
to be more transparent in its working methods. An open
work environment would surely lead to enhanced
cooperation and a speedier resolution of this issue,
which harms our world's most valuable asset - our
children.

