Mr. Monchotte (spoke in French): I would like to
highlight today the good practices developed during
the transition by the police component of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
to the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), which began on 16 October, in a
crucial area of our mandate, namely, the strengthening
of the capacity of the Haitian National Police (HNP).
That transition period has presented two major
challenges for the police component.

The first concerned ensuring the smooth
management of the reduction of contingents by 69 per
cent - that is to say, going from 951 international police
personnel for MINUSTAH to 295 for MINUJUSTH.
That was made possible by precise departure planning,
based on the innovative structure of a committee
dedicated to renewing the contracts of the international
police officers.

The second challenge involved the need to adapt
our efforts to the new situation in the crucial area of
capacity-building for the HNP, including promoting
gender equality. In line with the guidelines that I
developed with the consent of the Director General of
the HNP, another version of the previous model was
developed. It was designed so as to ensure the smoothest
transition possible to MINUJUSTH and offer a new
approach to transferring skills on another scale. Its goal
is aimed at establishing cultural and strategic change in
the way in which the HNP is supported.

The programme, known as the guidance and
support programme, is based on mentoring the
senior management of the HNP, in particular in the
areas of command and control, operational planning
and administrative management. Accordingly, 205
international experts were assigned to an exterior,
exo-skeletal unit, which has been attached to the
HNP, alongside 150 senior officers of the Haitian
police, holding positions of responsibility within
general management and the central and departmental
directorates, as well as specialized units. The United
Nations police officers who were deployed to that
programme were selected based on their professional
and linguistic skills, as well as their experience in the
sought-out areas.

The programme has been implemented in four
successive phases according to the deadlines set for
the closing of MINUSTAH. A pilot project in one
department served as a benchmark for the entire
process, and its assessment enabled the monitoring
committee to make the necessary changes before
deploying it in other departments of the country.cThe
subsequent three phases involve its implementation in
the nine other departments so as to conclude with the
western part of the country, which includes the capital.

In order to encourage participation, buy-in and
ownership, a total of 11 round tables with elected
officials, magistrates and personnel from both forces
were led by the Director General of the Haitian
National Police and myself throughout the country.
A list of posts and skills was drawn up to inform
contributing countries of those developments through
the Police Division, as well as to encourage them to
provide the appropriate resources to appoint female
personnel with the required skills and qualifications
where they must be more widely represented. The
international police experts were trained with those of
the HNP in the preliminary phases and provided with
documentation - furnished for the first time through
a joint effort by the operational and development
pillars of the police component - that spelled out and
publicized the various skill sets.

In conclusion, it is clear that that programme is
the main focus of the police component, and that that
reform, implemented in accordance to the deadlines
established pursuant to resolution 2350 (2017), will
be able to develop and begin to function optimally
only if the police component receives the necessary
support for carrying out its work, including, on the one
hand, equipment, especially with regard to vehicles,
infrastructure and a well-functioning helicopter
component, and, on the other, human resources,
including the authorized allocation of 295 qualified
personnel. Although we have demonstrated that we can
do more with less, the road before us remains long.

