Mr. Lordkipanidze (Georgia): At the outset, on
behalf of my delegation, let me express how pleased
we are to see you, Sir, presiding over this meeting of
the Security Council that is important to the entire
international community. We wish you every success. I
should also like to express our appreciation to your
predecessor, Ambassador Gunter Pleuger of Germany,
for his skilful leadership of the Security Council last
month.

We hope that the current meeting of the Security
Council will make substantial progress in resolving
issues on Iraq.

We are indeed in a situation in which we all have
to make critical choices. As demonstrated by the recent
report of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC), despite
some progress in cooperation, Iraq continued to fail to
meet requirements of resolution 1441 (2002) -
namely, to offer a full, accurate and complete
declaration and to engage in voluntary, unconditional
and active cooperation with UNMOVIC and the
International Atomic Energy Agency. In that respect,
we note Iraq's alarming record, as Iraq has already
been found to be in material breach of 16 previous
resolutions over a period of 12 years. Therefore, my
delegation believes that Iraq's continued possession of
weapons of mass destruction represents a direct and
active threat to international peace and security.

We reaffirm that Iraq should disarm immediately
and unconditionally and should meet in full its
obligations under resolution 1441 (2002). In that
respect, as proposed, the introduction of a timeframe
for the implementation of the resolution is justified.
Based on that, we would like to associate ourselves
with those delegations that voiced support for the draft
resolution sponsored by Spain, the United Kingdom
and the United States. We do believe that the draft
resolution offers a sound basis to the Security Council
for meeting its responsibilities and for taking necessary
and effective action to compel immediate Iraqi
compliance.

As we have reiterated all along, no State should
be allowed to breach its obligations under mandatory
resolutions of the Security Council, especially when
international peace and security are put at risk.
Otherwise, serious consequences will be imminent.

