Mr. Oshima (Japan): I should like first of all to
say that, as one of the new elected members of the
Security Council, which include Argentina, Japan
looks forward to working closely with the delegation
of Argentina, as well as with other members of the
Council, in the coming months. I should also like to
say that my delegation feels privileged to see the
Foreign Minister of Argentina presiding over today's
meeting.
We commend the strong commitment and the
active and ceaseless efforts of the countries of Latin
America and the Organization of American States in
taking the lead to deal with the situation in Haiti,
which is on our agenda today. I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Valdes, for his comprehensive and enlightening
briefing. We commend the efforts of Ambassador
Valdes and his team in the multifaceted United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for
securing safety, promoting stability and undertaking
many activities in a variety of areas, including
humanitarian and electoral support, development aid,
civil affairs and others. I also pay respect to all the
countries concerned, especially the Latin American
countries, which have contributed significantly to the
Mission in Haiti by providing personnel, technical
expertise and financial resources, as well as political
and moral support.

Haiti presents yet another example of a country
where the fundamental issue of the interlinkage
between development and peace arises. A combination
of widespread poverty and joblessness in society,
disease, weak or failing governance and institutions,
social injustice, corruption and so forth, and the
resultant sense of frustration, anger and despair among
the population constitute a certain prescription for
tension in society and political instability, which can
eventually blow up in one form or another. Sometimes
the situation is made worse, as we have seen in many
other countries throughout the world, by natural
disasters of one kind or another - earthquakes,
drought, floods, hurricanes, tsunamis - that expose
and accentuate vulnerabilities and cause what would
otherwise be avoidable damage, suffering and misery.
International sympathy and assistance are needed in
many of these cases, and needed in time - not after
the blowout. Prevention is wiser than cure, and it is
less painful and often less costly.

I had an opportunity to pay a visit to Haiti in mid-
2003, when I was still in the service of the
humanitarian arm of the United Nations. By early
2003, it was already recognized in the international aid
community in Haiti that the situation in the country
might be quickly reaching an extremely dangerous
stage.

Unfortunately, early warnings of possible
impending crisis went largely unheeded by the United
Nations and the international donor community, and
little concrete action was taken until the crisis had
materialized. Haiti should serve as yet another good
lesson for the future more generally as we ask some
relevant questions: How do we set up a more effective
early-warning mechanism as part of the efforts aimed
at conflict prevention and at the prevention of a
recurrence of crisis? What sort of preventive measures
can be realistically taken by the international
community in general and by the United Nations in
particular? How can we best organize ourselves to
undertake such activities? The report of the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change
commissioned by the Secretary-General (A/59/565)
offers some clues and ideas that the Organization will
soon address in a serious way. We hope that important
steps forward will be taken as a result.

That being said, we welcome the efforts of the
Transitional Government of Haiti to stabilize its
political situation with the support of the international
community. Japan would also like to commend the
proactive steps taken by MINUSTAH and the
Transitional Government of Haiti, particularly to
improve the security situation, including their recent
joint operations in Port-au-Prince and in other areas,
and we expect that such initiatives will continue.

Progress in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration is manifestly important, not least for the
success of the forthcoming national and local elections.
Although we welcome the statement of Prime Minister
Latortue to move on that issue, we would like to call
upon the Transitional Government to make strong
efforts to be proactive in that area, making use of the
support of MINUSTAH.

It is of great importance that the Haitian people
take steps towards promoting a process of meaningful
national dialogue, with a full sense of ownership, to
create a more stable political environment. The
Transitional Government is expected to continue to call
for national reconciliation and to promote quick-impact
projects. For the medium to long term, political and
economic restructuring and corruption-prevention
measures, as well as development policy measures that
contribute to the improvement of people's lives, should
be vigorously pursued. That will be the surest path for
the Government to follow to gain the broad support of
the people.

From that point of view, the support of the
Special Representative and of MINUSTAH is critically
important; we call for their active initiative in this
matter. At the same time, we remain concerned about
the arbitrary detention of people solely on the grounds
of their political affiliation, as the report of the
Secretary-General points out. We believe that that is
neither advisable nor condonable, as such action will
not serve to facilitate the national dialogue and is in
direct contravention of fundamental human rights
principles.

The consolidation of peace in Haiti requires not
only national dialogue, but also an improved
humanitarian and economic environment. For the
success of the elections scheduled for November,
prompt disbursement of the funds pledged at the
international donor conference on Haiti held last July is
also essential. All three of the projects in the areas of
health, food and agriculture pledged by Japan have
already been implemented. To date, the total assistance
extended by Japan to Haiti in the form of development
aid, technical assistance and emergency relief amounts
to more than $160 million. The international
community may rest assured that Japan will never
falter in its efforts to help Haiti and its people.

