The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We welcome the participation in today's meeting
of the Security Council of Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We listened carefully to his assessment of the current
situation in his country.

We thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
report (see S/2009/246) submitted to the Security
Council on the development of events in that country.
At the same time, we cannot agree with its overall
tenor. The leitmotif of that document is one of
persisting tension in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
inability of the Bosnian authorities to meet the
challenges facing the country on their own. In our
opinion, this assessment is not objective.

The report is unwarranted in relegating to the
background an analysis of the dialogue among the
three leading national political parties of the country,
which - a fundamentally important factor - was
launched at their own initiative. We feel that this trend
is the most important in the period covered by the High
Representative's report. Thanks to the constructive
disposition of the three, breakthroughs have been
achieved, including passage of the national budget
through Parliament at record speed. The adoption for
the first time of an amendment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's Dayton-mandated Constitution, definitively
enshrining the status of the Brcko District pursuant to the
Award of the Arbitral Tribunal, is a key indicator of the
potential of the three to identify and implement
compromise solutions.

Incidentally, the substantial progress registered
recently in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the stabilization
of the situation and the implementation of the Peace
Agreement is graphically illustrated in the report of the
Government of the Republika Srpska on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I note that, in February this
year, the leadership of Republika Srpska brought that
report to the attention of the members of the Security
Council.

Too much attention is given in the report of the
High Representative to harsh rhetoric, using
descriptions such as "nationalistic" and "anti-Dayton",
and in the process all the blame for it is placed on the
Prime Minister of the Republika Srpska, Mr. Dodik.

Indeed he is sometimes wont to be outspoken, reacting
to the unremitting attacks on the Dayton constitutional
status of the Republika Srpska and persistent attempts
to abolish it, particularly by the Bosniac leader,
Mr. Siladjic. At the same time, the Serbian entity's
leadership is not taking real actions that would run
counter to Dayton. Furthermore, the Republika Srpska
itself - if one considers its political, economic and
social situation - is a factor of stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, unlike the Federation. The report does
not take account of this important aspect and
emphasizes outside appearances.

We appeal to the High Representative to work
closely with the leaders of the leading political parties
in Bosnia and Herzegovina so that at the meeting of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
(PIC) at the end of June in Sarajevo they can adopt a
joint statement on commitment to Dayton and
unconditional respect for its provisions. Such a step
would shift the focus of the Bosnian parties away from
sterile polemics towards the working out and
implementation of specific steps to resolve the pressing
financial and economic problems that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is facing, which the High Representative
rightly referred to in his report.

On the whole, we have developed the impression
that the High Representative apparatus is largely
operating by inertia and is not taking sufficient account
of the fundamentally new trends that have become
clearly apparent in Bosnia and Herzegovina in recent
months. We expect Mr. Inzko to bring to the activities
of his office more objectivity and impartiality and
direct it towards the future.

Qualitative changes in the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina have objectively increased the need for
reforming the international presences in the country.
Specifically, we are thinking of prompt implementation
of the 5+2 formula adopted by the PIC Steering Board,
that is, to resolve the only outstanding question of State
property. We expect that by June of this year the
Bosnian parties will have achieved agreement on the
problems pertaining to military property. By the end of
September, the process for apportioning State property
among the different levels of authority will, on the
whole, be completed. That will make it possible for the
PIC Steering Board to take, no later than October, a
definitive decision on the schedule for turning the High
Representative apparatus into a Special Representative
mission of the European Union.

We are ready for close interaction with the High
Representative, all interested partners in the
international community and the Bosnian parties in
completing these tasks.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Serbia.

