Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to join previous speakers in
thanking Tribunal Presidents Pocar and Byron and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their very
precise and detailed briefings. We also, of course,
associate ourselves with the statement to be delivered
by Slovenia on behalf of the European Union. I would
like to make some comments in my national capacity.

First of all, I would like to assure our guests of
France's full support to the important efforts to be
carried out by the Tribunals in this difficult phase of
the completion of their work. The Security Council set
up the Tribunals so that the serious crimes against
humanity committed in Rwanda and in the former
Yugoslavia would not go unpunished. In seeing to it
that those responsible get a fair trail, the international
community wanted not only to see justice done, but
also to reduce tensions and restore peace and security
in those areas afflicted by terrible conflict.

That objective has largely been achieved, thanks
to the work of the Tribunals. Their term is now coming
to an end, and we believe that we should give them all
the support they need to be in a position to fully carry
out their mission. That is the point of the completion
strategies defined in 2003 and 2004 by the Council. A
timetable was laid out: 2008 was to be the end of the
trials at first instance, and 2010 the end of the appeals
process and all of the work. We commend the Tribunals
for their efforts to comply with that timetable. The
steps taken to streamline the trials should be
highlighted, as should the intensification of the pace of
work. The Security Council's decision to authorize the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) to recruit additional ad litem judges
has been particularly useful in that regard.

Complying with the timetable means that we
must give the Tribunals the resources necessary to
conduct their activities in a sustained manner without
compromising the quality of justice dispensed. We note
the delays encountered with regard to the completion
strategy, which can be largely explained by the judicial
complications mentioned in the reports. Furthermore,
the referral of cases to national jurisdictions is an
important aspect of the completion strategy, but we
understand that its implementation by the judges is not
always easy.

The international community too bears its share
of responsibility for the delays, since progress in the
proceedings also depends on cooperation by States. We
acknowledge the indicative nature of the deadlines set
by the Council, but we request the Tribunals to do all
that they can to comply with them. We note with
satisfaction the commitments undertaken in that regard.
We must ensure that the spillover not exceed a
reasonable time frame.

The major uncertainty with regard to completion
is the question of the accused still at large. We agree
that the mission of the Tribunals will not be
accomplished with those accused have been arrested
and tried. France is firmly committed, in particular, to
bringing to justice Messrs. Mladic, Karadzic, Zupljanin
and Hadzic, for the ICTY, and Mr. Kabuga, for the
ICTR. We regret, in that regard, the inadequate
cooperation shown by Serbia and Kenya, and we call
upon those States to fully cooperate with the Tribunals.

France earnestly hopes that the problem of
fugitives will be solved before the end of the Tribunals'
work. If that is not the case, it should be done within
the framework of managing their legacy, because it
would be unacceptable for the end of the Tribunals to
mean impunity for those criminals still at large.

That of course leads me to deal with the question
of the residual functions of the Tribunals, on which an
informal working group of the Council, very
effectively chaired by Belgium, has been working for
several months. Our objective is to ensure that the
Council is in a position by the end of the year to adopt
a resolution that would establish a framework for
managing the residual functions of the Tribunals after
they are gone. We welcome the points of agreement
that have already been achieved within the group, first

and foremost the rejection of impunity and bringing the
fugitives who bear the greatest responsibility before
international justice. We believe that we should provide
for a mechanism that would restore the capacity to try
those individuals once they are arrested. Furthermore,
we strongly consider that such a mechanism, which
must be compact, effective and economical, should
provide for the functions necessary to administer
justice in full equity and security. We are, finally,
committed to ensuring that the United Nations retain
ownership and control of the Tribunals' archives.

In general, France believes that the United
Nations and the Security Council are duty-bound to
take the necessary steps to ensure the integrity and
lasting nature of the legacy of the Tribunals. The
mission for international justice entrusted to them
should be completed and the conclusion of their work
in terms of the strategy defined by resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004) must not mean renunciation of
the primary impetus behind their creation, that is, the
rejection of impunity and the determination to see
justice done.

