Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): For
over three years, the escalation of the conflict in Syria
has inflicted deep suffering on the Syrian people and
posed a serious challenge to the countries of the region
and the international community. China has always
maintained that all parties in Syria should respect
human rights and international humanitarian law and
prevent innocent people from being harmed during the
conflict. China is firmly opposed to all violations of
international humanitarian law or serious violations of
human rights committed by all parties to the conflict
in Syria. However, with regard to draft resolution
S/2014/348, on which the Council voted earlier, China
has some serious reservations.

First, China believes that any action to seek
recourse to the International Criminal Court (ICC) to
prosecute the perpetrators of serious violations should
be conducted on the basis of respect for State judicial
sovereignty and the principle of complementarity.
China is not a State party to the Rome Statute. China
always has reservations concerning the referral by the
Security Council of particular country situations to the
ICC. This is our principled position.
Secondly, efforts to seek a political settlement to
the question of Syria are encountering difficulties. The
international community must shore up its confidence,
remain patient and be steadfastly committed to the
overall direction of the political settlement. What is
most urgently needed now is to urge the Government
of Syria and the opposition to immediately implement
a ceasefire and put an end to the violence in order to
start a third round of negotiations in Geneva so as to
advance the political process and embark on a political
transition. In the current circumstances, to forcibly refer
the situation in Syria to the ICC is not conducive either
to building trust among all parties in Syria or to an
early resumption of the negotiations in Geneva. It will
only jeopardize the efforts made by the international
community to push for a political settlement.

Thirdly, for some time now, the Security Council
has maintained unity and coordination on the question
of Syria, thanks to efforts by Council members,
including China, to accommodate the major concerns
of all parties. At a time when seriously diverging views
exist among the parties concerning the draft resolution,
we believe that the Council should continue holding
consultations, rather than forcing a vote on the draft
resolution, in order to avoid undermining Council
unity or obstructing coordination and cooperation
on questions such as Syria and other major serious
issues. Regrettably, China's approach has not been
taken on board; China therefore voted against the draft
resolution.

I have already clearly elaborated my country's
position and explicitly highlighted the facts and reasons.
Just now, the United States, the United Kingdom and
other Western countries have made totally unfounded
accusations against China. That is irresponsible and
hypocritical. China firmly rejects the slander expressed
by those Western countries against China.

China has continued to uphold an objective and
impartial position on the question of Syria. China
pursues no self interest on the issue, much less shield
any party, faction or persons in Syria. As a permanent
member of the Council and a responsible member of
the international community, China has remained
committed to seeking a political settlement to the
question of Syria.

China has endeavoured comprehensively and in a
balanced manner to engage with the Government of
Syria and opposition parties to urge them, based on the
demands of all sides, to seek a middle path appropriate
to the country's conditions and accommodating the
interests of all sides through dialogue and negotiation.
China is highly concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Syria and sympathizes with the suffering
of the Syrian people. It has provided humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people and Syrian refugees
in neighbouring countries through various channels
on many occasions. China attaches great importance
to the legitimate concerns of all sides and of the Arab
countries on the question of Syria. We remain willing
to maintain close contact with all parties and promote
active efforts to seek a political solution to the question
of Syria and to maintain peace and stability in the
Middle East region.

