The President (spoke in Arabic): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as Representative of
Syria.

We express our sincere thanks to Mr. Noel
Sinclair, Head of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB), for his comprehensive
briefing, which shed light on the latest developments in
Bougainville. I would also like to express our support
to Ambassador Sinclair and his team, who have worked
so diligently in support of the peace process and
stability in Bougainville. We appreciate the efforts by
the friendly Government of Papua New Guinea and the
role it has played in support of the peace process in
Bougainville, in addition to its positive contribution
and collaboration, which we heard about in the
statement of the representative of Papua New Guinea
this morning.

There have been important developments since
the last briefing of the Security Council, on 28 March
2003, creating a sense of optimism regarding the
implementation of the necessary procedures to prepare
the new constitution in Bougainville for election of the
national Government. These developments include the
completion by the Peace Monitoring Group (PMG) of
its mandate last June; the succession of the PMG by the
Bougainville Transitional Team, which includes 15 to
17 civilian observers from Australia, New Zealand, Fiji
and Vanuatu; and the adoption by UNPOB of phase II
of the weapons disposal plan. We are looking forward
with the same sense of optimism to the implementation
of phase III of the plan.

Despite the positive comments that have been
made today and the general sense of optimism that is
prevailing, certain parties - in particularly Mr. Francis
Ona and his Me'ekamui Defence Force - are still not
participating in the peace process, and this is cause for
concern. We therefore hope that the various appeals,
and the other efforts that are being deployed, will
eventually result in a clear commitment by those
parties that are not participating in the peace process to
refrain from taking any actions or steps that would
hinder or delay the peace process. We also urge them to
participate in the Bougainville peace process.

Once again, we reaffirm our support for the Head
of the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
and his team for their efforts to promote the peace
process in Bougainville.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Fiji. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

