Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): It has
been one week since the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2042 (2012), authorizing the deployment of
an advance team of 30 unarmed military observers to
Syria. The Council was clear about the obligations on
the regime to cease troop movements towards
population centres, end the use of heavy weapons and
begin the pull-back of military forces from in and
around population centres. It was also unambiguous in
its call for the advance team to operate under
appropriate conditions, including the requirement that
the regime ensure full and unimpeded freedom of
movement. We committed to deploy a larger mission
only after a sustained cessation of Violence.

Unfortunately, since the adoption of resolution
2042 (2012), the regime has done little to demonstrate
that it has any intention of taking the steps necessary to
end the crisis. On the contrary, we have witnessed a
further escalation of the regime's brutality. It has
continued to use heavy weapons, shelling Horns and
other cities, in violation of its commitments to the
United Nations. It has restricted the advance team's
freedom of movement, in a flagrant effort to hide the
truth about its shameful acts of brutality and
destruction.

Nevertheless, the Secretary-General has
recommended that a larger team be deployed. We share
his judgment that such a mission could help shift the
dynamic on the ground. We have therefore worked
constructively on ensuring the rapid authorization of
the Mission. We welcome the unanimous adoption
today of resolution 2043 (2012).

The United Kingdom believes that a mission that
is able to operate effectively could have a positive
impact on the ground, in terms of both saving lives and
ushering in a Syrian-led political transition. The
resolution comes following the preliminary
understanding reached between the Syrian Government
and the United Nations on the mandate and operating
conditions of the Mission. It is essential that it now be
implemented in full.

A larger mission, provided that it has freedom of
movement and the use of air assets as called for in the
resolution, will be able to monitor more locations. The
mandate is not just to monitor a cessation of Violence,
but to monitor and support the full implementation of
the six-point proposal, including the elements related
to political detentions, ensuring freedom of
demonstration and association, human rights, access
for journalists and the political transition. That is why
it will include a strong civilian component, with a
range of skills, including political, human rights and
civil affairs.

It is a measure of the depth of international
concern that we are ready to deploy unarmed United
Nations personnel into such a dangerous environment.
It is fraught with risk. The Mission will fail in its task
if the regime continues to violate its commitments and
obstruct the work of the Mission. The Mission and the
Joint Special Envoy's six-point proposal represent the
last opportunity for the Syrian regime to reverse course
and to allow a peaceful solution to the crisis in Syria to
emerge. Continued failure of the regime to meet its
commitments or any attempt to hinder the work of the
Mission must be met with robust sanctions by the
Council.

