Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, I wish to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General at this important meeting on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the holding of
which my delegation appreciates. I associate myself
with the words of welcome that were addressed to the
Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, and thank him for
his statement. I would also like to thank Mr. Ngongi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for having
introduced us to the ninth report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

The report draws attention to positive
developments in the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and emphasizes the need to
maintain the momentum of the peace process, which
apparently has entered a decisive and delicate phase.
From this standpoint, I would now like to make a few
comments.

First of all, the drive towards peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is moving
forward- at its own pace, of course, but it is still
making progress. As the Secretary-General's report has
emphasized, the ceasefire has been respected since
January 2001, and the disengagement of foreign forces,
their redeployment and the withdrawal of Namibian
troops and a good many troops from Uganda have been
carried out. Some progress has been made in the inter-
Congolese dialogue. These results are significant
advances towards finding a lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. To support such
momentum it is essential, in accordance with the
Lusaka Agreement and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, that all foreign forces withdraw entirely
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and that
the city of Kisangani be demilitarized.

Secondly, my delegation considers that
deployment of phase III of MONUC must now
commence in accordance with the operational plan put
forward by the Secretary-General in paragraphs 59
through 87 of his report. These demands perhaps carry
some political risks and certainly come at a financial
cost. But we think that this is the price that must be
paid in order to continue pushing the peace process
decisively forward.

My third comment relates to the question of
armed groups. This is undoubtedly one of the most
important challenges in the new phase that MONUC is
entering, particularly with regard to repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration of these former
combatants.

I should therefore like to emphasize the
responsibility of signatories to the Lusaka Agreement
to provide information as soon as possible on the
troops and location of the armed groups. Ongoing
dialogue between Presidents Kagame and Kabila is
also necessary in order to achieve an acceptable and
definitive solution to this problem.

In that vein, we feel that the Security Council's
meeting on 9 November with the Ministers of the
Political Committee of the Lusaka Agreement should
be exploited to ensure that frank discussions take place
concerning disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation or resettlement and the withdrawal of all
foreign troops from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

We also believe it essential that, in order to
support this progress in the peace process, the Bretton
Woods institutions and donors mobilize around the
United Nations to ensure that programmes for the
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration of armed
forces can get under way.

My fourth comment relates to the need to achieve
progress in the peace process and to end hostilities. As
the Secretary-General says in his report, this is
increasingly urgent because grave violations of human
rights continue and the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and throughout the
region remains disturbing. In this connection, my
delegation joins in the appeal to all parties to facilitate
the international humanitarian efforts so desperately
needed by the civilian population in the Congo.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm my best wishes
to Mr. Ngongi for success in his work and to pay a
tribute to all MONUC personnel for their important
ongoing contribution to restoring peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

