Ms. Adamson: The candidate countries
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European Free
Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member
of the European Economic Area; and Ukraine align
themselves with this statement.

The following remarks are focused on the Middle
East peace process. The European Union (EU) position
on Syria will be outlined during the forthcoming
informal meeting of the General Assembly.

Before the Council in July (see S/PV.7736), the
European Union expressed concern at the trends on
the ground that threaten the viability of the two-State
solution. Parties were called upon to swiftly engage with
the Quartet and other relevant stakeholders, implement
the Quartet's recommendations in full and reverse
negative trends. Regrettably, we have instead seen an
acceleration of negative trends, in direct contradiction
with Quartet recommendations and Foreign Affairs
Council conclusions. The risk is to entrench a one-State
reality of perpetual occupation and conflict that is
incompatible with realizing the national aspirations of
both peoples.

For the European Union, there is no alternative to
a negotiated two-State solution, based on parameters
set out in European Council conclusions of December
2009 and July 2014, that meets Israeli and Palestinian
security needs and Palestinian aspirations to statehood
and sovereignty, ends the occupation that began in
1967, and resolves all permanent status issues in order
to end the conflict. It remains the only realistic way of
ending the conflict once and for all.

Since early 2016, and particularly since the
publication of the Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex),
there has been an acceleration of Israeli settlement
expansion. Settlements are illegal under international
law. On 28 September, Israel announced plans to
construct 98 new housing units in what is effectively
a new settlement near the existing one of Shiloh,
which drew wide condemnation from the international
community. This cuts deeply into the West Bank and
further increases risks to the contiguity of a future
Palestinian State.

Other related policies threaten notably the
socioeconomic viability of Area C for the Palestinian
population. As clearly illustrated by the data provided
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Israeli demolitions of Palestinian
structures 4 including some funded by the European
Union and European Union member States 4 have
vastly increased in 2016, not least recently.

Such settlement and planning policies constitute
an obstacle to peace. A fundamental change of policy
by Israel with regard to the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in Area C, is necessary to
prevent the irreversible loss of the two-State solution.
It will significantly increase economic opportunities,
empower Palestinian institutions and enhance stability
and security for Israelis and Palestinians alike.

We continue to be deeply concerned by the
continuing cycle of violence and killings, most recently
on 9 October in Jerusalem. The European Union
unequivocally condemns acts of terror and extends its
deepest condolences to the families of the victims. We
urge all parties to work towards the de-escalation of
tensions, observe international humanitarian law, and
adhere to the principles of necessity and proportionality
in the use of force. Palestinian leaders are again urged
to consistently and clearly condemn terror attacks and
take all steps within their capacity to end incitement.
Violence not only brings personal tragedy, but also
makes any peace process infinitely more difficult.

Let me now turn to the situation in Gaza, an
important topic of today's meeting. Militant activity
and the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza feed general
instability and constitute a recipe for renewed conflict.
What hopes can Palestinian youth in Gaza have for their
future in current circumstances? While all international

donors should swiftly honour their pledges made at the
Cairo Conference, Gaza's humanitarian needs can be
properly addressed only through political progress on
the following three tracks:

First, all sides must respect the cease-fire. All
indiscriminate attacks are illegal and unacceptable and
increase risks of escalation. Such activities threaten the
lives of civilians, divert resources from humanitarian
efforts and impede reconstruction and development.
The illicit arms build-up by Hamas and other militant
groups must stop.

Secondly, the European Union urges all Palestinian
factions to engage in good faith in the reconciliation
process on the basis of the Palestine Liberation
Organization platform and Quartet principles. A single,
legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority, with
full control over Gaza, is critical for fulfilling the
national aspirations of the Palestinian people and for
achieving a viable Palestinian State. In this context,
the European Union encourages the prompt setting of
a new date for the planned Palestinian local elections,
which, ifheld in line with international standards, could
provide an important renewal of Palestinian democracy
and a first step towards advancing national unity.

Finally, we reiterate our call on Israel for an end of
the closure and a full opening of the crossings, while
addressing legitimate security concerns. The lifting
of restrictions on the movement of people, including
representatives of the international community, services
and goods - particularly those designated as dual-use
items 4 is needed to allow reconstruction, service
delivery and international infrastructure projects. The
EU urges both parties to promote confidence- and trust-
building measures. In that regard, the EU commends the
signing of the Israeli-Palestinian electricity agreement
on 13 September. The EU reiterates its readiness to
provide its full support to resolve the situation.

In these challenging times for the peace process,
the EU believes that regional partners can play a key
role in changing the dynamics on the ground, not least
through discussion based on the Arab Peace Initiative,
which provides key elements for a comprehensive
settlement. Their engagement and progress in the peace
process represent an opportunity and could unlock new
forms of cooperation benefitting the whole region.

Recalling French efforts and the communique
adopted at the ministerial meeting in Paris on 3 June,
as well as conclusions adopted by the Foreign Affairs
Council on 20 June, the EU is determined to continue
to work in close coordination with the parties, Quartet
partners and all other relevant stakeholders towards a
two-State solution that would end the occupation that
began in 1967 and resolve all permanent status issues.

I will end by thanking the Secretary-General and
his Special Coordinator for their ceaseless efforts.

