Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me at the outset to express to you, Sir, our
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. Your
outstanding skills and experience guarantee the success of
our work. We offer our full cooperation to you and to the
delegation of Egypt. We wish also to congratulate
Ambassador Qin Huasun and the delegation of China on
the excellent work accomplished this past May.

My delegation states its firm conviction that the
solution to the current conflict in Tajikistan can be
achieved only through peaceful means, through dialogue
between the parties and on the basis of mutual
commitments and concessions. Regrettably, because of the
differences that still remain between the parties, the
situation in Tajikistan has taken a clear turn for the
worse, and no progress is being made in the negotiations
towards a political settlement that would enable them to
restore peace and national harmony.

The repeated statements by the Tajik parties to the
effect that there should be no military solution to the
conflict, that they are in favour of political dialogue and
that they are prepared to resume negotiations seem
contradictory in View of the resumption of hostilities in
the country. Events such as those that took place in the
Tavildara region, which resulted in the loss of human
lives and aggravated the humanitarian situation, cast doubt
on the parties' sincerity and their desire for peace.

My delegation believes that if the parties truly wish
to continue with the negotiating process, they must first
of all comply strictly with the provisions of the Tehran
Agreement of 17 September 1994 on a cease-fire and the
cessation of other hostile acts. As this is an essential
prerequisite for the continuation of the talks, my
delegation believes that the parties should not limit the
extension of the cease-fire agreement to a short period of
time, but rather extend it as long as may be necessary
while negotiations between the parties are under way, as
was proposed before by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and accepted by the Government of
Tajikistan only. My delegation, therefore, while urging the
Tajik parties to respect effectively the obligations
stemming from the Tehran Agreement and to cease
hostilities immediately, wishes to appeal to them to
extend the cease-fire agreement for the entire duration of
the talks.

As concerns the activities of the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT), my
delegation regrets that military observers continue to be
harassed, that the parties are limiting their freedom of
movement and that, owing to a lack of security, the
activities of the Joint Commission have been suspended.
We hope that the Tajik opposition will accept the security

 

guarantees offered by the Government of Tajikistan so that
the work of the Joint Commission may resume soon.

My delegation believes that despite the obstacles that
UNMOT has faced in carrying out its mission, its presence
contributes to the stabilization of Tajikistan through its
liaison activities with the Collective Peace-keeping Forces
of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Russian
border forces and the Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and continues to
facilitate humanitarian assistance. We shall therefore vote
in favour of the draft resolution before the Council, which
extends UNMOT's mandate for six months.

Bearing in mind operative paragraph 4 of the draft
resolution, we hope that the Tajik parties will effectively
demonstrate a commitment to peace, democracy and
national reconciliation and that they will soon be able to
achieve an overall political settlement to the conflict.

