Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Ms. Sandra Honore, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, for her briefing and her
continued able leadership at the helm of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

Rwandaisencouragedbythecontinuedconsolidation
of the political, social and economic stability of Haiti.
We commend the Government for its progress in
strengthening national institutions and building social
cohesion. In particular, we applaud the Haitian people
and their partners, including MINUSTAH, for the
reported reduction in crime, the sustained fight against
cholera and the continued settlement of displaced
persons following the devastating earthquake of 2010.

The efforts of all political actors to continue the
political dialogue in the framework of the El Rancho
Accord is encouraging as it guarantees a peaceful and
progressive future for Haiti. We encourage them to
continue to engage constructively in order to uphold
the gains. In this regard, Rwanda commends President
Martelly and the national institutions for steps they
have taken to implement the Accord, including the
amendments to the electoral law by the Chamber
of Deputies and the appointment of members of the
Electoral Council.

We have taken note of the electoral schedule set by
President Martelly, as well as the concerns expressed
on this calendar, especially on the first round of
elections set for 26 October. We express our confidence
that the consultation initiated by the Government
with the leadership of both houses of Parliament will
lead to a consensus on the electoral calendar. In that
regard, we call upon all political actors, and the Senate
in particular, to engage positively to agree on a legal
framework, which is a prerequisite for other electoral
processes to go forward.

As MINUSTAH continues to draw down, it is

important for the Government of Haiti, with the
support of its partners, to ensure a successful transition
by improving the political and security situation
in the country and enhancing national institutions,
including security forces. In that regard, the increased
professionalization of the Haitian National Police and
the progressive stabilization of the security environment
are all critical benchmarks for MINUSTAH's
consolidation plan. It is in that context that we support
the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend the
mandate of the Mission for an additional year until
15 October 2015, as well as his proposal for a two-stage
drawdown based on a review of the overall stability,
the security situation and the capacity of the National
Police.
In the meantime, Rwanda is encouraged by the
continued investment of MINUSTAH in quick-impact
projects focusing on the rule of law, good governance,
health, infrastructure, access to water and civic
education. In the same vein, we acknowledge the
continued collaboration of the Government of Haiti
and the United Nations Development Programme in
the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategic framework. We believe that the ongoing joint
programmes will enable the country to fully recover
from the 2010 earthquake and ensure that Haiti is
on the path to sustainable, peaceful and long-term
development. In that regard, we call on the Government
of Haiti to continue working with the international
community on necessary reforms that could set the
stage for increased foreign investment in the country
and enhanced socioeconomic reliance.

In conclusion, Rwanda, as a police contributor to
MINUSTAH, reaffirms its solidarity to the Government
and people of Haiti as we trust their resolve and
determination to succeed in their quest for stability and
prosperity.

