Mr. Lancry (Israel): I wish to emphasize our
appreciation for your leadership in this discussion and to
commend the several discussions that preceded it over this
past year. In the months since the Secretary-General
presented us with his report, we have seen special attention
given to the protection of civilians in places like Sierra
Leone, Angola and others. This gave birth both to
short-term and long-term measures. More importantly, it
added to a renewed focus on the plight of civilians
targeted in armed conflict.

As the report of the Secretary-General pointed out,
physical protection must precede legal protection. It is the
more immediate need. We have seen efforts to begin
integrating ex-military forces into civil society. We have
seen attempts to place United Nations peacekeepers in
areas where civilians are vulnerable. We have seen plans
to increase civilian police, which would be a welcome
development across the globe.
Still, all of these practical steps begin with a legal
one: identifying the deliberate targeting of civilians as a
distinct crime. As we recall, resolution 1265 (1999)
strongly condemns the deliberate targeting of civilians.
We should also recall that the Secretary-General's report
in September specifically used the word "terror" to
describe such actions and noted that:

"The violence is frequently perpetrated by non-state
actors and privately financed militia."
(S/J 999/95 7, para. 8)

These affirmations serve to identify and help
criminalize the tactic of wilfully targeting civilians. They
also reaffirm that any violations by States or militias are
worthy of the attention of the Security Council. Moreover,
by criminalizing the tactic itself, we prevent actors from
hiding behind their political or military purposes. The
international community has finally established that no
end justifies a deliberate assault on the innocent. This is
a universal principle, and the next step might be for
Member States and entities to explicitly outlaw the
practice.

Still, we have only scratched the surface. The
question still plagues us: how did the century that saw the
birth of our international human rights instruments also
witness the most vicious targeting of civilians in human
history? Less than 50 years after the conventions on
genocide, human rights and humanitarian law, we saw the
systematic destruction of entire civilian households, both
in Europe and in the African continent.

Moreover, our current age has marked the growth of
a new tactic, which is as cynical as it is brutal: the use of
civilians as human shields. This practice must itself be
included as part of the same theme, for it is in essence
the same crime: the deliberate attempt to cause the death
and suffering of civilians in armed conflict.

 

Nevertheless, the root causes continue to elude us. The
above-mentioned report refers in paragraph 48 to "the
obligation to prevent the open incitement to violence
against particular groups". We must recall that the worst
case of targeting civilians, in the century just past, began
with the vilification of an entire people. This continues to
be the case today. Groups that attack civilians are often also
guilty of conducting media campaigns against entire peoples
or ethnic groups.

This is no coincidence. We must demand that States
do their utmost to prevent demonization before - and
especially after - it reaches the point of violence. The
outlawing of incitement to violence is a step in the right
direction. But more must be done to promote a climate of
peace and respect for human rights. This begins with
respect for the human rights of all peoples, regardless of
ethnic group, religion or nationality.

There is another point that is worth emphasizing:
civilians must never be the direct target of war; however,
they must certainly be the target of peacemaking. All
efforts at diplomatic reconciliation, between States and
parties, must be supplemented by efforts to promote
normalization of relations between peoples and societies. In
this manner we can lay the groundwork for a climate in
which civilian life and human dignity will be respected. Let
us hope that the focus on the innocent, beginning in this
forum, will set the stage for a greater recognition of the
inherent rights of all human beings across borders and
continents. Then civil society will be truly safe and free.

