Ms. Grignon (Kenya): Allow me once again
to commend Poland on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of May and on
convening this important meeting of equal magnitude
to the meeting convened last week on the rule of law
(see S/PV.8262). I also wish to express my delegation's
sincere gratitude to Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres and the Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, for
their comprehensive briefings this morning.

Civilians are protected persons under international
law, and the parties to a conflict have a legal obligation
to protect them from the effects of conflict. However,
we continue to witness many civilian casualties,
with thousands of survivors becoming refugees and
internally displaced persons in conflict zones. The
Security Council's continued consideration of this
agenda item is a welcome indication of its commitment
to protecting civilians, who are the people most at risk
during armed conflict.

Despite the various achievements in this field,
there still remain considerable challenges: gender-
based violence and sexual exploitation and abuse,
inadequate mandates, the absence of a common doctrine
and resource gaps risk undermining protection-of-
civilian efforts.

Gender-based violence continues to be used as a
weapon of war, more so in those conflict situations that
are characterized by extremism and terrorism. This is
not only a human rights issue, but it also contravenes
international law. Additionally, sexual exploitation
and abuse by some of those entrusted to protect
civilians should be condemned by all. We commend
the Secretary-General for his zero-tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse. As a troop-contributing
country, Kenya is committed to the implementation of
resolution 2272 (2016), which seeks to hold accountable
the troop-contributing countries that fail to credibly
deal with allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse.

Mission objectives should be explicit and take
into full consideration the fundamental tasks of
peacekeepers and the situation on the ground. Any
attempt to have peacekeepers carry out tasks that may
pose a risk to the credibility of the mission without
necessarily contributing to reducing violence against
civilians should be avoided. Equally, caveats imposed
on peacekeepers and the divergent views on what
constitutes the protection of civilians, coupled with lack
of a common applicable doctrine, may complicate the
efforts to integrate the diverse sets of military, police
and civilian actors who are involved. Uniting efforts
is vital; the effectiveness of the protection of civilians
largely depends on the ability of different actors to
work together for the common good of those at risk.
The primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians rests with national Governments; the United
Nations becomes involved to offer support or when
national Governments fail. Each protection-of-civilians
situation is unique. Adequate information on situations
is therefore critical for success. It is important for
mission leaders to conduct assessments to understand
the dynamics of the conflict, the civilian threats
and vulnerabilities.

The lack of adequate capabilities and resources
pose the greatest challenge to the protection of civilians.
Peacekeepers have other primary objectives. Therefore,
additional tasks related to the protection of civilians,
especially when the number of those at risk surges,
and the strain exerted on already limited resources can
jeopardize the objective of protecting civilians.

My delegation believes that, for mandates to be
effectively executed, there is an urgent need to develop
a common doctrine on the protection of civilians to
guide those mandated to execute the task. Components
mandated to protect civilians need to be well trained,
better resourced, properly equipped and have the
capabilities to enable them to efficiently implement
their mandate of protecting civilians in conflict and
post-conflict situations.

Mission mandates should be clear, credible and
achievable, with specific objectives on the protection
of civilians, and allow for any necessary room for
manoeuvre, while devoid of unrealistic constraints.
United Nations missions need to develop internal early-
warning systems with a common understanding of
what constitutes threats to civilians. There is a need
for information-management systems that ensure that
early-warning information is widely shared with those
responsible for protecting civilians, to enable them to
make a predictive assessment of the situation on the
ground. Moreover, credible intelligence-processing
systems are necessary to support United
Nations missions.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the importance
of cooperation among international and regional
stakeholders. The involvement of communities is
also critical to the success of protection-of-civilian
mandates and should be facilitated.

