Mr. Krivas (Lithuania): Our meeting today and the
adoption of resolution 2254 (2015) mark an important
step towards the settlement of the most brutal conflict
of this century. The peace process that started in Vienna
is long overdue, as a human tragedy continues to take
place inside Syria and keeps spilling over its borders,
with a particularly heavy burden on its neighbours.
Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey are bearing the brunt of
it. Unprecedented numbers of refugees are reaching
Europe, while human traffickers and smugglers are
profiting from their plight.

To this very day, the civilian population continues
to suffer atrocities committed not only by terrorist
groups such as Daesh but also by President Al-Assad's
regime. As part of the problem, President Al-Assad
cannot be seen as part of the solution to this devastating
crisis. All Syrians should feel safe and have the right
to be secure in a future peaceful and democratic Syria.
Those who committed crimes against humanity, gross
human rights violations and mass atrocities should be
brought to justice. There can be no room for impunity.

An immediate halt to the hostilities in Syria that
leads to the end of this bloody conflict is a matter of
urgency and a moral obligation. The very first and
most urgent step is to agree on a long-term, sustainable
ceasefire. It is imperative to fully open unconditional
and unhindered humanitarian access to all in need,
including those in besieged and hard-to reach areas.

At this juncture, the political momentum is fragile
and still reversible. A real breakthrough requires
long-term, genuine engagement from all parties to
the conflict, along with courage and readiness to
compromise. After years of this monstrous war there
will be no winners, but there is much to be gained by
immediately stopping the bloodshed, safeguarding
the integrity and sovereignty of the Syrian State and
starting to build a future for its people.

We welcome the meeting by the broad range of
opposition representatives recently held in Riyadh,
which aimed to achieve a common stance in the
peace process. We see it as the start to consolidating
the moderate opposition and as a sign of readiness to
seek common solutions. In order to achieve peace and
reconciliation, the Syrians will need our massive, long-
term and sustained assistance in all aspects, including
in the political, security and humanitarian spheres, in
reconciliation and reconstruction and in the country's
overall development.

We must continue to push the peace process forward
by seeking a genuine and sustainable resolution to the
conflict, setting aside divergent views and interests.
The strong leadership and mediation of the United
Nations remains essential. In that respect, we express
our appreciation to Secretary- General Ban Ki-moon and
his Special Representative Staffan de Mistura for their
efforts. A well conceived, consistent and comprehensive
strategy for political transition, including reconciliation
and the voluntary, safe return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, must be thoroughly prepared and

responsibly implemented in accordance with the 2012
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

Even with a political transition soundly on track,
Daesh will remain one of the biggest threats to peace
and stability in the region and beyond. Along with the
military effort to defeat Daesh, there will be a long and
difficult battle against its poisonous ideology. That
battle must be fought by Muslims themselves, who
are the primary and most vulnerable target of Daesh's
murderous ideology.

In order to avoid the risk of fragmentation or the
creation of new frozen conflict zones in Syria, and
to advance the peace process and reconciliation, it is
critically important for local populations to take the
lead and ownership. Women's voices in particular must
be heard loud and clear at all stages of negotiations
leading to peace and post-conflict reconstruction.

Syria's strength lies in its cultural, ethnic
and religious diversity. All pieces of that complex
fabric - Muslims, Kurds, Alawites, Druze, Turkmen,
Yazidis, Christians and others - must play a full and
integral part in the future of Syria, while enjoying equal
rights, safety, dignity and inclusion in the governance
of the country. Even if the political transition is
facilitated by a third party, the final decisions on their
destiny must be taken by the Syrian people themselves.
Only the Syrian people can decide what kind of State
they want to live in. We hope that they will choose an
inclusive, democratic, accountable and moderate State,
in order to avoid repeating the tragedy that marks their
lives today.

