Mr. Ney (Germany): Germany fully aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of
Sweden on behalf of the European Union.

I wish to start by commending you,
Mr. President, for having convened this timely and
important meeting, marking not only the tenth
anniversary of the start of the Security Council's work
on the protection of civilians but also the sixtieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. Let me also
thank the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General
John Holmes and Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights, for their succinct
briefings today.

In our view, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is an issue that is fundamental to the mandate
of the United Nations. Although international law
specifically prohibits attacks directed against civilians,
as well as indiscriminate attacks in situations of armed
conflict, this phenomenon is still all too common
today. In its landmark resolution 1265 (1999) of 10
years ago, the Security Council, for the first time,
engaged in a thematic approach to the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Since then,
the Council has adopted a number of resolutions and
presidential statements addressing questions which are
instrumental to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, such as compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law, accountability,
the fight against a culture of impunity, the fight for
humanitarian access, and the role of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

The Council also addressed the protection of
specific groups which are particularly vulnerable in
armed conflict. In that context, let me welcome the
Council's and the Secretariat's work on the protection
needs of children as well as on the issues of women
and girls and sexual violence in armed conflict.
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008)
and 1889 (2009) - the latter adopted only a few weeks
ago - stress that the protection and empowerment of
women are key issues of international security policy.
In that regard, we are also looking forward to the
speedy creation of the new United Nations gender
entity and hope that actors in peacekeeping such as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and troop
contributors will cooperate closely with it.

Despite the conceptual and institutional progress
of recent years, substantive challenges remain.
Civilians continue to bear the brunt of armed conflicts.
The growing number of conflicts of a non-international
character has increased the vulnerability of civilians.
Many parties to today's armed conflicts, including
non-State armed groups, fail to comply with their
obligation under international humanitarian law to
distinguish at all times between civilians and
combatants and between civilian and military objects.
The utilization of the presence of civilians to render
certain points, areas or military forces immune from
military operations by adversary forces is a particular
area of concern. If such failures to abide by the rules of
international humanitarian law remain unanswered,
respect for the law of armed conflict will be further
eroded.

Here the fight against impunity is key. Bringing
perpetrators of serious violations to justice is a central
element of improving the protection of civilians in the
future. Ensuring accountability is key to enhancing
respect for international humanitarian law. To achieve
this, we should like to urge the Security Council to
consider making greater use of all the tools at its
disposal, including targeted sanctions against
perpetrators. We also call on the Security Council to
consider resorting to international judicial mechanisms,
including by referring a situation to the International
Criminal Court.
The protection of civilians is also fundamental to
the credibility of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Gaps remain between Headquarters and the
field. In our view, more can and must be done. I should
like to highlight a few points to illustrate what I mean.

First, missions must have a clear mandate for the
protection of civilians and resources commensurate
with the mandated protection tasks. Troop commanders
on the ground must have a clear understanding of what
is expected of them. Guidelines regarding
interpretation of those mandates need to be developed.

Secondly, with regard to doctrine and
preparation, troops on the ground need unambiguous
rules of engagement as well as specific training -
ideally according to common standards for all troop- or
police-contributing countries - in order to avoid
misunderstandings within the peacekeeping operation.

Thirdly, in terms of planning and preparedness, in
addition to clearly defined tasks, the planning process
should consider the issue of the protection of civilians
in its preparations. United Nations personnel in the
field also need appropriate training and instruction.

Fourthly, there is a need for a comprehensive
approach. The protection of civilians is not just a
military task: it is a cross-cutting issue for the mission
as a whole. A comprehensive approach involving
humanitarian assistance, police, rule of law and gender
issues must be put in place.

Fifthly, with regard to mainstreaming, all new
multidimensional mandates comprising the protection
of civilians should ensure that the protection of
civilians is mainstreamed throughout the complex
mission.

My final point relates to enhanced reporting.
Comprehensive, detailed and timely information from
the field on the protection of civilians, including on
constraints on humanitarian actors, is a prerequisite for
the Security Council to take action, enhance oversight
and adjust mandates in a timely manner to reflect
changes on the ground.

In that regard, Germany was encouraged by the
creation of the informal Security Council Expert Group
on the Protection of Civilians early this year. In our
view, that is an important step forward. We also
welcome the prominent role that the issue of the
protection of civilians plays in the New Horizon
process on the reform of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

The protection of civilians is an important issue
that concerns all States Members of the United
Nations. My delegation appreciates the effort that went
into drafting resolution 1894 (2009), adopted today,
which we were pleased to co-sponsor. Germany will
actively participate in future debates on this issue.

