Mr. Quinlan (Australia): When I last briefed the
Council as Chair of the Al-Qaida Committee in May
(see S/PV.7184), I spoke about the threat arising from
an increasing range of heterogeneous Al-Qaida-linked
or splinter groups. Since May we have all witnessed the
dramatic shift in that threat, with the brutal extremism
and rapid territorial gains of two groups on the Al-Qaida
sanctions list, namely, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra Front (ANF).

The Council responded on 15 August by adopting
resolution 2170 (2014), which emphasizes the role of the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime in tackling the threat posed
by ISIL and ANF and called on States to strengthen
measures to counter funding and recruitment for
those groups. In that resolution, the Council directed
the Al-Qaida Sanctions Monitoring Team to submit
to the Committee in mid-November a report on the
threat, including to the region, posed by ISIL and
ANF, their sources of arms, funding, recruitment and
demographics, and to recommend additional action to
address the threat.

In its report (see S/2014/815), the Monitoring Team
notes that the threat from those groups is not new: ISIL
evolved from Al-Qaida in Iraq to emerge today as a
splinter group of Al-Qaida, while the ANF remains a
formal Al-Qaida affiliate. Both groups originated from
terrorist networks founded by veterans of previous
Al-Qaida-related groups in Afghanistan and elsewhere
during the 1990s. Differences relating to leadership
emerged in 2013, with the Al-Qaida core and ANF
formally disassociating itself from ISIL and its leader,
Al-Baghdadi, in February 2014; but both groups
continued to subscribe to the underlying goals of
Al-Qaida, promoting extremism and seeking to change
the existing political order in the Middle East through
terrorist violence to establish a State based on a widely
repudiated misinterpretation of religion and to expel
foreign influence.

But while the threat is not new, the Monitoring Team
assessed that the scale ofthe threat was qualitatively and
quantitatively different, because of the nexus between
funding and the groups' control over population and
territory, and the thousands of foreign terrorist fighters
that have joined them. Both groups pose an immediate
threat to the population in territories they have seized
and Where they operate, as well as in neighbouring
territories. Both groups have a track record of summary
killings, rape and sexual violence, trafficking in
women and children, targeting humanitarian workers
and kidnapping and murdering hostages for income
or political messaging. Their presence fundamentally
complicates efforts to forge political order in Iraq and
Syria, and aggravates and intensifies existing armed
violence. Their extreme ideology exacerbates sectarian
tensions, generating further tension in the region,
while their campaign against minorities has altered the
demography of Iraq and Syria.

Globally, the Monitoring Team found the threat
derived from three strands: first, the large and diverse
networks of foreign terrorist fighters, numbering
over 15,000 from more than 80 countries and who
already threaten a range of States; secondly, the
power of ISIL and the Nusra Front's toxic ideology
and propaganda, which has set a new standard for
Al-Qaida in disseminating its message; and, thirdly,
their operational innovation, which could create a
mobile, transnational cadre of expert terrorists who can
combine terrorist, guerrilla and conventional tactics.
Those three strands carry associated risks. As we have
seen with previous Al-Qaida veterans, there is a high
risk that these battle-hardened, radicalized recruits will
transfer their skills and threaten peace and security in
other countries in years to come. ISIL's propaganda is
produced in greater volumes and with greater frequency
than before, and has been modernized and digitalized,
making it globally available with the potential to sustain
a new wave of Al-Qaida movement activity.

The Monitoring Team found that both ISIL and
ANF had seized military assets from conventional
armies, captured, diverted and traded arms with other
opposition groups and benefitted from an extensive
informal regional economy in arms smuggling. ISIL
is particularly well armed, having seized extensive
supplies of heavy weapons from the Government of
Iraq, including man-portable air defence systems and
high mobility multipurpose military vehicles, while
the Nusra Front is more dependent on continuing
fresh supplies of weapons and ammunition. Both are
sophisticated in their use of improvised explosive
devices and explosive remnants of war.

Similarly, on finances, the Monitoring Team found
that ISIL had been able to seize considerable assets in
both Iraq and Syria and continued to benefit from a
substantial, continuing revenue flow from a range of
sources, including the sale of oil, extortion, kidnapping
for ransom and - to a lesser extent today - donations.
The bulk of ISIL's funds appear to come from its
control of oil fields in Iraq and Syria, which it sells
and smuggles predominantly through tanker trucks
and long-established smuggling networks, which
the Monitoring Team assessed could raise revenue
ranging from $846,000 to $1,645,000 per day. Both
ISIL and the Nusra Front exploit civilian populations,
extracting payments from those who pass through,
conduct business in or live in areas under their control,
and raising revenue through the sale of stolen goods.
There is evidence that ISIL encourages the looting
and smuggling of antiquities from Iraq and Syria and
generates revenue by taxing looters. However, ANF
lacks the same range and depth ofresources and appears
to rely more on external donations and kidnapping for
ransom. The funds generated from those illegal activities
are used by groups to support their recruitment efforts
and strengthen their operational capability to organize
and carry out terrorist attacks.

In terms of ISIL and Nusra Front recruits, the Team
identified three main sources: foreign terrorist fighters,
local Iraqis and Syrians, and new local affiliates,
ranging from militia and ex-Baathists who had made
tactical alliances with ISIL. Recruits are drawn in
through Internet-based platforms, personal contact
and persuasion, or in some cases through prison-based
networks. Despite the sharp growth in foreign terrorist
fighters in the last three years, the Monitoring Team
found no specific typology for a foreign terrorist
fighter, but more data was emerging. What can be
said is that this new wave tends to be younger, more
diverse and digital-savvy, which in turn generates
fresh social and operational networks that are more
transnational. Fighters came from over 80 countries,
with large groupings from the Maghreb and the Middle
East, along with Europe and Central Asia. There was
also evidence ofa significant presence of dual nationals
with European passports.

As directed in resolution 2170 (2014), adopted
in August, the Monitoring Team has made a number
of detailed recommendations, which the Al-Qaida
Committee is now considering. The Monitoring
Team recommends that the Committee promote fuller
implementation and greater use of the existing Al-Qaida
sanctions regime by encouraging States to identify
more designations to the Committee relevant to ISIL
and ANF and encouraging the availability of technical
assistance and capacity-building to address gaps in
implementation, in collaboration with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate.

The Monitoring Team also recommends a number
of measures requiring Council action, designed not
only to stem the flow of funds to ISIL and ANF from
the sale of oil from territory they control, but also
to tackle potential revenue streams, such as from
looted antiquities, and to prevent possible avenues
for resupply in ISIL- and ANF-controlled territory by
banning flights to or from such territory. The Team also
recommends a specific focus on heightened vigilance in
the banking sector against ISIL and ANF. Should such
measures be adopted, the Team also recommends that

the Committee assess the impact of such measures after
six months to ensure that they affect only their target.

Lastly, the Monitoring Team recommends that
Member States use INTERPOL's network and tools,
such as the transnational fighters database, to share
information on known and suspected foreign terrorist
fighters, and highlights the need for more concerted
multilateral and national action to address the toxic
ideas and imagery promoted by ISIL, ANF and other
groups within the Al-Qaida movement.

Effectively implemented, well-targeted Al-Qaida
sanctions can make a real contribution to disrupting
ISIL and ANF and inhibiting their international
network of recruits and facilitators. But sanctions alone
are clearly not sufficient; a comprehensive approach
is needed that properly integrates United Nations
strategies with multilateral and national action and
incorporates strategic communication to counter the
terrorist narrative.

