Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, we commend you, Sir, as Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Italy, for presiding
over this important Security Council meeting at an
important historical juncture for our brother country of
Libya. I would like to thank Mr. Skoog for his statement
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. I
would also like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, for his
briefing, and to take this opportunity to express to him
Egypt's continued support for his intensive work aimed
at achieving a political solution to the Libyan crisis.

I would like to outline some of Egypt's efforts to
help to unify and strengthen the Libyan National Army
forces and support the work of Mr. Salame and the
United Nations in general. The Egyptian committee
tasked with the Libyan issue hosted a delegation of
Libyan military personnel in Cairo from 29 October to
2 November, where they conducted detailed discussions
on various ideas and solutions aimed at launching a
new era with a view to unifying the Libyan military
establishment. A group of specialized technical
committees has been formed to discuss unifying the
military establishment and to explore various concerns
related to achieving that goal. The discussions focused
on issues pertaining to the nature of the relationship
between the civilian authorities and the military, as
well as how to restructure and reorganize the latter.
The delegation agreed to meet again in Cairo, following
a presentation of the discussions back home in Libya,
so as to continue consultations on the necessary
procedures and to acknowledge the recommendations
that the committees have endorsed for reunifying the
military establishment.

On the political front, Egypt continues to follow
closely the meetings of the High State Council on
amending the Libyan Political Agreement. In that
regard, we would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our appreciation for Mr. Salame's exhaustive efforts
and the importance of continuing to expand the range
of consultations on the amendments. We also consider
it important to ensure that the participants display the
flexibility needed to enable the implementation of
the Agreement, which we all desire. It will be crucial
to avoid confrontation and embrace harmony and
agreement. We should also note that time is not on
our side, because any delay in arriving at a consensus
on the amendments to the Agreement would expose
the crisis in Libya to further complications. We must
therefore work quickly to finalize those amendments
by the end of the year.

With regard to developments on the ground,
we express our deep concern about the military
manoeuvres and recent clashes in Warshefana, in
western Libya. Egypt urges all parties to exercise self-
control and avoid escalation.

In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for the
work of the United Nations and Mr. Salame, and we
wish the brotherly people of Libya peace, prosperity
and well-being.

