Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, I am very pleased to see you, Sir, presiding
over this important meeting of the Council and would like
to express my gratitude to you. I would also like to
express my gratitude to the delegation of the fraternal
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, led by Minister Omar
Muntasser, whose initiative it was to call for the
convening of this open formal meeting of the Security
Council.

We would also like to thank all those who supported
that initiative, especially the League of Arab States, the
Organization of African Unity, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement.
Regrettably, it seems that it was necessary to pool all
these efforts in order to obtain the agreement of the
Security Council to convene a plenary meeting at which
Member States of the United Nations would be allowed
to express their views on the question before the Council,
despite the fact that the Council acts on behalf of these
States under Article 24, paragraph 1, of the Charter, and
that Article 31 of the Charter gives States that right.

Since the beginning of what has been called the era
of wild turmoil after the severe disruption of the
international balance brought about by the fall of the
Soviet Union various sanctions regimes have given rise to
major legal, ethical and political problems. From the legal
point of view, the problem is that sanctions continue even
when they are no longer justified, assuming there was a
justification to begin with. From the political point of
view, it is that the resolutions of the Security Council
imposing sanctions have been transformed into an
instrument in the service of the narrow political objectives
of a single State. From the ethical point of view, it is that
these sanctions have become a means of imposing
collective punishment against innocent civilians,
especially in Iraq and Libya.

The sanctions imposed against Libya and Iraq
represent a model of these problems. The sanctions were
imposed against Libya because of the mere suspicion of
the involvement of two Libyan citizens in the heinous
terrorist act called the Lockerbie incident. Thus, they were
based on suspicions and not on established facts, and they
 

therefore have no legal justification. At the same time,
these sanctions, since their inception in 1992, have inflicted
great suffering on the Libyan people. The fact-finding
mission dispatched by the Secretary-General to the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya in December of 1997 reported on the
widespread adverse effects of the sanctions on the social
welfare of the people and on the economy of the country,
especially as regards social services and public health,
which were greatly affected by the prohibition on air travel.
In addition, the sanctions did not provide the long-awaited
answers for the families of the victims of the Pan Am
flight.

There is also the problem relating to the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions. After
the adoption of resolutions 731 (1992), 748 (1992) and 883
(1993), the United States and the United Kingdom insisted
that Libya hand the suspects over to them, although
resolution 731 (1992) did not include any explicit provision
calling upon Libya to surrender the suspects.

For its part, Libya has launched numerous positive
initiatives in keeping with the spirit of these resolutions.
Those initiatives were supported by the League of Arab
States, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the
Organization of African Unity and the Non-Aligned
Movement, as well as by the Security Council itself. But
the United States and the United Kingdom insisted on
disregarding these initiatives that were supported by the
majority of the international community. They insisted that
Libya carry out what they referred to as the will of the
international community. Our question is, if the Libyan
proposals, which are endorsed by more than 140 States, do
not represent the will of the international community, then
what does?

Then there is the problem of reviewing the sanctions
regime. These reviews are undertaken in a closed
consultations meeting. They are supposed to be undertaken
in an open, formal meeting so that the international
community can tell whether the Council was faithful to the
mandate entrusted to it under Article 24, paragraph 1, of
the Charter in expressing its will regarding the keeping or
the lifting of sanctions.

These closed reviews begin by an expression of the
majority of the Council members of their welcome of the
positive developments, and they call for accepting one of
the proposals made by Libya. But they regrettably end with
the well-known statement that there is no consensus on
introducing any change in the sanctions regime.

This begs the question: why is a consensus required
to change the sanctions regime? Was this consensus
required when the sanctions were imposed? The answer
is no. Resolution 748 (1992) was adopted with only 10
votes in favour, while 5 States abstained, including a
permanent member. Resolution 883 (1993) was adopted
with only 11 votes in favour, while 4 States, including a
permanent member, abstained.

The mechanism used to review the sanctions gives
one State the possibility of blocking the consensus. It is
possible that this situation can go on indefinitely, as long
as this State has its own political agenda vis-a-vis the
target State. Faced with this problem, the General
Assembly adopted without a vote, on 15 September 1997,
resolution 51/242. This resolution and its annexes laid the
foundations to be used in considering the imposition of
sanctions and reviewing the sanctions. Paragraph 3 of
annex II provides for the following:

"The Security Council has the ability to
determine the time-frame of sanctions. This question
is of the greatest importance and should be seriously
considered in connection with the objective of
changing the behaviour of the target party while not
causing unnecessary suffering to the civilian
population. The Council should define the time-
frame for sanctions regimes taking these
considerations into account."

If the international community in its entirety is
agreed on the need for a time-frame for the sanctions,
what prevents the Security Council from implementing
that so as to be really faithful to the will of the
international community?

Recently, there has been an important development
that necessitates breaking the vicious circle of the
sanctions, by which we mean the decision of the
International Court of Justice on 27 February 1998, in
which it declared its competence to consider this dispute.
This decision asserted that the entire question relates to
interpretation and implementation of the 1971 Montreal
Convention on the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against
the Safety of Civil Aviation. This means that the
International Court is capable of pronouncing itself on it,
and there is no justification for continued resort to
coercive measures under Chapter VII of the Charter.

Therefore, it is imperative now to stop the coercive
measures pending the issuance of a judgment by the
International Court of Justice deciding the case before it.

 

Resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993) did not invalidate
the role of the Court. This latter is the major judicial organ
of the United Nations, as provided in Article 92 of the
Charter. It is inadmissible to invoke actions under Chapter
VII to block the powers of the Court. The Charter defined
the powers of the Court and the powers of the Security
Council, and it is inappropriate for any organ of the United
Nations to depart from its constitutional frame defined by
the Charter.

We call on the Security Council to adopt a resolution
suspending the sanctions imposed on Libya, because the
persistence of the current crisis without solution and the
continued imposition of sanctions on Libya are fraught with
grave dangers to peace and security in the area and in the
world.

