Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his work as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and for his presentation of the
90-day report of the Committee.

The Committee received from Member States
a number of communications on actions taken in
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and on responses on reported incidents
during the reporting period. The Committee discussed
the incident report by the Panel of Experts dated
11 January 2013, exchanged views on the case reported
by a Member State on 6 February 2013 and encouraged
the Panel to expedite the investigation in that regard
and report to the Committee on its findings. It is critical
that the Committee examine all cases and incidents
in an impartial and objective manner and consider
appropriate actions on the basis of solid evidence. It
is essential that the Committee continue its efforts to
assist States in implementing the relevant Security
Council measures. We note in that regard the adoption
by the Committee of an implementation assistance
notice on conventional arms and related material and
on financial and business measures.

We also note the Panel's visit to several Member
States to discuss matters pertaining to the mandate
of the Panel, and the participation of its experts in
a number of conferences and seminars during the
reporting period. It is essential that the Panel continue
its outreach activities, which play an important role
in increasing the number of national implementation
reports from Member States.

The reporting period was also marked by three
rounds of talks between the Islamic Republic of Iran
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
aimed at finalizing the structured approach document.
However, according to the report of the IAEA Board of
Governors of 21 February (see S/2013/103), it has not
been possible to reach agreement or begin substantive
work on the outstanding issues.

There is no doubt that every country has the right to
develop its nuclear industry for peaceful purposes in full
accordance with the relevant international obligations.
It is therefore important that the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran continue its efforts to build
international confidence in the exclusively peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme.

It is encouraging that high-level talks took place
at the end of February between Iran and the five
permanent members of the Security Council and
Germany. We hope that the meeting at the technical
level to be held later this month, and the resumption of
high-level negotiations in April in Almaty, Kazakhstan,
will help move the resolution of the problem forward. It
is essential to continue dialogue and cooperation on the
issues on which progress is urgent for regional stability.
We encourage further efforts aimed at resolving the
issues of concern peacefully and in a constructive
manner.

