Mr. Mladenov: On behalf of the Secretary-
General, today I will present the eighth report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), covering the
period from 13 September to 14 December. I will focus
on developments on the ground, in accordance with
the provisions of the resolution, including on regional
and international efforts to advance peace. Let me
underscore that these developments cannot be divorced
from the broader context - Israel's continued military
occupation of Palestinian territory; uncertainties about
the future of the peace process and the two-State
solution; Hamas's continuing hold over Gaza and its
militant activity; the persistent threat of war; unilateral
actions that undermine peace efforts; reduced donor
support for Palestine; and turmoil in the wider region.

Before I begin my report, I would like to warn of
the dangerous escalation of terrorist attacks, clashes
and violence in the West Bank. Over the past days and
weeks, there has been an alarming rise in incidents that
have led to the tragic deaths of Israeli and Palestinian
civilians and Israeli soldiers. My thoughts and prayers
go out to the bereaved families. The security measures
put in place in the aftermath of those incidents, search
operations in Ramallah, as well as clashes and protests
that turn violent, are adding to an already tense
atmosphere. I join the Secretary-General in his call
on Israeli and Palestinian security services to work
together to restore calm and avoid escalation.

Allow me to return to my reporting on resolution
2334 (2016). No steps were taken by Israel during the
reporting period, according to paragraph 2, to

"immediately and completely cease all settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem"

and to fully respect all of its legal obligations in
that regard, as required by the resolution. I reiterate
that all settlement activities are a violation under
international law and a major obstacle to peace. During
the reporting period, plans for some 2,200 housing
units in settlements in the West Bank were advanced or
approved by the Israeli authorities. The vast majority,
nearly 2,000, were advanced in East Jerusalem, further
consolidating the ring of settlements to the city's
north. Two hundred are in Area C and have reached the
final stage of approval. That is the lowest number of
quarterly advancements and approvals recorded since
the resolution was adopted. This period, like the last
quarter, saw no tenders issued.

In October, the Government approved the allocation
of $6 million for advancing the construction of 31
housing units in Hebron, which would be the first new
construction there in 16 years. On 15 November, the High
Court of Justice rejected an appeal by two Palestinian
families living in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood
of Sheikh Jarrah and allowed the eviction of some 40
family members to advance construction. The decision
was based on an ownership claim by an Israeli company.
On 19 November, the Knesset passed legislation
enabling, under certain conditions, the planning for
residential purposes in national parks located within
municipal boundaries. That amendment could facilitate
the construction of additional housing units in the East
Jerusalem neighbourhood of Silwan. On 21 November,
Israel's High Court of Justice rejected a petition filed
by over 100 Palestinian residents of Silwan to stop the
efforts of an Israeli organization to evict them from
their homes. The organization had gained control ofthe
properties by invoking an Israeli law by which Israelis,
but not Palestinians, may claim lands they owned prior
to 1948.

Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures by Israeli authorities continued across the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Citing
the absence of Israeli-issued building permits, which
are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain in Area
C and East Jerusalem, 152 structures were demolished
or seized by the authorities. According to the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, that
has resulted in the displacement of 103 people. On
21 October, the Israeli authorities announced the delay
of the demolition of the Bedouin community of Khan
Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu in order to allow for negotiation
with the community to relocate residents with their
consent. Nevertheless, the threat of mass demolition
and displacement remains, despite broad international
opposition to the move.

Let me turn now to the issue of violence. The
resolution calls for immediate steps to prevent all acts
of violence against civilians. However, violence and
the threat of war continue. Overall, 75 Palestinians
were killed by Israeli security forces, including during
demonstrations, clashes, air strikes, security operations
and other incidents. Seven Israelis, including three
soldiers and four civilians, were killed by Palestinians
in attacks in the West Bank and a military operation
in Gaza. The reporting period once again saw a major
escalation in Gaza that almost brought Israel and
Hamas to war.

On 11 November, in an exchange of fire following
the discovery of an undercover Israeli unit in Gaza,
seven members of the military wing of Hamas and
an Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) officer were killed.
Militants in Gaza immediately launched 18 rockets
and mortars. In the following 24 hours, some 450
projectiles were indiscriminately fired towards Israeli
cities and towns - more than in the entire period since
the 2014 conflict. One Palestinian civilian was killed
by a Hamas rocket in the Israeli city of Ashkelon. An
IDF soldier was also seriously wounded by a missile
strike that hit a military bus. The IDF responded by
striking 160 targets identified as militant sites. Seven
Palestinians were killed and at least four are reported
to have been members of armed groups.

On 11 October, the IDF announced that it had
destroyed a tunnel extending 200 metres from Gaza into
Israel. On 17 October, two medium-range rockets were
launched towards Israel, one directly hitting a residential
building in Be'er Sheva, some 40 kilometres away.
The IDF responded by firing 10 missiles at target sites
across the Gaza Strip. On 28 October, three Palestinian
children aged 13 to 15 were killed in an IDF strike
near the fence in the southern Gaza Strip, in disputed
circumstances. Protests at the Gaza perimeter fence
and near the beach continued, although their size
significantly decreased, and they have remained fairly
peaceful since the beginning of November.

Since early November, there have been no reports
of incendiary devices, balloons or kites from Gaza
causing damage in Israel. Since 13 September, some 43
Palestinians, including nine children, have been killed
during the protests and other incidents near the fence
and at sea. The youngest and most recent victim was a
four-year-old who died on 11 December after he was
injured by Israeli live fire during protests at the fence.

Meanwhile in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, the situation has also deteriorated over the
past weeks. During the reporting period, six Israelis,
including four civilians, and 12 Palestinians were killed
in various incidents, including terror attacks, clashes
and military operations. On 7 October, an Israeli man
and woman were shot dead in the Barkan industrial
zone by a former Palestinian co-worker, who was killed
in an IDF operation near Nablus on 13 December.

On 12 October, a Palestinian woman was killed
south of Nablus by stones allegedly thrown by Israeli
assailants. On 4 December, in Tulkarm refugee camp, a
22-year old Palestinian with a psychological disability
was shot and killed by the Israeli security forces in
circumstances that would seem to indicate that he posed
no threat to security personnel or others. Investigations
have been launched into both incidents.

On 9 December, in a drive-by shooting near the West
Bank settlement of Ofra, seven Israelis were injured,
including four children and a pregnant woman whose
baby was delivered prematurely and subsequently
passed away. Hamas praised the attack and identified
one ofthe perpetrators, who was later killed in an Israeli
security forces operation north of Ramallah, as one of
their own. The Israeli Defence Forces have indicated
that there are additional individuals involved in the
incident still at large and that a manhunt is ongoing. I
want to strongly condemn that attack and reiterate that
there is no justification for terrorism.

On 13 December, in another drive-by shooting
near the Giv'at Asaf settlement, two Israeli soldiers
were killed and another was severely wounded
alongside an Israeli woman. The perpetrators, who fled
towards Ramallah, reportedly remain at large. In the
operations to apprehend the perpetrators of the Ofra
attack, on 10 and 11 December dozens of IDF troops
entered Ramallah, where, inter alia, they raided the
offices of the official Palestinian news agency, WAFA,
and seized surveillance video. Two Palestinians were
reportedly injured by live fire during ensuing clashes
and over 150 in related incidents around the West Bank
in subsequent days.
In a statement issued on 13 December, the Israeli
Prime Minister announced a series of measures in
response to the wave of attacks, including revoking the
permits of family members and demolishing houses
of the perpetrators of attacks, increasing checkpoints
and administrative detentions, and intensifying efforts
to capture assailants still at large. The Prime Minister
also announced that some 2,000 houses built on private
Palestinian land in settlements would be retroactively
legalized, and that steps had been taken to advance the
construction of 82 new housing units in Ofra and in
two industrial zones in the settlements of Avnei Hefetz
and Beitar Illit.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has recorded 49 incidents of settler-related
violence resulting in the injury of Palestinians or
damage to their property. During the reporting period
there were also recurring clashes between settlers from
Yitzhar and residents of the neighbouring Palestinian
village of Urif.

Following the shooting attacks of the past few
days, settler leaders blamed the Government for failing
to protect them. Hundreds protested, some violently,
blocking traffic and throwing stones at Palestinian
vehicles. Police arrested some 40 people. Incidents of
stone throwing and vandalism, as well as shots fired at
villages have been reported in several locations in the
West Bank.

Resolution 2334 (2016), in its paragraph 7, calls
upon the parties "to refrain from provocative actions,
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric". Unfortunately,
such actions and statements continued during the
reporting period. Hamas continued to use inciteful and
inflammatory rhetoric. Its officials praised the stabbing
and shooting attacks that killed Israeli civilians as
heroic and mourned the killers. Fatah, including on its
official social media accounts, also commemorated and
celebrated the perpetrators of recent attacks, as well
as past terror attacks in which Israeli civilians have
been killed. In a radio interview, a senior member of
the party glorified the perpetrators of stabbing attacks
in Jerusalem. In addition, senior Palestinian religious
leaders made a series of inflammatory speeches
alleging Israeli intentions to destroy the Al-Aqsa
mosque or change the status quo at the holy sites in
Jerusalem. President Abbas has spoken against the
recent surge of violence in the West Bank.

Meanwhile, Israeli officials have also made
provocative and highly problematic statements
encouraging violence and undermining a two-State
solution. In the wake of the recent violence in the
West Bank, politicians have called for the deportation
of families of attackers. Separately, there have been
calls for a shoot-to-kill policy in Gaza, and one
politician has gone as far as to call for President Abbas
to be assassinated. Others have continued to reject
Palestinians' right to statehood, to support openly
widespread settlement expansion, and to support the
annexation of all or parts of the West Bank.

Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterates calls by the
Middle East Quartet for affirmative steps to be taken
immediately to reverse negative trends on the ground
that are imperilling the two-State solution. There have
been some positive developments, but the negative
trends dominate. Among positive developments, I
can point to the mobilization of international support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). On
19 November, UNRWA announced that the financial
shortfall for 2018 - which stood at some $446 million
in January - had been reduced to $21 million thanks
to substantial new funding by Member States.

In Gaza, the international community has taken
a number of steps to improve the lives of 2 million
people who live under Hamas control, struggle with
Israeli closures and have little prospect of seeing
national unity.

First, thanks to generous funding from the State
of Qatar, the United Nations has been able to import
life-saving fuel to operate the Gaza power plant.
Daily electricity supply has increased to more than 11
hours - the highest in over two years. Private homes,
hospitals, schools, water facilities and businesses are
all benefitting. Seventy-five per cent of the sewage can
now be treated again. That has significantly reduced
the contamination levels caused by discharge into
the sea. Piped water supply has increased by 40 per
cent, almost fully meeting water demand for domestic
household purposes. Drinking water supplied through
desalination plants has also increased by 20 per cent,
while private businesses have benefited from the
reduced fuel costs. Those are substantial improvements.
Finding sustainable solutions to Gaza's electricity
crisis, however, remains critical. The Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and the World Bank have convened
the international community to discuss how to stabilize
electricity supply in the long run.

Secondly, on 4 December, the United Nations
concluded a comprehensive review of the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism, together with the
Palestinian Authority and Israel. It has resulted in
several important changes that will be implemented as
of 1 January 2019. They will allow the Mechanism to
better respond to Gaza's changed needs and increase its
functionality, transparency and predictability.

Thirdly, the reconstruction and rehabilitation
of 360 totally destroyed houses and the repair of 30
homes that were partially damaged in the 2014 conflict
in Gaza have also been completed.

Finally, in Gaza, the United Nations has enhanced
its project implementation capacity by establishing
a project management unit to work with all relevant
stakeholders to support implementation, including
of the package of urgent interventions from the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians.

Beyond Gaza, in another encouraging sign, civil
society groups continue to mobilize in support of
peace. This past month, I participated in a remarkable
conference organized by Women Wage Peace, a
non-governmental organization that brings together
Jewish and Arab women advocating a negotiated
solution to the conflict. The conference, attended by
close to 1,000 young women and men, is precisely the
kind of grass-roots effort called for in the 2016 Quartet
report (S/2016/595, annex). It encourages a culture of
tolerance and laying a crucial foundation for peace.

Regrettably, however, the negative trends continue
to overshadow any positive developments. The
humanitarian, economic and political crisis in Gaza
continues and, despite Egypt's sustained efforts, there
has been no progress in implementing the October 2017
intra-Palestinian agreement. The goal remains that
Gaza and the West Bank are reunited under the control
of a single, legitimate national Government, with a
unified legal framework that would be responsible for
all aspects of governance, including security.

In December Hamas made public the decision
of a military court to sentence six people to death,
including a woman. Another death sentence was also
handed down in Gaza to a man convicted of murder by
a criminal court. These decisions are contrary to both
international human rights law and national Palestinian
legislation.

Resolution 2334 (2016) calls upon all States
"to distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between
the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967". On 28 November the Chilean
parliament approved a resolution that called on the
Government to examine all of its agreements with Israel
to ascertain that they apply solely to the territory of the
State of Israel, and not to the territories occupied since
1967. The Republic of Ireland advanced in the upper
house ofparliament, the "Control of Economic Activity
(Occupied Territories) Bill 2018", which, if passed into
law, would prohibit trade with and economic support
for settlements.

The resolution also called upon "all parties to
continue to exert collective efforts to launch credible
negotiations". No progress was achieved in this respect
as well.

At the beginning of my statement, I addressed
the continuing expansion of Israeli settlements. On
28 and 29 October, the Central Council of the Palestine
Liberation Organization reaffirmed the decisions taken
to suspend the recognition of the State of Israel until
the latter recognizes the State of Palestine within the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
end security coordination in all its forms, and disengage
economically from Israel. These decisions have not
been implemented. President Abbas is reported to have
signed, on 15 November, 11 instruments of accession to
international agreements.

In closing, I would like to share some broad
observations concerning the implementation of the
provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) over the past year.

The continued expansion of the Israeli settlement
enterprise, in all its aspects, is illegal under international
law, and undermines hope among the population, trust
between the parties, and the two-State solution itself.
Settlement planning and tendering continued during
2018 but at lower rates compared to 2017. For Area C
settlements, plans were advanced or approved for some
4,800 housing units, compared to nearly 7,000 during
2017. Tenders were announced for some 2,900 units,
slightly less than the 3,200 tendered the previous year.
For East Jerusalem settlements, plans were advanced
or approved for 2,100 units in 2018, compared to about
3,100 in 2017, and a tender was announced for the
first time in two years. About one quarter of the units
advanced, approved or tendered in 2018 are planned
for settlements in outlying locations deep in the West
Bank.

In this context, this year saw some worrying
moves, including the continued construction of a new
settlement, Amichai, located in a strategic location that
further consolidates the cluster of settlements to the
east of Shilo, at the very heart of the West Bank. Israeli
authorities also approved new construction in Hebron
after a lull of some 16 years. In addition, severaljudicial
and administrative decisions taken during 2018 have
removed long-standing obstacles to the use of private
Palestinian land for the benefit of settlements.

The United Nations continues to closely monitor the
threat of demolitions and displacement to Palestinians
in Area C and East Jerusalem. Between January and
November 2018, there were 422 Palestinian-owned
structures demolished or seized by Israel on the
grounds of a lack of building permits - 245 in Area
C and 167 in East Jerusalem. Some 411 people have
been displaced, which represents a slight increase in
the number of structures demolished compared with
the equivalent period of 2017.

Particularly worrisome is the situation in the
community of Khan al-Ahmar-Abu al Helu. Moving
forward on the demolition of the community would
amount to a serious violation of Israel's obligations
under international law and undermine the prospects
for a two-State solution. I call on all concerned parties
to work towards resolving the issue in a manner that
is consistent with the community's will and genuine
needs, and in line with Israel's international legal
obligations.

In terms of violence over the past year, although
Gaza has been the most volatile, the risk of an explosion
in the West Bank has also grown. I am concerned by
the recent incidents and rising tensions in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. During the past three
months, we have witnessed stabbing, ramming and
three lethal shooting attacks against Israelis, one of
which led to the heartbreaking death of a baby. We have
also seen the death of a Palestinian woman, killed by a
stone. There can be no justification for any brutal acts
of terror, and I call on all to join the United Nations in
condemning them unequivocally. They feed mistrust
and hatred among people.

Israeli responses to recent events in the West Bank
have been harsh, as some of the perpetrators of recent
attacks have been killed. Unfortunately, incidents like
the shooting of a Palestinian man with psychosocial
disabilities as he was walking away from the security
forces fuel a climate of fear and anger. These actions
continue to worsen a climate of hatred and fear and
drive Israelis and Palestinians further away from
resolution of the conflict.

Settler-related violence has also been on the rise
during 2018, with the highest number of incidents
recorded since 2014. Thousands of Palestinian-owned
trees and more than hundreds of vehicles have been
damaged. Settlers have continued to enter Palestinian
locations, triggering clashes, some of which involve
Israeli soldiers. Such incidents have resulted in the
death of two Palestinians. While I acknowledge efforts
by the authorities to prevent and investigate settler-
related violence, I call for further measures to ensure
that Israel fulfils its obligation to protect civilians and
to investigate and hold accountable those responsible
for attacks.

And while Gala has been quiet since the last
escalation in November, it is critical that events in the
West Bank not lead to reigniting the Gaza fuse. The
people in Gaza have suffered enough and must not be
made to pay the price for violence elsewhere.

Each time, as the parties came frighteningly close
to the brink of war, tireless efforts by Egypt and the
United Nations prevented a full-fledged conflict.
Ultimately, what will ensure long-term peace is
reuniting Gaza and the West Bank under a single,
legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority and
putting an end to the occupation. Meanwhile, however,
it is imperative that the current calm be preserved at all
costs. No one can afford another war in Gaza.

Since March, tens of thousands of people in Gaza
took part in demonstrations along the perimeter fence,
many of which turned violent. Throughout this period,
hundreds of fires were started in Israel by incendiary
devices, balloons and kites coming from Gaza. From
May through November, we witnessed the most serious
escalations since the 2014 conflict, with over 500
rockets and 700 mortars fired towards Israel by Hamas
and other militant groups. Some 175 Palestinians were
killed by Israeli live fire, including 32 children, two
women and three medical workers. One Israeli soldier
was killed by sniper fire during the demonstrations.
The indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars
against Israeli towns and villages violates international
law, placing hundreds of thousands of civilians under
imminent threat, and causing great fear and mental
trauma, particularly for children.

Serious concerns remain over the loss of life,
especially of children, in the context ofthese hostilities
and protests. The death of four-year-old child is a
tragedy that must not be repeated; I mourn his short
life. The killing of children is absolutely unacceptable.
Israeli security forces have a responsibility to exercise
restraint and should use firearms only when strictly
necessary in order to protect life or prevent serious
injury from an imminent threat. Hamas also has an
obligation to protect children, ensuring that they never
be put in harm's way.

Ongoing instances ofincitement, provocative steps
and inflammatory rhetoric plague the public discourse
of the conflict. They are highly dangerous and threaten
to push an already volatile situation past the boiling
point. I have repeatedly stated in my briefings to the
Council that leaders have a responsibility to reduce,
rather than escalate, tensions; yet over the past year,
statements that encourage violence continued. Such
rhetoric, particularly if it denies the right of existence
of one of the sides, or their right to Statehood or
glorifies terror, is dangerous and plays into the hands
of extremists beyond Israel and Palestine. I also
reiterate to political, community and religious leaders
the resolution's call to clearly condemn all acts of
terrorism.

Regrettably, this year has seen no affirmative steps
by the parties to reverse negative trends nor serious
progress on implementing important agreements
signed in 2017, including agreements on water, energy
and telecommunications. On the contrary, significant
Israeli administrative and legal decisions are facilitating
the legalization, under Israeli law, of settlements on
private Palestinian land and threaten to undermine
the financial stability of the Palestinian Authority.
Meanwhile, restrictive measures by the Palestinian
Authority against Gaza compound the long-standing
Israeli closures of the Gaza Strip, further widening the
political and administrative gap between Ramallah and
Gaza. Such measures must end.

However, the completion of the review of the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism and, more specifically, the
commitment by the Palestinian Authority and Israel to
the Mechanism's continuation and enhancement were
important developments. That rare example of direct
Israeli and Palestinian engagement with United Nations
facilitation shows that there is room for cooperation.
Humanitarian partners have also struggled to fulfil
their mandates in the face of rising humanitarian needs
amid record-high cuts in funding, increased restrictions
on humanitarian operating space and attempts to
delegitimize the work of reputable organizations that
provide essential support to vulnerable Palestinians. I
encourage Member States to support the humanitarian
response plan for 2019.

The important financial support of the State of
Qatar has enabled the United Nations delivery of fuel
to the Gaza power plant and the resulting substantial
increase in the electricity supply for Palestinians in
Gaza. Iurge other donors to support additional elements
of the package of urgent economic and humanitarian
interventions for Gaza that was endorsed by the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee in New York in September. I also
welcome the generous support of donors, which has
almost fully met the shortfall facing UNRWA this past
year. Looking ahead to 2019, I also urge donor countries
to maintain the funding levels achieved this year and to
increase the number of multi-year agreements.

The fate of two Israeli civilians and the bodies
of the IDF soldiers missing in Gaza also remains an
important humanitarian concern for us all.

Whiletherehasbeennoprogressonintra-Palestinian
reconciliation, it is critical that the important Egyptian-
led process continue. The United Nations stands firmly
in support of Egypt's efforts in that regard and urges
the parties to make serious efforts to ensure the return
of the legitimate Palestinian Government to Gaza. The
Gaza Strip is, and must remain, an integral part of the
future Palestinian State as part ofa two-State solution.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that I remain
concerned about the weakening of the international
consensus and the absence of collective efforts to
achieve an end to the occupation and the realization
of a negotiated two-State solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, in line with the relevant United
Nations resolutions and prior agreements.

I believe that I speak on behalf of us all today
when I say that we all share the concern that, at the
end of 2018, we are no closer to reviving efforts for
a negotiated solution. Without a political horizon, all
our collective and individual efforts contribute only to
managing the conflict rather than to resolving it.
It is only by realizing the vision of two States living
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition,
with Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and Palestine and
all final-status issues permanently resolved through
negotiations, that the legitimate aspirations of both
peoples can be achieved.

