The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.

I would like to welcome Special Representative
Jessen-Petersen back to the Security Council, and to
thank him for his excellent briefing. I would also like
to thank President Tadic of Serbia and Montenegro for
joining us today.

At the outset, we would like to remember the
very sad death of President Rugova last month. We
congratulate the people of Kosovo, however, on the
election of President Sejdiu. He will have a difficult
and important job as Kosovo enters future status talks.
Resolving Kosovo's status will finally put the conflicts
of the 1990s behind us.

When we look at Kosovo, we know that we must
reach a settlement that enhances regional stability,
promotes democratic governance and accelerates the
Euro-Atlantic integration of the region. Special Envoy
Ahtisaari has begun the process to achieve that, and he
hopes to conclude his work in the course of 2006.

Kosovo's status will come in the context of
arrangements to protect minority rights, enhance
regional security and reduce the chances of future
conflicts. Those arrangements bear upon long-term
stability.

We know that the implementation of standards is
very important. We believe that there has been real
progress on the implementation of standards, but, in
order for the pace of future status negotiations to
accelerate, the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government need to do even more. Parties must be
ready to engage on key issues, including minority
rights, decentralization and the status of religious
sites issues that will allow Kosovo to remain multi-
ethnic regardless of its status.

 

We must be realistic about possible outcomes.
Independence is a possible outcome. Any status
outcome must be acceptable to the people of Kosovo.
We have to keep in mind that the violent disintegration
of Yugoslavia, the ethnic cleansing and humanitarian
crises of 1999 and the extended period of international
administration under Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) make Kosovo a very special case.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Austria, to whom I give the floor.

