Mr. Pedersen: On 30 October, 150 Syrian men and
women gathered in Geneva to launch a Syrian-led and
-owned, credible, balanced and inclusive Constitutional
Committee, facilitated by the United Nations. There
were 50 members nominated by the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic, 50 members nominated by the
opposition Syrian Negotiations Commission and 50
civil society activists, experts and other independents
from inside and outside of Syria - a so-called middle
third. This was a potentially historic moment. It brought
Syrians together in one room in the context of the formal
political process mandated by the Security Council for
the first face-to-face talks in five years - for the first
time ever, following a political agreement between the
Government and the opposition and, for the first time
ever, with civil society present.

This launch was a sign of hope for the Syrian
people and a chance for the Syrian parties to begin a
direct dialogue that they lead and own on the future of
a broken country. It opened a door to a political effort to
overcome nearly nine years of conflict and chart a path
to a new day for Syria, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015), which has all the necessary elements for a
political settlement.

Over the next two days in Geneva, members
of the large body offered visions for Syria's future
constitutional arrangements. They adopted, by
consensus, a code of conduct and a set of initial
procedural practices, and agreement was reached on
the 45 members to work in the small drafting body.
Thereafter, the small body - 15 from each group of
50 - convened and reviewed ideas and proposals in
the speeches delivered by the members in the large
body and offered other ideas, too, in order to identify
potential constitutional principles. There were extensive
exchanges and ideas put forward, and they agreed to
return to Geneva on Monday, 25 November.

I commend Committee members for their courage
and patriotism in participating in those initial
proceedings and for the way that they did so. It was not
easy. There was mistrust, suspicion and strong feelings
among the members. There were deep feelings of anger
and loss, personal and national. Narratives, positions
and proposals diverged sharply. At times, proceedings
were painful, and emotions ran high. And yet everyone
stayed engaged. The members of the Committee
agreed on an initial agenda and listened to each other's
discourse. Efforts were made through language, tone,
gesture and positioning to signal openness to dialogue.
With each passing day, those efforts gradually increased.

I appreciated the business-like approach of the two
equal co-Chairs - Mr. Ahmad Kuzbari, nominated by
the Government and Mr. Hadi Al-Bahra, nominated by
the opposition. They respected their responsibilities and
alternated the chairmanship of meetings. They enabled
Committee members to speak openly and frankly. They
dealt in good faith with me and my team. Let me also
note that, while we focus on what the parties say in
the room, it is important that public statements show
commitment to the Committee's work, based on the
political agreement that both parties reached to launch
it. There is work to be done in that regard.

It is too early to say that there is agreement on
constitutional principles. Nor is there yet agreement
on which issues should be addressed in a future
constitutional text and which should be addressed in
other ways. But there was a solid initial discussion and
there are commonalities on which to build. I have urged
the members to reflect, during the recess, on What
was discussed and return ready to build on it. The 15
small body representatives of the Government and the
opposition have been meeting with the remaining 35
of their respective groups to that end. I have discussed
with the co-Chairs that we need them to propose a
forward-looking agenda for the coming work, and they
have agreed with me that that is indeed important. My
good offices are at their disposal.

Let me say a few words on the middle third,
whose members include civil society, independents,
experts and other Syrians of standing. They have no
formal political affiliations, and none of them speaks
for any other. Like Syrian society in general, there
are differences in their opinions, experiences, fears,
objectives and connections. Despite that, they sat
together, worked together and began their own long task
of building trust and confidence with one another. As
this effort proceeds, it will be important to enable the
15 in the small body to consult the remaining 35 in their
group. I look forward to furthering initial discussions
with them and the co-Chairs in that regard.

Let me also point out that around 30 per cent of
members are women. They made their voices heard
on all issues. Gender equality and women's rights
issues - raised by both men and women - were
prominent in discussions and are areas where I sensed
some potential for initial common ground.

I should add that the Syrian Women's Advisory
Board was convened in Geneva as the Constitutional
Committee proceedings began, and its members
showed, once again, an example of how a cross-section
of Syrians can build trust and work together. I look
forward to them convening again in Geneva in the not-
too-distant future.

I also look forward to continuing the process of
consultations by the United Nations with a wide cross-
section of Syrian civil society from both inside and
outside Syria through the work of our Civil Society
Support Room, and we expect further engagement in
that framework fairly soon as well.

Let me thank the Security Council for uniting to
support the Constitutional Committee. I was also glad
to meet with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iran,
Russia and Turkey, and earlier with representatives
of the small group in Geneva before the launch of
the Committee.

This brings me to the bigger picture. Undoubtedly,
the work of the Committee can build trust and
confidence. But if confidence is to develop among the
Syrian people in the political process, dynamics on the
ground need to begin to change, and that must start
with fully respecting international humanitarian and
human rights law and the protection of civilians.

I am extremely concerned about the renewed
violence in Idlib. As the Council is aware, there are
3 million civilians in Idlib, many of whom have fled
from fighting elsewhere in Syria and who have suffered
and continue to suffer. There has been an escalation
these past weeks in aerial bombardment, as well as
ground-based attacks from both sides. Just two days
ago, at least a dozen civilians were killed and 50 injured,
including children, when a missile reportedly launched
from Syrian Government territory struck a camp for
internally displaced persons near a maternity hospital.

Meanwhile, there have been significant
developments in the north-east: a Turkish military
intervention into Syria together with Syrian armed
opposition forces; the Syrian Government deploying
troops in the north-east following an understanding
with the Syrian Democratic Forces; a United States-
Turkish ceasefire understanding; a Turkish-Russian
understanding, leading to joint patrols along the Turkish
border; and, of course, the redeployment of United
States forces from large parts of the north-east to Deir
ez-Zor and Hasakah, including close to oilfields. While
these understandings have reduced violence in the area,
reports of clashes and shelling continue. More than
90 civilians have been killed, and, while many have
returned home, more than 75,000 remain displaced.
Meanwhile, Israeli air strikes near Damascus, which
Israel said was in response to rockets launched towards
Israel, reportedly killed two civilians.

All these dynamics are extremely worrying. We
must step away from any trend that could lead towards
a deeper international conflagration over Syria and
the continued infringement of Syria's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity.

Resolution 2254 (2015) also calls for nationwide
ceasefire and a common approach to combating
terrorism. The unsolved challenge of Hayat Tahrir
al-Sham, the danger of the resurgence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, and the continuing
threat of foreign terrorist fighters only underlines the
need for a cooperative approach - one that ensures
stability, protects civilians, fully upholds international
humanitarian law, promotes real calm and prioritizes a
political solution.

As the violence and suffering continue, Syrians
on all sides are demanding concrete actions from this
process to improve their lives. I continue to consider
unilateral releases of detainees/abductees and steps
for clarifying the fate of missing persons by all parties
and at a meaningful scale as crucial entry points in
that regard.

But I also remain convinced that a broader set of
concrete actions would likely have to follow a steps-for-
steps model, with some element of reciprocity, building
trust and confidence between Syrians and with the
international community.

I continue to pursue a discussion with the Syrian
parties on the wider dimensions of the process and
to offer my good offices to the key regional and
international players on these issues. Russian and
American officials continue to meet to discuss steps
that could be taken. I had a valuable discussion on this
with German Chancellor Merkel and senior officials in
Berlin last week. Within the Astana group, the dialogue
among countries supporting different players in Syria
continues, and I continue to support the convening of
an international format that could bring the key players
together in a common effort.

Ultimately, I believe that all these efforts should lead
towards the establishment of a safe, calm and neutral
environment. That would allow any constitutional
reform to be matched by emerging positive conditions
on the ground, as well as an environment that would
allow for inclusive, free and fair elections administered
under the supervision of the United Nations, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). Clearly, the steps necessary to
create such an environment would also contribute to
refugees having the confidence to return in a voluntary,
safe and dignified manner.

It is my firm hope that with the Constitutional
Committee as a door opener, the Government and the
opposition will be able in time to establish a relationship;
violence will abate and conditions on the ground will
change; and a comprehensive and decisive solution will
finally emerge for the benefit of all Syrians. The Syrian
parties, who are leading and owning this process, must
seize the opportunity that the launch of the Committee
offers. And they, and all of us, must build around it a
mutually reinforcing dynamic for the sake of the Syrian
people. I appreciate the support of all members as I
continue to work in this direction, in implementation
of my mandate as contained in resolution 2254 (2015).

