Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I have long noted and been aware of the
fact that my friend, the German representative, has
a predisposition towards inviting me to engage in
dialogue during Security Council meetings. I cannot
deny him that pleasure. I wish to make this an interactive
dialogue. He does not need to give me the article from
The New York Times. I have seen it. It is just another
fake that has emerged and has long been refuted by our
Defence Ministry. It is clear that it is a cheap fake.

I would also like to provide something, that is,
the text of my briefing at a press conference that I
held for journalists. I do not recall the exact date but
I believe that it was on 16 or 18 September. During
the briefing I described the fake news, the fraudulent
information and the fabrications being used as part of
the de-confliction process by so-called credible United
Nations sources in Idlib. Unfortunately, as a result, it is
being used by United Nations representatives. I think
that the commission that was mentioned today should
above all see to it that they ascertain how organizations
and bodies of the United Nations became complicit in
this shady scheme.

On the basis of the aforementioned fake information
our humanitarian champions deliberately patched
together an unacceptable draft resolution (S/2019/756),
which we, as was mentioned by the representative of
Germany, vetoed along with China. I believe that
the draft resolution was presented for the following
purpose - so that they might later have the pleasure
of mentioning that fact at Council meetings. It seems
that this was the reason for putting the draft resolution
before the Council.

My German friend is perfectly aware of the fact
that the fate of the draft resolution was known even
prior to its submission. I warned him about that from
the very outset. We constantly hear instructions from
others as to what we need to do and what we should
not do. I want to ask him what Germany itself is doing
to stabilize the situation in Syria beyond lecturing
others and constantly insisting on new conditions.
When will it deign to consider the needs of the Syrian
people? We are not lecturing or competing with anyone,
we are simply taking action.

