Mr. Valdes (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for once again giving me an
opportunity to address the Council. This opportunity is
all the more welcome given that we have today the
pleasure of having among us the President-elect of
Haiti, to whom I extend my best wishes for success. I
also renew to him my personal commitment, as well as
that of all the members of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), to
continue to work together for the success of the
transition process in Haiti. There are still major
challenges ahead of us in ensuring that the
consolidation of democracy and the rule of law become
permanent in that country.

For almost two years now, the United Nations
Mission has been deployed in Haiti with a mandate that
is clearly focused on restoring stability and support for
the organization of free, transparent and legitimate
elections. Even though we have had to overcome many
difficulties in both areas, this has not prevented us
from achieving our objectives.

I would like in that respect to underscore the
inclusive character of the elections, which saw a
massive turnout on the part of all of the political forces
in Haiti in the first round. Those factors are the
guarantee that the result of the elections - namely, the
victory of Mr. Rene Preval in the presidential
elections - clearly reflects the sovereign will of the
majority of the population.

In the area of security, while continuing to
maximize the benefits of our military and police
presence on the ground, we have simplified the
command structures in place in order to strengthen
direct control by MINUSTAH force headquarters.

Despite the achievement of these major
objectives, I am convinced that the mission has only
begun. A new cycle of cooperation has begun with the
Government of the President-elect, Rene Preval, during
which stress must be placed on strengthening State
institutions and on launching a comprehensive and
sustainable socio-economic development process. It is
important to continue the process of reform aimed at
professionalizing the Haitian national police, in which
the first milestone should be the certification of all of
its officers in order to provide the country with a
security force that is capable of ensuring stability and
public safety. But it is also crucial for this process to
go hand in hand with a strategy to reform and
strengthen judicial institutions and the penal
administration.

Apart from the technical aspects necessary to
begin these reforms, we also have to think about the
Haitian men and women who form the very basis of
such institutions. The members of the Haitian national
police, as well as the officials of the judicial system,
must receive decent salaries and be ensured acceptable
working conditions. They must benefit from ongoing
professional training, not only in academies but also on
the ground, especially in the provinces. I had the
opportunity to visit most of the country's regions, and I
was struck by the precarious nature of the facilities and
the limited resources at the disposal of Haitian national
police officers and judges for carrying out their tasks.
As long as this situation continues, any reform project
will be extremely difficult.

State institutions need greater support from
donors and from friendly countries, either in the form
of financial assistance or, as the President-elect has
said, in the form of services of international experts.
During this new stage, it will be important as well to
promote reconciliation and dialogue at the national
level in order to ensure stability and good governance.
That process must involve the active participation of
all the country's social forces, not only its political
forces; this includes civil society organizations, the
private sector, community leaders and provincial
officials, as well as authorities of the poor
neighbourhoods in the main cities. The process of
dialogue should enable Haitians to achieve a common
vision of the future. It has to be decentralized in order
to take into account the realities - often very
different - of each region in the country. The Haitian
diaspora must also be called upon to play a role in
these initiatives. Reconciliation and dialogue are two
crucial elements that will make it possible, in this new
era of hope for the country, to prevent any recurrence
of political crises, violence or destabilization.

As the President-elect has said, national
reconciliation must find its roots in the future of Haiti,
and not in its past. While the process of dialogue will
be a long-term exercise, we must nonetheless
endeavour to achieve results in the short term in areas
of concern to the entire population. Reconciliation
activities will be decisive in the context of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme involving illegal armed groups in the
country.

I fully share the vision expressed by the
President-elect as to the need to supplement progress in
the area of security and rule of law with socio-
economic development, which would lead to an
improvement in the living conditions of the population.

Let me cite other examples of discussions that
ought to be linked to the dialogue process. How can we
manage to produce wealth in a poor country by
maximizing its available natural and human resources?
How can we create the conditions necessary to
stimulate foreign investment? This is a debate that is
ongoing in many countries and that could be used to
unite political and social forces and to pursue common
objectives. These discussions are necessary among the
Haitian people; but, once again, they must be able to
count on continued assistance from the international
community.

In the last two years, the country has begun an
economic recovery and seen an improvement in its
financial management system, which is extremely
interesting. At the same time, the Interim Cooperation
Framework has made it possible to set up a
coordination mechanism between the Transitional
Government and the international community.
However, as its name indicates, this is a structure that
focuses on the short and medium term. I sincerely hope
that cooperation and coordination mechanisms with a
longer-term vision will be established in order to
optimize cooperation between Haiti, donors and the
international community as a whole. Together, we must
show those who have been plunged into despair by
poverty and who have even resorted to violence that
the democratic process can yield tangible benefits in
their daily lives. The vast majority of the population
continues to live in total deprivation, surviving from
day to day in often inhuman conditions.

The Government of Haiti - both the executive
and legislative branches - and the international
community must show the people of that country that
we have the will and the ability to fight extreme
poverty and to improve the socio-economic conditions
that prevail in Haiti, in the areas of employment and
housing as well as access to education, health care and
justice. Until the social divide created by the glaring
inequalities that exist within Haitian society has been
reduced, we will not be able fully to achieve our
objective of stabilizing Haiti permanently.

(spoke in Spanish)

It is almost inevitable for international observers,
in referring to Haiti, to note that it is the poorest
country in the hemisphere. That situation cannot
continue to be accepted as an immutable reality. Haiti
has a future as a fully viable State, involved in a
development process undertaken in full cooperation
with the international community. It can and must
integrate itself entirely as a full-fledged member of the
group of countries of the region.

Here, I would like first to welcome the decision
taken by the countries of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) to normalize its relations with the
Government of Haiti and to receive once again its
officials at the meetings of that organization. In
particular, I would like to highlight the crucial
importance of continuing to intensify cooperation
processes between Haiti and its closest neighbour, the
Dominican Republic, since those two countries are
inextricably linked in terms of their history and
development. The successful visit of the President-
elect to Santo Domingo, in response to an invitation
from the President of the Dominican Republic, is an
important and very significant step that represents a
hopeful beginning for the new phase that is unfolding
in Haiti.

Also important, encouraging and productive were
the visits that the President-elect made to Brazil, Chile
and Argentina, also in response to official invitations
from those Governments. Of particular importance was
the renewal of those countries' commitment to continue
their vital support to Haiti through the contribution of
troops to MINUSTAH. It is impossible to overestimate
the importance of the participation of Latin American
countries, whose contribution represents the majority
of troops in the Mission, to the future of stability and
democracy in Haiti.

The progress achieved has helped to place the
country once again on the road to democracy.
However, this process is still fragile and could be
seriously jeopardized if there is a premature reduction
of the support provided by the military component of
the Mission. The experiences of previous peacekeeping
missions in Haiti have taught us that it is possible to
obtain substantive achievements in the democratic
process, but also that such achievements should not be
overestimated. Our efforts must continue until the
progress made becomes irreversible.

In conclusion, I would like once again to thank
the Secretary-General for the trust he has placed in me
by appointing me his representative in Haiti. I would
also like to thank the Security Council and all of the
member countries of the core group for their ongoing
and vital support during the discharge of my duties as
Special Representative. In addition, I wish to thank the
Transitional Government of Haiti for its ongoing
cooperation and trust.

It has been an honour to serve the United Nations
in the ideals of peace, justice and democracy, which the
Organization represents. It has been an honour to be
able to help Haiti and its people recover their process
of peace and democracy.

