Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would first of all like to note that the
signing of the Interim Constitutional Declaration has
been an important step on the path to stabilizing the
situation in the Sudan over the long term. We want
to point to the mediation efforts of Ethiopia and the
African Union in the negotiation process, which
were a practical embodiment of the notion of African
solutions to African problems. However, we must give
due credit to the people of the Sudan themselves, who
were able to overcome their differences and reach
agreement against a backdrop of unrelenting external
pressure whose purpose was not to help the parties
get down to negotiations but merely to manipulate
the political landscape in Khartoum to suit their own
narrow interests.

With regard to the state of affairs in Darfur, we
are seeing a noticeable improvement in the security
situation and a certain degree of normalization on the
humanitarian front. The general dynamics have not
changed in the areas that the Blue Helmets had already
withdrawn from. And most importantly, no negative
security trends have emerged. The sporadic clashes in
the Jebel Marra region between Government forces and
the Sudan Liberation Movement/Abdul Wahid group,
which is still the main spoiler for the peace process,
do not change that assessment. In that connection,
we believe it will be essential to continue with the
phased drawdown and withdrawal of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. We
hope that a dialogue with the Sudanese authorities will
help to create the right conditions and determine the
parameters for subsequent international support to the
peace process in Darfur. The challenges that Darfur
is now facing are related to peacebuilding rather than
peacekeeping. The time has come to concentrate on
Darfur state's restoration and economic development,
and that should be the priority now.

As for the activities of the International Criminal
Court regarding Darfur, we have read Prosecutor
Bensouda's most recent report. Just as before, we
have seen no progress in its work and our views and
approaches therefore remain unchanged.

