Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to welcome
you, Madam President, to today's debate, along with
the State Secretary of the Federal Foreign Office of
Germany. At the outset, I also want to thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his very comprehensive briefing.

Let me begin by reaffirming Poland's commitment
to a comprehensive settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict through a two-State solution and
an agreement that ends the occupation that began in
1967, ending all claims and fulfilling the aspirations
of both parties, including the security needs of both
Israelis and Palestinians and Palestinian aspirations for
statehood and sovereignty, on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and internationally
agreed parameters.

We should continue to seek an end to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict by reviving the peace process. A
return to meaningful bilateral negotiations, based on the
relevant United Nations resolutions and international
law, can only make a positive contribution to the
process. That is the only path to a two-State solution
and a resolution of all final-status issues. At the same
time, we encourage the parties to the conflict to take
action in order to achieve reconciliation and safeguard
the dignity and sanctity of the holy sites, particularly
in Jerusalem. We strongly believe that the aspirations
of both parties for Jerusalem must be fulfilled, and a
way to resolve its status as the future capital of both
States must be found through negotiations. The status
of Jerusalem should also take into account the mutual
recognition of the historical relations and national rights
of both parties to the city. A key element in that context
would be a meaningful dialogue among the three main
monotheistic religions.

We continue to follow developments in the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation closely. In that context,
we have taken note of the Palestinian Authorities' call
for general elections, the first in 13 years. The issue
is very important, especially because the reconciliation
process has reached a stalemate, despite Egypt's best
efforts to facilitate it.

Turning to Gaza, I want to underline that the
situation remains dire and continues to fuel extremism
and radicalization and foster instability. We call on all
the parties to take urgent steps to promote fundamental
change in the humanitarian, political, security and
economic situation in Gaza, as well as to end the closure
policy and ensure the sustained opening of the crossing
points that are important for Gazans' daily lives, while
at the same time addressing Israel's legitimate security
concerns. We commend the efforts led by Egypt, Qatar
and the Special Coordinator to improve the humanitarian
situation in Gaza as part of a future Palestinian State. I
also want to underline the importance of the agreement
reached by the Palestinian Authority with Israel on
restoring some of its tax revenues. We strongly believe
that additional revenue will ease the financial crisis
and at least partially ensure payments to civil servants.
More than 160,000 Palestinian Authority employees
will receive their salaries.

Today I would also like to underline our commitment
to Lebanon's unity, stability, independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. In considering the difficulties
faced by the Lebanese economy, exacerbated by regional
turmoil and the refugee crisis, we greatly appreciate
the efforts of the Government in Beirut to address the
concerns in that regard. Introducing reforms can be
challenging, but they must be implemented to avoid
further deterioration in the country's socioeconomic
conditions. Along those lines, we believe that the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) is
providing the stability needed in the mission's mandate
area. Today it is difficult to imagine the security
environment in southern Lebanon without UNIFIL's
presence. The international community must fully
appreciate UNIFIL's contribution to the stability of
Lebanon, and we are very happy to contribute to that
endeavour, as Poland is returning to UNIFIL.

