Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this quarterly debate.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his comprehensive briefing.

Let me begin by congratulating the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
on recently having been awarded the 2013 Nobel
Peace Prize. That timely and important recognition is
testimony to the significant work being carried out by
that organization around the world, especially in the
Syrian Arab Republic during the past several weeks.
In that context, we would like to express our full
support for the decision taken by the Security Council
on 11 October whereby a first-of-its-kind OPCW-
United Nations Joint Mission in Syria was endorsed
and entrusted with a multiphase mission to carry out
resolution 2118 (2013).

The ongoing armed conflict in Syria is of the
utmost concern to each and every one of us. The
attempts by the international community to resolve
the conflict and restore stability in that country
remain insufficient. Kyrgyzstan once again expresses
its serious concern over the numerous victims of the
armed conflict, the humanitarian catastrophe and the
further escalation of the crisis. We call on both sides to
immediately implement a ceasefire and to resolve the
crisis peacefully by conducting a dialogue among all
the political forces of the country under the mediation
of the United Nations.

We support the recent agreement on Syria's chemical
weapons reached between United States and Russia,
and subsequently endorsed by the Security Council.
We welcome Syria's adherence to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their
Destruction. Kyrgyzstan is strongly convinced that
more efforts should be undertaken by all the parties
concerned to resolve the crisis while preserving Syria's
sovereignty and territorial integrity, without military
interference from the outside.

The need to avoid external interference, especially
by force, unauthorized by the Security Council and to
engage in political dialogue on the basis of the Geneva
communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex), has
been expressed in the declarations ofthe Heads of States
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and
of the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
adopted, respectively, during recent high-level summits
in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, and Sochi, Russian Federation.
The member States of the SCO and CSTO voiced their
support for the convening of the second international
Geneva conference to lay a foundation for Syria's
reconciliation and normalization.

The situation in and around Syria should not distract
our attention from the Israeli-Palestinian question. We
wholeheartedly welcome the resumption, in late July,
of direct talks between Israel and Palestine. Those
United States-brokered peace talks are of significant
importance for both parties. As United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process Robert
Serry rightly told the Council on 17 September (see S/PV.7032), momentous and sustained efforts will
be necessary to successfully conclude negotiations
within the nine-month deadline set for achieving a
comprehensive settlement.

We consider it important to continue that process in
order to find ways to achieve a long-term settlement and
to reach an agreement that provides for the coexistence
of two States living in peace and security in accordance
with previously defined and accepted parameters. We
support the efforts being made by the United States
in that regard, including the series of high-level
negotiations carried out by the United States President
and the Secretary of State with their Palestinian and
Israeli counterparts in September. At the same time, we
express serious concern about continued illegal actions
by Israel, such as the killing of innocent Palestinians,
its settlement activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, the hampering of aid deliveries to those in
need, the ill-treatment of prisoners, forced evictions
and the excessive use of force.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our strong conviction
that the Middle East Quartet, which has a strong mandate
of trust from the whole international community, should
play a more active role in the peace process to help both
parties reach a final and comprehensive settlement.

