Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, the
Permanent Representative of Chile, presiding over the
Security Council this month. The fact that your country
is presiding over the Council during January
undoubtedly augurs well for the rest of the year.

The accumulation, proliferation and illegal use of
small arms and light weapons pose a threat to the peace
and stability of all peoples. The proliferation of such
weapons fuels armed conflicts, exacerbates violence,
promotes crime and terrorism, contributes to the flow
of refugees and internally displaced persons, makes
peace processes more difficult and hinders
humanitarian assistance. As Barbara Frey, Special
Rapporteur of the Sub-Commission on the Promotion
and Protection of Human Rights, recognized, "Small
arms are used to violate, directly and indirectly, the
entire spectrum of human rights"
(E/CN.4/Sub.2/2002/39, para. 76).

We are pleased that the Security Council has
recognized the pernicious impact of the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and that it has therefore
decided to include that subject on its agenda. This body
has already adopted a number of valuable
recommendations, such as the request that all States
use end-user certificates in their arms transfers, the
appeal to arms-exporting countries for greater
responsibility, the invitation to establish national
registers of weapons intermediary firms and the appeal
to impose sanctions against those who violate arms
embargoes. The implementation of all those
recommendations is indispensable, but it is not
sufficient in itself.

The international community's action with regard
to small arms must go beyond marking weapons and
implementing existing embargoes. It is time to look at
the problem of small arms from the perspective of
human rights. It is time to prohibit the transfer of
military equipment or personnel or of financial and
logistical support to States whose military units or
security forces participate in human rights violations. It
is time to prohibit the sale of weapons to those who do
not respect democratic principles or have not ratified
the principal instruments of human rights or
international humanitarian law.

My delegation welcomes the recent creation by
the General Assembly of an open-ended working group
to negotiate an international instrument that will enable
States to identify and trace illicit small arms and light
weapons. We also welcome the report of the Group of
Experts that designed the reference framework for
future negotiations. However, the mandate of those
negotiations is limited. It is not sufficient to create
norms for tracing and marking; we need to adopt
binding norms defining when the use of weapons is
legitimate and under what conditions arms transfers
can be authorized. To that end, the Government of
Costa Rica is promoting a draft framework convention
on international arms transfers, prepared by a group of
non-governmental organizations, Nobel Peace Prize
laureates and qualified jurists. The draft strives to be a
faithful codification of State obligations arising from
existing international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, with regard to
arms transfers.

As a basic principle, the draft framework
convention establishes that every arms transfer must be
authorized. The text also stipulates a number of
restrictions on transfers arising directly from existing
State obligations under current international
humanitarian law, such as the prohibition on the use of
weapons that cause excessively injurious or
indiscriminate effects. In addition, the draft establishes
a number of prohibitions on arms transfers when it is
evident that they will be used to violate the Charter of
the United Nations, to commit grave violations of
human rights or international humanitarian law, or to
perpetrate genocide or crimes against humanity.

The framework convention seeks, not to create
any new obligations, but to specify categorically the
logical and necessary implications of the norms and
principles already in force. The draft also seeks the
adoption of innovative measures of a precautionary
nature that, in principle, should be taken into account
whenever arms transfers are authorized. We hope that
the draft will become a model for internationally
binding agreements that, once adopted, will facilitate
coordinated and concrete action involving the
regulation of arms transfers.

Furthermore, the Security Council must design
new mechanisms to guarantee compliance with arms
embargoes. The most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2003/1217) reveals that compliance with
recommendations related to embargoes remains
deficient. Suffice it to recall that, in 2001, 54 countries
were linked to transfer or resale of weapons in express
violation of existing embargoes. In the meantime, the
sanctions committees established by the Security
Council to verify compliance with such embargoes
were unable to take any effective action. That came as
no surprise: the sanctions committees are political
bodies that lack the technical capacity to carry out
genuine verification work. That is why we believe it is
necessary to create a mechanism within the Secretariat
to proactively monitor the implementation of arms
embargoes and to serve as technical support for the
sanctions committees' political work.

In the past few years, both the Security Council
and the General Assembly have taken a number of
positive steps against the scourge of small arms. Some
measures have been positive; others have not been
effective. Let us continue to move forward; there is
still a long road ahead.

