Mr. Christian (Ghana): I wish to express the
appreciation of my delegation to Mr. Charles Nqakula,
Minister of Safety and Security of South Africa and
Facilitator of the Burundi Peace Process, for his
briefing on the latest developments on the Burundi
peace process. We also acknowledge the presence of
the Executive Representative of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, Mr. Youssef Mahmoud.

We recall the purposeful role played by South
Africa in the Burundi peace process. It has not only
endeavoured to ensure that full implementation of the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement, but has also
contributed troops to the African Union Special Task
Force for the maintenance of peace and security in
Burundi. South Africa's particular contribution is
exemplified by its current effort, along with other
countries in the region, to activate the peace process.
Recently, it has undertaken a series of consultations,
including with leaders of the Regional Peace Initiative
and President Nkurunziza. The establishment of the

Political Directorate in Bujumbura emerged from those
consultations. The Directorate is intended to address
the political obstacles arising in the implementation of
the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement. We wish to
emphasize the necessity of continued support and
strong engagement by regional and international
partners towards the successful conclusion of the peace
consultation process.

Ghana welcomes the appointment on
14 November 2007 of the Government of National
Unity, whose composition is in compliance with
constitutional provisions regarding party, ethnic and
gender representation. This development is
encouraging, and President Nkurunziza's perseverance
and the flexibility shown by the leadership of the
Union pour le progres national (UPRONA) and the
Front pour la democratie au Burundi (FRODEBU) in
ending the political crisis that had paralysed parliament
and other national institutions should be commended.
We expect the new Government to focus its efforts on
addressing the many outstanding peace consolidation
and reconstruction challenges, progress on which had
been stalled during the political crisis of the past
months. Its highest priority should be to successfully
conclude the last phase of the peace process.

We are particularly concerned by the resumption
of sporadic armed clashes between the Force de la
defense nationale and PALIUPEHUTU forces. Without
an end to hostilities and a comprehensive ceasefire, the
peace and stability required for effective reconstruction
and sustainable development, will continue to elude the
people of Burundi. It is therefore imperative for all
political actors in Burundi, including the Forces
nationales de liberation (FNL) party, to engage in an
inclusive dialogue with the Government and contribute
positively towards the implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement.

At the core of this are issues concerning the need
for an agreement on the modalities for FNL's inclusion
in national institutions and the conclusion of a forces
technical agreement to determine the positions that
former FNL combatants would occupy in the national
security forces, as well as the release of FNL prisoners.

We are of the opinion that the Government and
the FNL, with the assistance of regional partners and
the international community, should be able to
surmount these challenges. Despair is not an option.
We commend the facilitation and the regional technical

team for their efforts at reconvening the Joint
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and urge the
FNL to overcome its internal differences and return to
that mechanism.

Finally, we thank Mr. Nqakula for his tireless
efforts aimed at finding a lasting solution to the
conflict in Burundi. The continued presence and
assistance of the United Nations, through the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi remains crucial to
the consolidation of peace in Burundi.

