Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and to convey to you our confidence that your
rich diplomatic experience and wisdom will enable the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities in the best possible
way.

Under Article I of the Charter, the maintenance of
international peace and security is one of the purposes of
the United Nations, but it is also the essence of the role
of the Organization and its main raison d 'etre.

The Charter contains well-defined measures to deter
the aggressor in cases of aggression or the threat of
aggression. But the course of events since the Charter was
drafted, including differences in the nature of conflicts
and the surrounding circumstances, has proved that it is
almost impossible to implement the model designed by
the Charter. Clear-cut cases where the Council easily
identified the aggressor and the aggression and where it
took the decision to use military force have been very
few. It is in this context that peacekeeping operations
were established, but experience has proved that
peacekeeping operations do not completely satisfy the
requirements of peace-building. The process of peace-
building requires that the United Nations play an
integrated, multi-faceted and more action-oriented role in
order to create a climate conducive to political and
economic stability in the State concerned.

While peacekeeping operations are aimed at creating
an atmosphere of stability in the short term, it is
imperative to conceive a series of long-term measures that
would put an end to the chaos caused by a conflict, the
continuance of which could generate new conflicts.

The importance of the concept of post-conflict
peace-building to the work of the United Nations was
underlined by the former Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, when he submitted to the General
Assembly and to the Security Council the reports entitled
"An Agenda for Peace" and subsequently "Supplement to
An Agenda for Peace". That initiative which was meant
to explain how to apply this concept with full respect for
the existing balance between the principal organs of the
United Nations. The ideas presented in "An Agenda for

 

Peace" were well received, and the General Assembly
adopted its resolution 47/120 acknowledging the importance
of the proposals on this concept and deciding to continue
their substantive consideration.

The Assembly's thorough consideration of this
important issue revealed that the concept needed further
elucidation through the drafting of a working paper to
reflect agreed details on the definition, principles,
framework and scope of post-conflict peace-building
activities as well as the role of the United Nations system
in undertaking these activities. After lengthy discussion,
agreement was reached on all aspects of a working paper,
dated 17 January 1997. Regrettably, the opposition of one
delegation prevented the adoption of the paper by the
General Assembly. The opposition focused only on a
paragraph stating that the General Assembly had the key
role in post-conflict peace-building activities. All other
delegations were then of the view that decisions on such
activities must be entrusted primarily to the General
Assembly, which could receive support from other principal
organs of the United Nations, and from the specialized
agencies.

Egypt believes that there is an integral relationship
between the maintenance of international peace and security
on the one hand, and post-conflict peace-building on the
other. We also consider that post-conflict peace-building is
one of the main responsibilities of the General Assembly.
The Security Council or any other major organ of the
United Nations system could play a supportive role to the
primary role of the General Assembly in this field. The
relationship that we see between the maintenance of
international peace and security on the one hand, and post-
conflict peace-building on the other, stems from the fact
that measures for post-conflict peace-building can follow
the successful end of a peacekeeping mission.

Therefore, it is beneficial to ensure smooth transition
from peacekeeping operations, which are usually established
by the Security Council - although the General Assembly
also has that competence - to post-conflict peace-building
activities under the supervision of the General Assembly.

I find it important at this juncture to refer to some of
the imperatives for the success of any post-conflict peace-
building activities. Post-conflict peace-building should be
carried out in full respect for the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter, in particular the principles of
sovereign equality, political independence, and non-
intervention in matters which are essentially within the
domestic jurisdiction of any State. As a rule, it should be
undertaken only at the request of and with the consent of
the State concerned. It should be based upon the genuine
will of the conflicting parties to cease and not to resume
hostilities, and to commit themselves to national
reconciliation, development and durable peace. It should
be resorted to on a case by case basis, bearing in mind
the requirements and needs of each State together with its
cultural characteristics, as well as the right of each State
freely to choose and develop its economic, political and
cultural systems in full freedom. Post-conflict peace-
building activities should have the support of the United
Nations system as a whole in the context of defining
these activities and of their implementation.
In this connection, we consider that the types of
activities to be used after a conflict should be selected on
a case by case basis, as I stated earlier. Meanwhile, I
would like to highlight the importance of some activities
which we find essential for the success of post-conflict
peace-building, particularly in Africa - namely, the
return of refugees, the resettling of internally displaced
persons, reorientation and reintegration of former
combatants into the ranks of productive civil society and,
of course, demining. These are in addition to the activities
that were highlighted by the Secretary-General in his
report to the General Assembly and the Security Council
entitled "The causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa"
(S/1998/318). These activities include assistance in
rebuilding the economic and social infrastructure,
assistance in reintegration into the world economy, direct
economic and financial assistance and provision of
humanitarian relief assistance.

In conclusion, I must emphasize the importance of
the United Nations remaining the focal point for both
facilitating and coordinating post-conflict peace-building
activities, with the help and support of outside actors such
as the World Bank and other financial institutions that
could contribute to such activities. This will necessitate
agreement among us, as Member States of the United
Nations, on the basic rules of post-conflict peace-building
operations. My delegation feels that the working paper of
17 January 1997, to which I referred a few moments ago,
still provides a solid basis for this agreement, and we
hope that it will be adopted by the General Assembly by
consensus.

