Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): France
voted in favour of the resolution that the Security
Council has just adopted unanimously. We participated
in the discussions prior to the adoption in a spirit of
consensus. I would like to make some specific remarks
with respect to our approach.

Our first concern was to respond to the official
request made by the Transitional Government of Iraq.
The Government had asked for a 12-month extension
for the mandate of the multinational force in Iraq.

Our second objective was to send to the people of
Iraq a message of support for the sovereignty of Iraq.
We Wished on the one hand to encourage pursuit of the
political process towards national harmony and, on the
other, to recall that the presence of foreign forces in
Iraq is occurring within this framework and that those
forces must maintain their temporary status.

Our third priority was to recall the crucial role of
the United Nations in the political and economic
transition in Iraq beyond 31 December 2005.

In our view, the resolution that we have adopted
meets those concerns. The Security Council, in
response to the letter from the Prime Minister of Iraq
(S/2005/687, annex), has extended for 12 months the
mandate of the multilateral force and the arrangements
related to the operation of the Development Fund for
Iraq and the activities of the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board.

At the same time, that decision is accompanied
by a number of other provisions. I should like to recall
the major ones. First of all, the Council emphasizes the
importance of pursuing the political process beyond the
elections of 15 December and the establishment of a
sovereign Government. The Security Council, in this
resolution, calls on the future Government to promote
truly inclusive political dialogue with a view to
national reconciliation, including by engaging with all
those who renounce violence. These are significant
challenges, but meeting them is essential for the future
of an Iraq which will be stable, united and democratic.
The international community must, naturally, provide
its full support to Iraq on this path. In that regard,
France welcomes the prospects of an Iraqi national
conference organized with the assistance of countries
in the region to promote the integration of all Iraqi
groups and communities into the political process.

Secondly, it goes without saying that the Security
Council does not prejudge decisions to be taken by the
next Government regarding the mandate of the
multinational force. The future Government may at any
time request that the mandate be revised or ended. The
mandate is limited in duration; barring a contrary
decision of the Council, it will expire on 31 December
2006. Moreover, the Security Council has included a
meeting clause. The mandate will be reviewed no later
than 15 June 2006. Until then, the multinational and
the Iraqi forces must act in compliance with
international law.

Thirdly, the Council reaffirms in the resolution
that the United Nations must continue to play a lead
role in the political and economic transition process
through the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General.

Overall, the Security Council today has assumed
its share of responsibility, bearing in mind the requests
made by the Transitional Government of Iraq and
acting in a manner consistent with the logic that has
guided its actions vis-a-vis Iraq for the past two years
and that seeks to ensure the effective exercise by that
country of its full sovereignty. France will continue to
support the people of Iraq on the path of national
reconciliation, democracy and reconstruction. That is
the meaning behind today's vote.

