Ms. Wilson (Australia): Safeguarding our critical
infrastructure is an economic and security imperative.
Australia supports Ukraine's initiative aimed at
mobilizing international cooperation in the area of
preventing and responding to terrorist attacks against
critical infrastructure.

The threats posed by terrorism to critical
infrastructure are enduring and require sustained
mitigation efforts by Governments. The United Nations
has a key role to play in that regard, including by working
with Member States to ensure the full implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Countries define what constitutes critical
infrastructure in different ways. For Australia, critical
infrastructure refers to the physical facilities, supply
chains, information technologies and communication
networks that - if destroyed, degraded or rendered
unavailable for an extended period - would
significantly impact the social or economic well-being
of the nation or affect Australia's ability to conduct
national defence and ensure national security.

In January 2017, Australia established the Critical
Infrastructure Centre, which provides a coordinated
and cohesive approach to the security of Australia's
critical infrastructure. The Centre brings together
expertise and capability from across the Australian
Government to better manage the national security
risks to our critical infrastructure. Australia relies
upon a strong intelligence-led prevention and
preparedness regime to support our counter-terrorism
arrangements. That approach encompasses targeted
prevention and preparedness measures based on risk-
management principles and on maintaining capabilities
to manage various types of terrorist threats, attacks
and their consequences. The Australian Government
also works with owners and operators in a business-
Government partnership to share information, tap into
the experiences of others and develop collaborative
mitigation measures for dealing with the most serious
risks to critical infrastructure.

From an information-technology perspective,
the Australian Cyber Security Centre is the
Australian Government's primary source of advice on
cyberthreats. It is firmly of the View that establishing
a strong cybersecurity posture, increasing awareness
of potential vulnerabilities and implementing effective
security measures are vital to efforts to deter and
prevent incidents against critical infrastructure,
including from terrorists. The safety and security of
critical infrastructure require the concerted efforts of
public and private partners around the globe. Australia
looks forward to continued practical collaboration with
international partners, including the United Nations, to
enhance and promote cross-border and global critical
infrastructure security and resilience.

