Mrs. Malenga (Democratic Republic ofthe Congo) (spoke in French): First, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of July and thank
you for your initiative to convene today's debate on the
plight of children in armed conflict. I would also like to
welcome Ms. Virginia Gamba and express our respect
and gratitude for her commitment and dedication to

the cause of the world's children. Lastly, I would like
to thank His Excellency Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres; Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of
UNICEF, and all those who spoke before me for their
very edifying statements.

The issue of child soldiers is one of the concerns
of our Government, which, at the initiative of the Head
of State, has decided to ban the recruitment and use of
children in our armed forces and security services. To
translate that political will into action, the Head of State
has established an entity to combat sexual violence and
the recruitment and use of children.

We should recall all the legislative and regulatory
measures taken to strengthen the fight against the
recruitment of children, with a View to providing a
better response to the phenomenon and to achieving
de-listing. Such measures include various decrees,
orders and laws pertaining to, first, the demobilization
and reintegration of vulnerable groups existing in
the combatant forces; secondly, the establishment of
the Interministerial Committee for Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration; thirdly, the
establishment of the European Union's national
programme on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; and fourthly, the protection of children.
On 4 October 2012 came the signature of the national
action plan to end the recruitment and the use of
children in armed conflict and other grave violations
of children's rights perpetrated by the security services
and the Forces Armees de la Republique Democratique
du Congo (FARDC).

Undeniable progress has been made in my country's
fight to end the recruitment and use of children in the
army and intelligence services. Thanks to operational
standards that strengthen the verification of identity,
between July 2015 and May 2016 it was possible to
separate 453 children from among the FARDC recruits,
330 ofwhom have been reunited with their families. The
123 children separated from the Kamina military have
been reunited with their families in the former Kasai
provinces, via the city of Lubumbashi, with logistical
support from the Congolese Government and its
partners - UNICEF and the International Committee
of the Red Cross. The use of formal and compulsory
banking services strengthens such measures. In addition,
intensive specialized rehabilitation programmes have
been established and buildings constructed with the
assistance of the National Institute for Professional
Training, with funding from the Government and with
Japanese cooperation.

Since de-listing, FARDC has set itself the goal of
zero children within its ranks. During recruitment,
before recruits are sent to the training centre. they
are checked to remove any minors. FARDC works in
synergy with protection agencies, UNICEF and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
As part of this fight, during the first quarter of 2018,
some activities were conducted with the assistance
of child protection partners. A total of 1,500 exit
certificates were issued by the European Union's
national programme for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) and delivered to UNICEF
for distribution to its implementation partners. Eight
hundred children associated with armed forces or
groups have left those groups and are being reintegrated
by five UNICEF-funded child protection partners - 70
by ACOPE, 308 by the Association des Jeunes pour le
De'veloppement Communautaire, 150 by the Concert
d'actions pour jeunes et enfants defavorises, 125 by
leProgramme d'Appui a la lutte contre la Misere and
147 by the Union pour la paix et la promotion des droits
de l'enfant au Congo.

Three training workshops on operational standards
for child age assessment have been held this year, in
Kisangani from 13 to 20 February, in Kitona from
26 to 30 March and in Kinshasa from 21 to 23 March.
They were organized for FARDC officers, provincial
police officers and members of the security forces,
as well as child protection agencies and the Reseau
Communautaire de Protection de l'Enfant.

Such activities, conducted with logistical support
from MONUSCO, have also made it possible to
strengthen the capacities of those involved in protection
with regard to various humanitarian rights issues in time
of conflict, gender issues, the responsibility of a troop
commander, and techniques for protecting children,
schools and hospitals. They have bolstered measures
to verify the age of FARDC recruits by the Ministry
of National Defence and Veterans Reintegration,
supported by child protection partners, before recruits
enter training centres. Out of 2,850 verified recruits,
70 children have been separated and returned to
their communities.

The coordination of actions and activities to foster
the DDR of children is done through monthly meetings
that bring together the local offices of the European
Union's national DDR programme and child protection
actors at several levels - at the central level, with
UNICEF and partners such as the Reseau des Jeunes
et Enfants de la Rue and Save the Children, and the
children's DDR focal point; at the ministerial level,
with the Joint Technical Working Group; and at local
level, with the Child Protection Working Group.

Raising funds for this important component of
traditional DDR - DDR children - is vital because
a total of 5,331 children under the age of 18 associated
with armed forces or groups have already been reunited
with their families and are awaiting reintegration into
school or training for work. As long as armed groups
remain active, the situation will continue. That is why
my Government remains determined to continue its
efforts to completely neutralize them and put an end to
the phenomenon.

I cannot conclude without expressing my country's
gratitude to the United Nations and to several
international partners who continue to support our
efforts in the struggle to end the recruitment and use
of children.

