Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, for his very inciteful briefing, as always,
and the work he does with his team on the ground.

I also want to express our appreciation for the
presence, once again, of Minister Coulibaly, which is
much appreciated and useful.

While it is clear that some progress is being made
in Mali, concerns remain over the security situation and
the pace of implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. I should like to pay tribute
to the work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
in difficult and often dangerous circumstances. Our
thoughts remain with the families of the peacekeepers
from Chad and the Niger who lost their lives in the
attacks that occurred in Aguelhok and Gao last week.
The Malian Government has the primary responsibility
to fight impunity for violence and ensure access to justice
for all, including by prioritizing the reconciliation and
justice measures in the peace Agreement. In this regard,
we welcome the new Government's ambitious plans to
restore security, particularly in central Mali - always,
of course, in full respect for human rights.

On 24 January, the Security Council adopted a
press statement (SC/13177) that clearly set out our
expectations in relation to the key reforms foreseen
under the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. We expressed a shared sense of impatience at
persistent delays in the Agreement's implementation,
as well as our intention to assess progress and respond
with appropriate steps, if needed. The time to evaluate
progress has now come; we are ready to engage with all
parties and key actors to do so.

We welcome the continued engagement of the
parties in the implementation process. The recent visit
of Prime Minister Maiga to the northern and central
regions is encouraging, as is the ongoing drafting
process ofa national strategy on security sector reform.
However, engagement must be further translated into
tangible actions. We regret that most of the deadlines
set out in the January timetable have not been met.
We stand ready to continue to work with the parties to
implement the roadmap, as further revised in March. We
hope that there will be no further delays or adjustments
to the timetable going forward.

We reiterate the need for substantial steps towards
the full implementation of the peace Agreement as
a prerequisite for successful elections. At the same
time, it is crucial for Mali and the peace process that
elections be duly and legitimately undertaken and that
electoral timetables be fully respected. As the date set
for the planned elections gets closer, there is no time
to spare. All parties have a responsibility to honour
their commitments and engage in confidence-building
measures without further delay.

We welcome and echo the Secretary-General's
call for the inclusion of women and youth in all the
mechanisms supporting the implementation of the
Agreement, as well as among interim authorities.
Inclusivity and the full and effective participation of
women, including in elected and nominated functions
and decision-making structures related to the peace
process, is essential to building a sustainable peace.
For that reason, the meeting on 16 January between the
President of the Agreement Monitoring Committee,
the High Representative of the President for the
peace process and MINUSMA with a delegation of
women representing signatory armed groups and
civil society was encouraging. However, the further
institutionalization of women's inclusion in the
mechanisms supporting the implementation of the
Agreement is needed.

All the tools needed to support the peace process
are now in place, including the independent observer,
the International Commission of Inquiry on Mali and
resolution 2374 (2017). We encourage the parties to
take advantage of this opportunity. I want to again
thank Foreign Minister Coulibaly for his availability
and active engagement during the visit to Mali of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017) concerning Mali. It was clear that the parties
took the sanctions instrument seriously, with all parties
to the peace agreement expressing their support and
engaging. That engagement needs to be sustained

Finally, MINUSMA's presence remains a key
factor for stability in Mali. Its support for the Malian
Government serves to build confidence between
State actors and the population. We look forward to
the conclusions of the independent strategic review,
which we hope will identify ways to enhance the
performance of the Mission. We are proud to contribute
to MINUSMA's important work as it continues to
support the parties to deliver on their commitment
to implementing the outstanding provisions of the
peace Agreement.

