Mr. Burkhalter: First of all, I would like to thank
all of those who have tried to pronounce my name as
well as possible. They did pronounce my first name
perfectly, and that is fair enough.

More seriously, I would to thank all speakers
for their thoughtful interventions and, above all, for
having clearly supported the priorities of the Swiss
chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I see once again how
very useful it is to have a one-page summary table of
our priorities. For me, it was a clear image of support
of my priorities as Chairperson-in-Office, which is
very important to me. The support of the Council is
of the utmost importance because we want to hold
consultations throughout the year with all of our
partners and all members of the Council.

I will not respond now to all the statements, but
I would like to say that Council members should rest
assured that we will integrate their points of view into
our work as its progresses throughout our term in office.

I want to focus briefly on some ofthe questions and
make some remarks on some issues and priorities I did
not touch upon during my statement earlier. I will then
conclude with a political message I would like to send
at the end of the meeting.

There was in fact only one formal question, unless
I am mistaken.

(spoke in French)

That question was from Luxembourg. I thank the
representative of Luxembourg for her question. What
contribution can the OSCE make in the fight against
foreign fighters? I think that, in general, it must be
said that what we need to do is to reduce as much
as possible the causes of extremism in countries of
origin. Primarily, we must act to reduce as much as
possible the fertile ground in which extremism can
grow. In addition, we must also step up reintegration
activities for such individuals. Specifically for the
OSCE, that means doing every possible to promote
cooperation among security services, the exchange of
good practices, research and the fight against terrorism
financing.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to respond positively to the Nigerian
suggestion on the same issue of enhancing cooperation
and coordination among regional organizations - such
as between the OSCE and the African Union.

With regard to the issues I did not mention earlier
that members brought up, I wish to say to Jordan, first
of all, that we are fully aware of the Mediterranean
partnership ofthe OSCE; indeed, we would like to make
links between our priorities and that partnership. A
concrete example is the issue of kidnapping for ransom:
we will try, with the Mediterranean partnership, to
make progress on that issue.

To France, Chile and others, I would like to say that,
although I did not mention the issues of conventional
arms control and the modernization of the Vienna
Document, they are very important to us. We must be
realistic. We know that we will not be able to move
forward very rapidly on such issues, but we do want to
engage in dialogue on conventional arms control and
want to modernize the Vienna Document.

As for the final political messages I would like to
send during today's meeting, there are four. First, I
would like to say that, in our globalized world, there
is greater need for regional organization for security.
The conception of the OSCE is useful for the twenty-
first century. What we need is the capacity to enhance
confidence and to act. The OSCE has the capacity to
enhance confidence because it is a platform for dialogue
and acts as a common roof for the 57 participating
States, meaning we can try to reduce lines of division
in this area. In terms of our capacity for action, the
OSCE brings a comprehensive security conception - a
multidimensional approach that is so important today.
It is a major asset that should even be exported to other
regions. Furthermore, with regard to the capacity to act,
1 would like to recall our action on the ground - the
fact that the OSCE is a field-based organization, and
that is very important.

The second message is the fact that the Swiss
chairmanship is fully committed to strengthening the
cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE,
as well as with other regional organizations. There is
great potential in particular in the field of mediation
support and training.

The third message is that our chairmanship wants
most seriously to build bridges between East and West.

I would like to thank all of the members of the Council
for their constructive reactions to what I said about
Ukraine, our proposal to establish an international
contact grou, and our decisions to send a special envoy
and core group for a needs assessment mission, and to
prepare potential human rights and election observation
missions, in case the Ukrainian authorities make such a
request, as we hope they will.

In addition to the measures on Ukraine I mentioned
in my statement and have just recalled, based on the
statements made today, I think that the involvement
of another important OSCE institution 4 the High
Commissioner on National Minorities - should be
involved. The High Commission works with a conflict-
prevention mandate and could help defuse tension in
the eastern part of the country and in Crimea.

The last message I would like to send today is the
fact that the chairmanship wants to work for and with
the people, and above all for and with young people.
We regard it as a key task of politics to provide good
prospects for the generations to come, and we have high
expectations of the 57 youth ambassadors of the model
OSCE in negotiation of a youth action plan.

Let me conclude by stating that Switzerland highly
values the United Nations, we remain fully committed
to the objectives of the United Nations and we are
determined to support its efforts to advance peace
and security, which are also the basis of the Swiss
Constitution.

