Mr. Salim: I wish at the outset to express
appreciation to Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Permanent
Representative of the United Republic of Tanzania and
President of the Security Council for the month of
January, for the invitation that was extended to me to
brief the Council on the ongoing negotiations in Abuja,
Nigeria, to end the conflict in Darfur.

It is good to be back in New York and in this
Council Chamber. As I have gone down memory lane,
I cannot help reminiscing about the time, 30 years to
the month this January, when, as Permanent
Representative of my country to the United Nations, I
was privileged to preside over the deliberations of the
Security Council. The coincidence and symbolism of
being in New York when a distinguished and worthy
compatriot is presiding over the Council can only make
me hope that those fortuitous circumstances will lead
to successful deliberations by this body.

Let me preface my briefing to the Council on the
status of the Darfur peace talks by underscoring the
unparalleled commitment of the African Union (AU) to
the attainment of lasting peace in Darfur through a
negotiated settlement. Indeed, I do not recollect any
other time - be it in the history of the erstwhile
Organization of African Unity or in that of the African
Union - when a deployment of the magnitude of that
which the AU has launched in Darfur has ever taken
place under the aegis of the continental organization.
Many of us accepted the calls to join in facilitating the
process out of our honest conviction that Africans had
not only to take the lead, with the full and active
support of the international community, to put an end
to the senseless killings in Darfur, but also to address
the abuses which had become an indictment of our
collective conscience as Africans, especially after
things went dramatically wrong in Darfur.

Darfur therefore represents an exemplary and
new case of the African Union's taking the lead as a
regional organization to tackle a complex humanitarian
emergency. The African response to the tragedy
unfolding before us in Darfur also symbolizes our
collective determination to respond effectively, as
against assuming an attitude of indifference to
problems in Africa. Such a response is totally
consistent with the letter and spirit of the Constitutive
Act of the African Union, which makes it hardly
surprising to see the overwhelming support of Africans
and the wider international community in Abuja and
Darfur itself. Let me therefore express appreciation for
the strong support that this Council and the
international community at large have extended to
those African initiatives.

We are now in the seventh round of the talks. I
began my current role during the fifth round in June
last year. At the end of that round, a declaration of
principles to end the conflict in Darfur was adopted.
That significant development paved the way for the
commencement of negotiations on the substantive
issues that had been identified by the mediation. It was
therefore our collective hope, after that round in July
2005, that when the sixth round was convened in
September 2005, progress would be made on the issues
of power-sharing, wealth-sharing and security
arrangements. That expectation was not realized, as the
talks could not cover much ground on account of the
deep division in the armed opposition - the Justice
and Equality Movement and the Sudan Liberation
Movement/Army (SLM/A) - where the threat of
fragmentation was more serious.

The seventh round of talks has been in continuous
session in Abuja since 28 November 2005, arising from
the stated commitment of the parties to make that
round a decisive and final one. Apart from short breaks
to celebrate Christmas and Eid El-Hajj, we intend to
ensure that the parties are continuously engaged until a
comprehensive agreement is reached on all the major
issues that separate the parties.

Prior to the convening of the seventh round,
concerted efforts were deployed to resolve procedural
issues that were impacting negatively on the progress
of the talks. Those problems included, in particular, the
division of the armed movements, especially that
within the SLM/A. Internal leadership divisions have,
of course, created their own complications. I am happy
to note that, following initiatives spearheaded by the
AU, the United States of America, Chad, Libya, Eritrea
and the United Nations, the problem has been
contained, at least for the time being. Consequently,
the SLM/A has been able to participate in the
negotiations during the current round as one
movement, with emerging joint positions, along with
the Justice and Equality Movement, on many of the
issues under the agenda of the negotiations.

We remain appreciative of all those who were
directly and indirectly involved in that and other
constructive initiatives. The net effect has been that,
even though that arrangement has led to some tension
for a single delegation, the task of the mediation was
greatly expedited, as negotiations began in earnest in
all three commissions, namely on power-sharing,
wealth-sharing and security arrangements. The absence
of total unity among the ranks of the movements has
resulted, in some cases, in the hardliners' holding the
process hostage, and the results have therefore been
very mixed.

As concerns the wealth-sharing commission,
substantial progress has been made in the consideration
of its agenda. The negotiations are being conducted in
a professional and serene atmosphere. The parties are
demonstrating a high degree of cooperation, both
among themselves and with the mediation. The
discussions were facilitated by the fact that most of the
representatives are highly qualified professionals in the
relevant technical fields. So far, the commission has
considered eight out of the 10 items on its agenda, and
agreements have been reached on about 90 per cent of
the issues.
Unfortunately, the level of progress in the two
other commissions - those on power-sharing and on
security arrangements - has remained frustratingly
low, and the discussions extremely difficult.

In the power-sharing commission, the gap
between the positions of the parties remains wide and
their views extremely divergent, especially on the
following issues.

First, with respect to the status of Darfur, the
issue is whether it should become a region now, as
demanded by the movements, or whether it should
retain the status quo of three states and facilitate a
process whereby the people of Darfur can decide
whether they want a region through a referendum or
another consultation mechanism, as articulated by the
Government. While the movements and the
Government both accept the notion of a referendum,
the difference lies in the fact that the movements want
a referendum after the establishment of a region, while
the Government's position is that a referendum should
be held to decide whether a region should be
established.

Other issues include the demand by the
movements for the post of Second Vice-President; their
demand that Darfurians control the capital city of
Khartoum, given that there is a significant population
of Darfurians in the city; and their demand to return to
the Darfur border of 1 January 1956.

The other power-sharing issues that remain
unresolved include power-sharing at the national level
during the interim period. This involves the question of
executive, legislative and judiciary appointments, as
well as representation of the movements in the civil

service, the military, police and security forces, and
transitional institutions such as the electoral
commission, the census board and the implementation
commissions established under the Naivasha
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

In the security arrangements commission, the
negotiations have been more problematic, as expected.
Security is at the heart of the problems in Darfur. Apart
from the current deterioration of the security situation
on the ground in Darfur, another set of deep-rooted
problems have combined to complicate the discussions
on security arrangements.

It has taken the parties more time, over a period
of a month, even to agree on a five-point agenda for
the negotiations. The delay was due partly to the stated
desire of the parties - mainly the movements - to put
their detailed positions on the agenda and to negotiate
those positions with the mediators. Those problems
have been compounded by the current and historical
experience of deep mistrust on the part of the
movements, arising from their perception of the
unwillingness, or inability, of the Government to
negotiate in good faith or even to implement the
agreements reached. In effect, the movements are
negotiating on the basis of their worst fears as against
their best hopes. Given such a situation, in order to win
the trust of the parties, mediation had to proceed
patiently and cautiously. Moreover, the parties are now
falling back on the decisions of the Security Council
and of the African Union Summit to either articulate or
dig in with respect to their positions, losing sight of the
fact that those decisions were intended to facilitate the
negotiations in the first place, not complicate them.

In the light of the engagements with the parties,
the mediation has been able to identify the major issues
that will have to be resolved before any realistic
security arrangements for Darfur can be agreed upon.
These include, but are not exclusively limited to, the
following.

First, the existing humanitarian ceasefire must be
enhanced. Its agreements are not being fully
implemented by the parties, thereby resulting in a
serious deterioration of the security situation on the
ground in Darfur. Here such issues as disclosure,
mapping, assembly and redeployment of forces,
creation of a buffer zone for humanitarian assistance,
safe supply routes for non-military supplies and the
enhancement of the Ceasefire and Joint Commissions
would have to be addressed.

Negotiations for a permanent cessation of
hostilities and a comprehensive ceasefire agreement
would incorporate issues such as the disarmament of
the controversial J anjaweed and other tribal militias, as
well as the status of forces of both the Government and
the movements, and the final security arrangements for
Darfur, including, of course, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.

Given the foregoing, the assessment of the
mediation could be summarized as follows.

The approach of the parties to the negotiations on
the substantive issues still leave a lot to be desired. So
far, the negotiations have been characterized by an
unacceptable level of inflexibility with respect to the
positions of the parties; suspicion; the absence of even
a minimum level of confidence; and deep distrust. In
fact, in many instances, a deliberate policy of stalling
by the movements, in the expectation of some dramatic
developments in the country and externally, could be
detected.

The movements do not appear to view the
negotiations as a strategic arena. The battlefield
remains the strategic arena, and the negotiations are a
tactical arena. This does not mean that the negotiations
are unimportant; it means that they are not yet
sufficiently important to the movements. At least, that
is the way it appears insofar as some of the movements
are concerned.

The movements might be waiting for a deal in the
power-sharing commission before negotiating in
earnest on security arrangements. That would be a
logical negotiating posture, since, in general, military
force is a means to achieve political objectives, and
security is an outcome of political arrangements.

The current estimate of the mediation is that the
Darfur process is still some weeks away from a
settlement. The parties, both the Government and the
armed movements, need to show more flexibility and
willingness to compromise if a settlement is to be
achieved. Some of the extraordinarily high
expectations and demands of the parties, especially the
movements, have to be addressed and reduced to more
realistic positions.

The issue and place of the Naivasha
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in the Darfur peace
process poses a unique challenge. Interestingly, the
movements have adopted an eclectic approach to the
Agreement. On the one hand, they refuse to accept its
validity as a reference for resolving the problems of the
Sudan, including the conflict in Darfur. On the other
hand, they want to pick and choose those aspects of the
Agreement that would accord them the same
arrangements as were secured by the southerners,
unmindful of the differences between the two
situations.

Given the foregoing, it may be desirable to
consider the following as the way forward and as a
means of providing fresh momentum to the Abuja
peace talks, whose pace is disturbingly, agonizingly
slow.

First, all possible efforts should be made to
ensure the effectiveness of the mechanisms established
to implement the Humanitarian Ceasefire Agreement,
notably the Ceasefire Commission and the Joint
Commission. Consideration should be given to
reorganizing and revitalizing the commissions, with
appropriate and credible sanctions for any parties that
persist in violating provisions of the Ceasefire
Agreement.

Second, the parties should be left in no doubt
that, if their approach to the Abuja talks continues to
delay progress towards a settlement, the Security
Council will hold them responsible for prolonging the
suffering of their people. In such an eventuality, the
threat and application of carefully targeted sanctions
should be credible and evident and should enjoy the
strong support of a united Security Council.

Third, the role of the neighbouring countries -
especially Chad, Libya and Eritrea - should be
recognized and commended. At the same time, there is
a strong need for greater cohesion, transparency and
coordination among the regional countries facilitating
the peace process and the mediation in order to ensure
cohesion, consistency and progress.

Fourth, other external conditions need to be
consolidated and accelerated if a peace agreement on
Darfur is to be achieved. A particularly urgent concern
is the current state of relations and the tension between
Chad and the Sudan. Chad's role as a co-mediator in
the talks is in the best interest of the process, as
evidenced by that country's initiatives and
contributions. However, there are reasons to be
concerned that an escalation of the crisis in Chad and
the crisis between Chad and the Sudan could render
any potential political settlement to the conflict in
Darfur extremely problematic, especially in the short
term.

Fifth, the international partners in the process
have continued to play a constructive and positive role
in the Abuja negotiations. That should be welcomed,
commended and strengthened. However, now more
than ever, cohesion and greater coordination between
the African Union mediation and the international
partners are most desirable as an important component
of and a sine qua non for successful negotiations. It is
most important for the international partners and the
African Union to speak with one concerted voice in
their engagements with the parties. As experience
gained from other mediation efforts clearly teaches us,
whenever the international community speaks with one
voice the chances of success are enhanced. On the
contrary, when conflicting signals are sent to the
parties, the prospects for securing an agreement are
made much more difficult. Additionally, the partners
need to enhance the level of their representation in
Abuja and, wherever possible, facilitate high-profile
visits by political leaders to encourage the parties to
reach an early agreement.
Sixth, funding for the talks remains extremely
precarious. Peace processes are, by nature, expensive
undertakings. While the contributions that some
countries have made to support the Abuja talks are
appreciated, clearly, the current level of funding for the
talks needs to be increased substantially to
accommodate the extended and final phase and relieve
the African Union of a major constraint.

Seventh, as a matter of priority, the African
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) should be strengthened,
supported and well funded so that it can carry out its
mandate along the lines recommended by the recent
joint assessment mission, which undertook a
comprehensive review of the deployment of AMIS. In
my view it is vital that nothing be allowed to
undermine AMIS for the duration of its role in Darfur.
That is in the interest of the efforts to end that sad
conflict and in the long-term interest of future African
Union peace support operations. I realize that a major
constraint with respect to financing is the feeling -
quite justifiable on the part of those supporting the
operation financially - that there is need for greater
burden-sharing. But I believe it is not impossible to
find a way to address that concern. That is all the more
relevant given the African Union's position of
supporting in principle a transition from AMIS to a
United Nations operation within the framework of a
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations to promote peace, security and stability in
Africa.

The African Union and those of us involved in
the mediation are actively seeking a negotiated
settlement to the Darfur conflict that is just,
democratic, sustainable and consistent with the letter
and the spirit of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
in particular its most important provisions, which were
negotiated to help stabilize the processes of
peacebuilding, security, unity, cohesion and good
governance throughout the Sudanese nation. Without
doubt, those same expectations have also motivated the
Council's involvement and decisions, of which we are
highly appreciative.

The African Union mediation is confident that a
just and lasting settlement of the conflict in Darfur is
achievable, but such optimism needs to be guarded,
given the action of the parties and some developments
in, around and outside Darfur. For that reason, I wish
to strongly appeal to the Council to remain actively
engaged and to send very strong signals of its support
for the Abuja peace process so that a comprehensive
agreement can be concluded in the shortest possible
time.

