Mr. Manalo (Philippines): At the outset, Sir,
allow me to express my delegation's pleasure in seeing
you preside over this meeting and our congratulations
on your delegation's successful and able leadership and
guidance of the Council during this month.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his latest
comprehensive report on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
In addition, we wish to express our appreciation to
Prime Minister Howard, Senior Minister Ramos-Horta
and Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello for their statements
earlier today.

We are almost at curtain time in East Timor. All
our efforts for more than two years will be rigorously
tested starting 20 May, when East Timor formally
declares independence. As the Secretary-General
observes, the international community has abundant
reasons to be proud of what has been accomplished in
East Timor in such a short period of time. For many of
us, it is also truly gratifying to have made some
contribution in the efforts towards creating a strong
foundation for an independent East Timor - a real
success story in the history of the United Nations.

In times of success, such as in East Timor, it is
not difficult to be lured into complacency, to rest on
our laurels and become victims of our own success and
achievements. However, we hope that our success in
East Timor will not distract us from the multitude of
tasks remaining to be done.

We have not yet reached the point, in our view,
where we can be reasonably assured that our efforts in
East Timor will be secure and durable. My delegation
therefore urges the Security Council and the
international community to remain vigilant and to
ensure that the gains we have achieved thus far, and
intend to achieve in the future, in East Timor are
preserved and sustained.

We have carefully read the report of the
Secretary-General. It is essentially, in our view, an
unequivocal call for adequate funding and support for
East Timor. UNTAET, the Secretariat and other
international partners are working hard to come up
with a comprehensive plan for the future of East Timor.
But we should know that without sufficient funding it
will be virtually impossible to implement successfully
even the best-laid plans. The maintenance of security
and the building of a sustainable administrative and
economic structure in East Timor depend on this.

We thus call on the donor community to intensify
its efforts to ensure adequate and predictable funding
for the growing needs of East Timor. With crises in
other parts of the world, and the international
community's attention riveted to the war on terrorism,
we hope that East Timor will not be relegated to the
background or, worse, forgotten in the scramble for
assistance and support at this critical time. The
international community should not fail to respond to
the aspirations of the East Timorese, who deserve, at
the very least, our continued support and active
encouragement. The people of East Timor have earned
the right to freedom and independence. We cannot let
them down.

Attaining independence in East Timor is no small
achievement. But it cannot be the final chapter of the
United Nations exit strategy for East Timor.

The Philippines supports the further extension of
UNTAET's mandate until the declaration of
independence in East Timor on 20 May. We also
express our broad support for the proposed framework
for the successor mission to UNTAET and in this
regard look forward to its further elaboration by the
Secretary-General. We urge the Security Council to
accept these recommendations.

In the meantime, the Philippines remains
committed to participating in United Nations efforts in
East Timor and to supporting the East Timorese people
in their historic endeavour.

