Mr. Sharma: It is indeed a great pleasure to
participate, under your chairmanship, Sir, in this open
periodical debate on the progress of the mandate given
to the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). My previous statement before the
Council was made six months after the accession to
independent statehood of Timor-Leste and the current
report covers almost a year since independence. My
statement today is being made shortly before the
Council will deliberate the adoption of a draft
resolution extending the mandate of UNMISET for a
final year.

With the passage of time, the experience of any
newly independent nation exhibits features in the
continuum of national experience, with emerging
potentialities. In respect of the evolving situation over
the first year of Timor-Leste, I wish to remark first of
all on developments to which a re-evaluated response
was required by the Council in the security-related
mandate of UNMISET.

I would like to begin by expressing our
appreciation for the Security Council's recognition of
the pivotal requirement of international support for the
stability of Timor-Leste, as reflected in its adoption of
resolution 1473 (2003). The strengthening of the police
force through a recast strategy involving accretion of
capacity and mobility, reinforced training and
augmentation of professionalism according to the
highest policing standards, on the one hand, and a more
gradual drawdown of the peacekeeping forces, on the
other, are of critical importance. They will be of
enormous assistance as we seek to address the
emergent threats identified in the Secretary-General's
special report: the risk of civil disorder and the
criminal and politically motivated violence in rural
areas, which appears to be part of a strategy by the
perpetrators to try to instigate numerous such incidents
simultaneously across the entire territory of the country
in order to encourage a perception of a crisis in
governance and instil a fear of returning social
disorder.

A surge in violence at this time could potentially
generate a demoralizing psychological apprehension in
the population of a recrudescence of violence and of
the rending of the social fabric still fresh in memory
and experienced in the searing national turmoil only a
few years ago. This factor of traumatic national
experience will diminish in potency through the
passage of time, but the initial years of the State are
critical in firmly entrenching the confidence both of the
Government and of the people that the political,
administrative and security order in the State, on which
all steady social and economic advance depends,
cannot be shaken or challenged. The slower drawdown
of the UNMISET military component would contribute
to reducing the threat posed by such groups, while also
ensuring that the police forces have adequate time to
develop. The revised drawdown schedule is contained
in the report of the Secretary-General before the
Council.

UNMISET has noted the emphasis widely placed
by members of the Council and other Member States
on the institutional strengthening of the police and has
initiated and supported actions by the Government of
Timor-Leste in this direction, in collaboration with the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
other development partners. These efforts will build in
particular on the foundation provided by the report of
the joint assessment mission on policing requirements.
The recommendations of the joint assessment mission
will be reflected in the comprehensive road map under
preparation for institutional strengthening and their
implementation will be overseen by a committee on
institutional strengthening of the police, chaired by the
Minister of the Interior. This process was further
supported by discussions during a major international
workshop with the highest-level participation, which
has just concluded.

We have been mindful to learn the appropriate
lessons from the civic riots in Dili, the instance of
armed attacks in the district of Ermera and subsequent
instances of armed banditry in other districts. These
first instances of security threats to the State have
provided additional impetus for recasting, planning and
augmenting readiness to make such challenges difficult
to mount in the future. That there will be other
instances of attempted assaults on the fabric of law and
order is a reasonable surmise. However, Timor-Leste is
now on a path where it can be quick to respond
effectively to such situations and work towards
eventually dismantling such threats through appropriate
security, political and economic measures, which
would progressively show positive results.

The process of handing over policing functions to
the National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) continues,
with some adjustments, and responsibility for policing
more than half of the districts in the country's territory
is now in the hands of PNTL. We are strengthening our
presence as advisors in all districts and headquarters to
ensure a process of smooth transition until all
responsibility is transferred by mid-2004. With the
cluster of improvements initiated, it is expected that the
State will be better equipped with the essential means
necessary to ensure stability in the time to come, even
though reviewing and enhancing security capacity and
responsibility in the light of requirements is admittedly
a continuing and evolving process.

In the development of beneficial external
relations of Timor-Leste, the growing and constructive
relationship between Timor-Leste and Indonesia has
been a great asset. High-level visits have been
exchanged that have given political direction and
substance to the positively evolving relationship and
the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste will be making his
first official visit to Indonesia in early June. Through
the forward-looking meeting of the Joint Commission,
both countries have resolved upon cooperation in a
variety of areas. Both countries are also striving to
meet the target for delineation of the land border by 30
June, but it will require substantial effort on both sides
to achieve that target date. Some financial and
technical support is needed to complete the joint
actions required by the deadline and eventually also for
carrying out demarcation of the international boundary.
The process of handing over border oversight and
control services from the peacekeeping force to the
Border Patrol Unit of the Timor-Leste Police has
commenced.

I wish to acknowledge here the encouragement
which I have received through the reception accorded
to me at the highest political levels in Jakarta. It
continues to be our endeavour to play as helpful a role
as we can to both sides in advancing the bilateral
relationship in transitional matters, as we have been
mandated to do, over the duration of UNMISET.

Despite efforts deployed by both countries and
the international community, around 30,000 refugees
remain in West Timor. Voluntary resettlement in other
parts of Indonesia continues to be the policy of
Indonesia. The return of refugees to Timor-Leste has
virtually ceased since last December after the
announcement of the cessation clause by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), though a significant decline in returns had
been perceptible even in October and November. It is
encouraging to note that, while some former adherents
of the militias have again been involved in criminal
activities in Timor-Leste, the Government of Indonesia
has stated its commitment to assist in neutralizing
those elements.

The task of developing a professional, dedicated
and responsive public administration from ground level
is no less a challenge for the new State. The Council
had mandated UNMISET to prepare the groundwork
for the structure of a national administration over two
years, and halfway through the process we can report
that progress is satisfactory, given the scope of
capacity-building support that could be provided,
limited to providing international advisers to 100
stability posts. The uneven situation in respect of
counterparts that could be provided, given the
undeveloped skills inherited by Timorese society, has
been another constraining feature.

It is clear, however, that within the 15 sectors
where we provide support, there are areas where the
necessity of continued mentoring and online assistance
will remain on account of the depth of expertise
necessary, the extent and scope of practical and
conceptual knowledge to be transferred and the critical
nature of some crucial sectors. In the period following
the departure of UNMISET, it has to be ensured that
the functioning of those critical sectors is not
jeopardized. We have initiated the process of
identifying the areas where continuing supportiveness
will be required, together with the reasons for it. That
assessment will be shared with the Council and other
partners so that appropriate successor arrangements
may be taken in hand in good time.

The role of UNDP, which is crucial in advocating
the need for further capacity-building support and
filling, in parallel, more than 200 development posts,
will continue to be central. UNMISET has been
particular in keeping the civilian support programme
under constant review, in close consultation with the
Government, for lessons that are progressively learnt
and improvements that can be effected.

The Serious Crimes Unit was set up under the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) for the judicial handling of cases of
egregious crimes surrounding the popular consultation
of 1999. The Unit had to resolve many challenges in
the start-up phase, and efforts need to be made
continuously in facilitating the work of the Special
Panels for Serious Crimes at the Dili District Court,
which has been made responsible for trying those cases
in the areas of investigation, prosecution, trial, defence
and support services to the Court. Subsequent to the
judgements, we must anticipate the appeals phase. The
process, although slower than earlier envisaged when
the constraints were not clear, is now under way.

In respect to the 10 priority cases of crimes
against humanity and the five cases of widespread
patterns of serious violations of human rights, progress
as of the end of April 2003 has been as follows:
Investigations have been completed in nine out of the
ten priority cases. Eight additional major cases of
crimes against humanity have been fully investigated
and indicted so far. Trials are proceeding in those cases
where the accused are in Timor-Leste, and two cases -
Los Palos and Lolotae - have been judged at the first
instance. In many other cases the trials may not even
commence due to the absence of defendants, a large
proportion of whom remain outside of Timor-Leste.

The role of UNMISET has been to provide
substantive, administrative and technical support to the
process so that the infrastructure required for the trials
is available. In order to assist in the investigation and
indictment phase, and in the subsequent trials,
UNMISET has provided the Prosecutor General of
Timor-Leste with an international Deputy Prosecutor
General, who heads the Serious Crimes Unit composed
of prosecutors and investigators. UNMISET has also
provided the services of judges for the panels and
public defenders for the trials. Along with areas, such
as public administration and policing, which will
continue to require support after UNMISET withdraws,
the mandate to bring to justice the perpetrators of
serious crimes committed in 1999 is another area which
will require deliberation as to the appropriate post-
UNMISET arrangement, as it is certain that the judicial
process cannot be completed within the period of
UNMISET's mandate, which is until mid-2004.

The economic situation of Timor-Leste is slow to
improve given the comprehensive legacy of
underdevelopment inherited by the newly independent
State. The path of development and fulfilment of
economic and social needs will be long and arduous,
and in the foreseeable future the country will have to
manage the political and economic pressures created by
depressed economic and social indicators and, in
particular, joblessness. The indicators of poverty for
Timor-Leste enumerated in the UNDP Human
Development Report of 2002 include an infant
mortality rate of 80 in every 1,000 live births; an adult
literacy rate of 43 per cent - with 46 per cent of the
population having never attended school - resulting in
a large inexperienced and unskilled work force; more
than two out of five people living on 55 cents a day or
less; a life expectancy of only 57 years; and a per
capita gross domestic product of less than $500, with a
total gross domestic product of $380 million.

The majority of the East Timorese people still
practise subsistence agriculture, with extremely
rudimentary means of production. The economy needs
a focus on agriculture based on greater diversity and
quantity of production, encouragement to small
industries, creation of professional services and
opportunities for self-employment as the basis of the
Timorese economy. The Government recognizes that,
as a small and not heavily populated country,
Timor-Leste should enable greater participation of
beneficiaries in the process of development.

Timor-Leste seeks self-sufficiency as an objective
to be achieved in the medium term. The existence of
the means for doing so is encouraging. In my last
statement to the Council I stated the favourable
conditions possessed by Timor-Leste in terms of its
affluent and dynamic neighbourhood and its reserves of
natural resources that could be turned to advantage for
the country's economic upturn.

The ratification, after a protracted process, of the
Timor Sea Treaty between Timor-Leste and Australia,
enabling the exploitation of an offshore oil and gas
field, has been an important development for the public
finances of Timor-Leste. Prospects for further revenues
will be enhanced through cooperation between the two
countries on another identified field. In respect of the
five metallic ores and three types of industrial clays
that have been surveyed and that are believed to exist
in commercial quantities, the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) has
prepared a comprehensive report, which was presented
to the Government by the ESCAP Executive Secretary
earlier in the year. The fisheries and tourism potential
also remains to be exploited. The Government is aware
that in order to attract investor interest the basic laws
and guidelines required have to be put in place quickly.
Timor-Leste has also formally applied for recognition
as a least developed country. Concessions granted to
such countries by other countries could potentially
attract some investors.

Development strategies towards fulfilment of the
goals in the comprehensive National Development Plan
are being pursued with the participation of bilateral
partners and institutions. The national exercise of
identifying policy priorities on the basis of popular
consultation has evinced close compatibility with the
United Nations Millennium Development Goals. The
Government is committed to registering advances in
key social indicators. A signal contribution is being
made in assisting the development process by UNDP
and the United Nations agencies, and that relationship
will, of course, continue after UNMISET's departure in
mid-2004.

The role being played by other United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes is truly commendable
and will contribute to a smooth transition to a
traditional development assistance framework after the
completion of UNMISET's mandate. The decision to
appoint the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General as Resident Representative of the
UNDP and Resident Coordinator of United Nations
agencies has demonstrated its value in practice, and I
should like to acknowledge here the important
contribution made by the Deputy Special
Representative, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa. UNMISET
itself has encouraged initiatives through the creation of
a science park and science education in cooperation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, through business promotion and
the development of small enterprises in cooperation
with the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, and through focused pilot projects of
direct economic and social benefit in identified rural
areas with the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs. I also wish to acknowledge their support and
responsiveness.

The Council can take satisfaction in the
contribution its decisions have made to consolidating
and buttressing the new nation of Timor-Leste, now a
Member of the United Nations. The Council has before
it the report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/449),
which provides information on the current situation in
some detail. Experience shows that nation-building is
the result of unremitting effort and belief in political
values that a country's leadership and citizens can
bring to bear to the task; partners can play only a
supportive role. The United Nations has played that
role well. The Council must, in due course, take a View
on the optimal form that the Organization's association
with Timor-Leste should take after UNMISET has
concluded, in the context of intrinsic requirements. The
engagement of the international community in peace-
building and institution-building will need to continue.
As UNMISET downsizes in preparation for its ultimate
withdrawal, we will be reviewing possible options
through which those continuing needs can be met.

Timor-Leste should proceed on its chosen path
with faith and persistence, reflecting the central
importance of an ethos of governance based on the rule
of law - the judiciary must move swiftly to win public
confidence - personal freedoms and universal
principles of human rights. The United Nations will
continue to be an ally on that journey.

