Mr. Fize (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
reports (S/2019/417, annexes I and II) and their briefings.

I would like to thank President Agius and warmly
commend him on delivering his first briefing to the
Security Council as President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. France
reiterates its confidence in him and knows that it can
count on his unwavering commitment to an impartial
and high-quality international criminal justice system,
as President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, until 2017, and now as President of
the Mechanism. He can rest assured that France lends
its full support to the work of the Mechanism.

With regard to the judicial activities of the
Mechanism during the reporting period, France
welcomes the successful outcome of the Prosecutor v.
Radovan Karadeic' case. This decision constitutes an
important milestone for justice and the fight against
impunity in the Balkans, as well as for international
criminal justice as a whole. Like the Prosecutor, France
hopes that the facts definitively established in that case
will be accepted unequivocally and that they will serve
as a basis for reconciliation.

The Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladic' case will be
another important milestone for the Mechanism and the
fulfilment of its mandate with regard to the countries of
the former Yugoslavia. France hopes that the date of the
hearing in the appeal will be set in the coming months.

With regard to the Rwandan cases, we note that
the single judge decided not to refer the Prosecutor
v. Maximilien Turinabo et al. case to the Rwandan
authorities and ordered that the trial be held before the
Mechanism. In this regard, we note that this is the first
major contempt case brought before the Mechanism.

France also notes that President Agius stated his
desire to see decisions in pending cases rendered
without delay, and to the extent possible, before the end
of 2020. We rely on the professionalism of the judges
and the Office of the Prosecutor to conclude all ongoing
proceedings and trials in a timely manner.

With regard to cooperation, France recalls that
States are required to cooperate with the Mechanism in
the search and arrest of eight fugitives indicted by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
In this regard, we note the recent requests made by
the Prosecutor and call on the States concerned to
cooperate. The crimes committed by those fugitives
cannot go unpunished.

France welcomes the assistance provided by
the Mechanism to national courts responsible for
prosecuting perpetrators of international crimes
committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. We
call for enhanced inter-State cooperation in the region,
which must make further progress, to complement the
legal assistance offered by the Mechanism, which must
have the means to respond to it.

With regard to Rwanda, the two cases referred
by the ICTR to the French courts have undergone
significant developments during 2018, as mentioned in
the reports presented to the Council and in our previous
statement (see S/PV.84l6). France will, of course,
continue to address those cases with all the necessary
diligence and rigour. In this regard, we would like to
inform the Council of President Macron's decision to
enhance the material and financial resources dedicated
to the prosecution of parties to the genocide who are
present in France. The objective of such reinforcements
is twofold: to quickly initiate proceedings against all
such parties residing in France and to prosecute them
more expeditiously.

We take note of the Prosecutor's comments with
respect to the cooperation provided to his Office
by the countries of the former Yugoslavia. We are
concerned by its renewed negative assessment of
regional judicial cooperation, which is "at its lowest
level in years" (S/2019/4I7, annex H, para. 61). For
France and the European Union, the countries of the
former Yugoslavia must both fully cooperate with the
Mechanism and themselves fight against impunity
for crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia that
do not fall within the jurisdiction of the Mechanism.
These are two inseparable and essential dimensions
for reconciliation and regional stability, which are
themselves essential for the future of the Western
Balkan countries. Moreover, during his official visit to
Serbia earlier this week, the President of the Republic
recalled France's commitment to strengthening the
rule of law and ensuring the lasting stabilization of
the region.

I would also like to echo the concern once again
expressed by Prosecutor Brammertz in his report with
respect to the denial of crimes and responsibility by
some individuals convicted by international criminal
tribunals upon their release. In that regard, we recall that
the denial ofgenocide is subject to criminal punishment
in France. We will spare no effort to counter the rhetoric
of denial of well-established facts. In that context, on
the occasion of the recent twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Rwandan genocide, the President of the Republic
designated 7 April as an official day of commemoration
of the Tutsi genocide.

With regard to the issue of requests for early
release, resolution 2422 (2018) must be fully respected,
and we note the determination of the President and the
Prosecutor in that regard. We encourage the Mechanism
to continue its discussions and deliberations with a view
to establishing a clear regime under clear conditions,
which will usefully enhance internationaljurisprudence.

With respect to the Mechanism's functioning,
France welcomes the willingness shown by the President
and the Prosecutor to promote more than ever a unified
and coordinated working culture among the divisions
and the policy of a single Mechanism and a single
Prosecutor's Office. That is an essential condition for
its effectiveness and the coherence of its action.

In conclusion, allow me note, like President Agius,
that 17 July is the Day of International Criminal Justice
and marks the anniversary of the adoption of the Rome

Statute. On this occasion, France reiterates its full
support for the International Criminal Court.

