Mr. Ouch (Cambodia): I would like to commend
Indonesia's initiative to convene today's open debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which
is a timely agenda at the current critical juncture of
international security. I also wish to thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres for his informative briefing.

Cambodia listened carefully to the passionate
plea for international law and humanitarian action by
the President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Executive Director of the Center
for Civilians in Conflict. There is no doubt that the
present situation concerning international security
remains grim. With the evolving nature of armed
conflicts, civilians across the various regions of the
world continue to suffer heavy casualties. However, the
protection of civilians remains an arduous task for the
international community.

Over the past 20 years, the Security Council
adopted multiple resolutions and presidential statements
and developed a legal framework for strengthening the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. In addition,
the protection of civilians has become one of the key
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Cambodia's contributions to international security
and peacekeeping are well documented. From being
a recipient State of peacekeeping forces in the early
1990s, Cambodia has since 2006 been an active State
in deploying staff to United Nations peacekeeping
missions, having sent nearly 6,000 troops to eight
countries in Africa and the Middle East. With regard
to sending female officers to United Nations missions,
in 2017 the United Nations ranked Cambodia first
among the members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, and second in Asia overall. Based on
our practical experience, I would like to contribute five
points to today's deliberations.

First, peacekeeping operations must work strictly
within the parameters of the Security Council's
mandate in fulfilling their responsibility to protect
civilians. However, it cannot be a substitute for the
responsibilities and obligations of the Government of
the country concerned and of the parties to the conflict.
In addition, lines of communication and a bond of
sincere friendship among the peacekeepers, local
authorities and the people must be further enhanced on
the basis of winning their confidence and support. This
week, United Nations News published an article entitled
Cambodia: Giving Back to the UN Peacekeeping,
which features Cambodian peacekeepers inspecting
a water purification plant. It is not the responsibility
of the Cambodian contingent to process water for
United Nations colleagues, but it is an indication of a
cooperative and collegial approach to peacekeeping,
which is born of a recent historical link.

Secondly, it is crucial that regular and close
collaboration between local authorities and multilateral
forces be established, with a view to gathering timely
information prior to the eruption of conflict and to
carrying out a safe and early evacuation of civilians
from regions with armed conflict. Further efforts
must be made with regard to the timely provision of
protection and medical care to refugees during armed
conflict. In certain dangerous situations, our troops
have participated in jointly coordinated responses
through regular patrols and control of the movement
of internally displaced persons and of refugee camps
to protect civilians from armed attacks. Moreover,
the entry-exit point of refugee camps must be tightly
controlled in order to prevent the importation of
weapons and other prospective harmful substances that
could potentially endanger the safety and security of
civilians living in the affected areas.

Thirdly, education is an essential factor. Local
authorities and multilateral forces need to work hand
in hand to disseminate the relevant laws and culture
of the country of operation and pertinent international
law in vulnerable areas, as well as information on
the role and responsibilities of the United Nations
in areas of operation. In addition, the awareness of
the local authorities and people must be raised with
regard to the risks, incidents and impact of landmines
and unexploded ordinance. It is also imperative to
strengthen professional skills prior to the deployment,
based on the new United Nations reform as well as
engagement in the protection of civilians and the fight
against violence and sexual trafficking. At the request
of the United Nations , Cambodia is now in the process
of reviewing amendments to the legal framework on the
policy on accountability for conduct and discipline in
field missions.

Fourthly, the lessons learned have taught us that
predeployment and in-mission training for our troops
have proven to be an effective and contributing
factor of successful peacekeeping operations. The
troops should be provided with reliable field support,
adequate equipment and modern technologies. In
that connection, my Government made its modest
contribution last March by providing armoured vehicles
to our Cambodian United Nations peacekeeping forces
in Mali.

Fifthly, as protection-of-civilians mandates are
fully integrated into each peacekeeping operation,
troop- and police-contributing countries must be
consulted in the formulation of mission-specific
objectives so as to ensure the greater effectiveness of
United Nations forces, and in this way improve the
protection of civilians.

Peacekeeping has faced unprecedented challenges
since the non-State actors have waged rebellion wars
against our peacekeeping forces, which have claimed
many lives and caused disabilities. We are sincerely
indebted to the sacrifice of these United Nations heroes.

Before I conclude, I would like to reaffirm that
regardless of the hurdles, Cambodia remains committed
to further contributing to the cause of this great mission.

