Ms. Brink (Australia): I thank China for convening
this debate today.

This is a challenging period for global cooperation.
Geopolitical competition, propelled by rapid and
accelerating change, as well as rising nationalism, pose
powerful challenges to the core tenets ofmultilateralism.
Australia recognizes the reality that great States have
a significant role to play in shaping the international
system. Australia considers that the world is safer and
more prosperous when differences are managed and
challenges met by agreed rules, and not by the exercise
of power alone.

Australia's 2017 Foreign Policy White Paper
contends that there are few issues ofgreater significance
than the continued success ofa rules-based international
order. By extension, the role of the United Nations is
paramount. A rules-based order provides the foundation
for our common security and prosperity, including for
our region, the Indo-Pacific. It benefits all of us, from
the smallest States to the largest States. It plays an
important role in managing security challenges, such
as the proliferation of weapons and terrorism.
Australia believes firmly that global security and
prosperity are best served when countries behave in
accordance with international rules and norms; when
open markets facilitate the free flow of trade, capital
and ideas; when rights of freedom of navigation and
overflight are upheld; and when disputes are resolved
peacefully, without the threat or use of force.

As an island nation located at the confluence of
the Indian and Pacific Oceans, we place particular
importance on the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). The maritime boundary
treaty agreed between Australia and Timor-Leste in 2018
is a testament to the way in which UNCLOS reinforces
stability and allows countries to resolve disputes
peacefully and without coercion. It is an example of
the rules-based order in action. Other examples are the
rules-based trading system centred on the World Trade
Organization, which strongly advances the prosperity
of all members, as well as rules and institutions that
promote responses to global challenges like climate
change or health security.

The rules-based order also provides the framework
for our efforts to support universal human rights. Just
as peace and development are mutually reinforcing,
respect for human rights is the foundation for peace and
security. Indeed, one of the greatest challenges to the
rules-based order is posed by States that question the
universality of human rights. Australia is committed
to a strong multilateral human rights system. We are
committed to reforms that strengthen the United Nations
Human Rights Council's credibility and effectiveness.
We need stronger processes to ensure that Human
Rights Council members uphold the highest human
rights standards.

Australia also supports Secretary-General
Guterres's reform agenda. We see it as a key means to
increase and strengthen United Nations effectiveness,
and with it multilateralism, to promote sustaining
peace and achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We welcome the General Assembly's
adoption of resolutions on the mutually reinforcing
pillars of reform, including on the United Nations
development system. But there is more to do.

In conclusion, protecting and strengthening the
rules-based order benefits all of us and is a shared
responsibility. We must work together to ensure that
multilateral institutions are best equipped to engage
effectively in the contemporary world.

