The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

Having listened to all the statements and appeals
around the table, I think that we all sound a bit like
broken records. Since we last spoke (see S/PV.8469),
neither the humanitarian situation nor the human rights
situation has improved. International humanitarian law
is being violated. We hear about new attacks on schools
and hospitals; famine is worse; and cholera is spreading.
It is very, very frustrating. The only one of the only
positive things is what our French colleague mentioned
and the fact that the Security Council is united.

Again, having listened to all speakers, I think that
we all agree that there can be no military solution to
this conflict. We have to do everything possible to
ensure that a political solution is found, and I think that
the voice of the Security Council must be heard.

Like others, we fully support Martin Griffiths.
We are extremely encouraged by the fact that he
never gives up but starts again and again. I offer him
congratulations on the agreement that he has achieved
on the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. Of
course, the proof of the pudding will be in the eating.

We believe that it is also important to think about the
next steps and to work towards a framework agreement
with respect to the transitional phase. Germany is ready
to host a possible next meeting and supports the work of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement on the ground; we are ready to support up
to 10 monitors to assist in the work there. We are also
ready to work with our Berghof Foundation, which
he mentioned, behind the scenes on the second track,
because we believe that this track is important and that
it is important to speak to all parties in the region in
order to make progress.

On the peace process, we deem vitally important,
and here I would echo what Ms. Luqman said, that we
have to include women in the peace process. It cannot
be like it was in Stockholm; I think there was only one
woman sitting at the table. The next round must have
more women around the table, not only because women
are those most affected, but because they are half of the
population, and experience shows that when women are
involved in peace negotiations, we can actually achieve
progress.

The inclusion of youth is also key, and here I want to
thank Ms. Gamba for her report, which was devastating.
I can only echo what she said in her statement: children
have to be given a chance to survive. I can only
encourage her to continue to raise her voice and speak
out on the fate of children that are being dragged into
war and are suffering. Anatolio gave some terrible
figures in this respect. I also encourage her to go to
the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict
to report on the situation in Yemen. We also support
what she and others said with regard to accountability.
It cannot be that those committing serious crimes are
not punished.
Lastly, concerning the humanitarian situation,
Germany has also provided $100 million again for 2019,
most of it disbursed. We want to support in particular
UNICEF's WASH programme and others that are
fighting cholera.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

