Mr. Al-Shara' (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize for taking the floor for the second
time. I do not want to enter into a controversy.
However, I would like to elucidate some of the points
made by Mr. Jack Straw.

My first point relates to the statement by
Commissioner Mehlis. He almost agrees with us that
these are hypotheses. However, as far as we know, we
did not deny Commissioner Mehlis anything he
wanted. Everything he requested was approved. After
finishing his interviews with Syrians on 23 September,
we asked him, "Do you need to come back?", and he
said, "I may; I may not" - although he seemed to
indicate that he would not return. Furthermore, some of
the investigators accompanying Mr. Mehlis were
amazed at the beauty of Syria and expressed the wish
to return as tourists, which we welcomed. They said
that they would pay their own hotel fees, and we said,
"Fine". I do not want to go into further detail about
that.

Secondly, we have condemned the attack of
11 September 2001 on dozens of occasions. I cannot
think of a single lecture or event about the international
situation or on peace in the Middle East or on politics
in the region that has failed to condemn the events of
11 September 2001. Simply stated, we are paying the
price for what was perpetrated by those terrorists. I
will not go on at length about that. Those who stand
accused are paying the price for the terrorist attacks,
rather than the terrorists themselves. You know where
certain people are, and they are still free from justice.
Those being punished are those who have condemned
9/11.

Syria suffered from terrorism before many other
States did; we have had to pay a very high price. I will
not bore the Council at length with the history of the
1980s and the ugliness of the terrorist campaigns from
which Syria suffered during that period. At that time,
many States did not stand with us in the way that we
have stood with the United States, the United Kingdom
and Spain. As Mr. Straw is well aware, we sent many
messages of condolence and sympathy and expressed
our condemnation many times after the attacks on the
London Underground in July. Despite all of the
controversy and disputes, I even contacted Jack Straw
by telephone on several occasion to express personally
to him our indignation, condemnation and denunciation
of those attacks. If I am wrong, perhaps he would be
kind enough to tell me so.

Thirdly and finally, we want to uncover the
truth - no more and no less - based on conclusive
evidence. I think that we can all agree on that point.
We want to uncover the truth about who assassinated
Hariri, and to see conclusive evidence. We have no
other objective. I am talking and acting in good faith.
There is no bad faith, and I do not have a hidden
agenda.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having given me this opportunity to comment, and I
apologize for having taken so long.

