Ms. Wolcott (United States of America): The
United States appreciates the leadership of
Chairman Arias and welcomes his report.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) play an essential role in ensuring that States
implement resolution 1373 (2001).

We are pleased to hear about the progress that has
been made during the past six months. In particular, the
CTC's adoption of 50 preliminary information
assessments will help guide the efforts of States to
fully implement resolution 1373 (2001). Along with the
adoption of the preliminary information assessments,
we wish to stress again the need for CTED to provide
an analysis of the global status of the implementation
by States of resolution 1373 (2001), which the Council
can consider as it monitors compliance with that
important resolution.

The United States commends the Committee's
Executive Directorate for hosting an informal meeting
in July to address the technical assistance needs of
West African States in fulfilling their counter-terrorism

obligations under resolution 1373 (2001). That meeting
exemplifies CTED's efforts to provide a forum for
States that need assistance to convey their needs in
practical terms, and for donor States and organizations
to better understand the ways they can help.

The United States welcomes the appointment of
Ambassador Mike Smith of Australia as the new
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. We look forward to working with both him
and Chairman Arias to further the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001).

The Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) has made important progress
under Ambassador Verbeke's strong leadership. We
thank him and his staff. The United States would also
like to thank the Monitoring Team for its invaluable
assistance in helping the Committee to discharge its
mandate.

Perhaps the key issue facing the Committee today
is the accuracy of the consolidated list. As has been
stressed, the accuracy of the list is fundamental to
ensuring that the 1267 sanctions regime continues to
contribute in a meaningful way to international
counter-terrorism efforts. Almost a year after the
adoption of resolution 1735 (2006), in which the
Council stressed the importance of improving the
quality of the list, the Monitoring Team has found that
list does not sufficiently reflect the real and persistent
threat of terrorism.

The United States strongly believes that the
Committee must focus on updating the list to make it a
relevant and potent tool in the fight against the Taliban
and Al-Qaida in Afghanistan. We believe in a
three-pronged approach clearly laid out in
resolution 1735 (2006) - sanctioning new Taliban
who are responsible for the current upsurge in
violence, de-listing former Taliban who have severed
their ties and adding new and updated biographical
information to help States better enforce the sanctions.

While we welcome recent action by the
Committee to add one individual to the Taliban section
of the list, much work remains to be done. Many
prominent Taliban and Al-Qaida leaders have not been
listed, and the Committee must make progress on
pending de-listing issues before it. The United States is
confident that under the dedicated stewardship of
Ambassador Verbeke, the Committee will make
progress on updating Taliban entries and the other
important issues on its agenda. We pledge our full
support in his efforts to do so.

We would also like to thank Chairman Burian for
his presentation and for his accomplishments during
the past six months. Resolution 1540 (2004) is a
significant tool for addressing the threat to
international peace and security posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related materials. We applaud
the Committee's efforts to monitor and promote the
implementation of the resolution.

We support the Committee's cooperation with
organizations such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, as well as with regional
organizations such as the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Organization of American
States and the Regional Forum of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations. It is noteworthy that, through
decisions adopted by those regional organizations,
112 States have committed to develop implementation
plans or action plans for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), as and if appropriate. The work
of those regional organizations complements the efforts
of the Security Council's 1540 Committee. We
encourage the Committee to forge close links with
those and other regional organizations.

We are pleased that the Committee has
transmitted its updated matrices to States. We also
intend to provide consent for the Committee to post the
United States matrix on the Committee's website and
hope other States will do the same. Posting the
matrices will provide important transparency and
facilitate the delivery of technical assistance to States
that need it. Finally, we welcome the Committee's
ongoing outreach efforts as well as the Chairman's
personal leadership in that important initiative.

Together with Norway and the European Union,
the United States was pleased to co-sponsor the recent
workshop held in Jordan on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We look forward to
co-sponsoring, together with Andorra and Norway, the
workshop in Botswana later this month.

We appreciate the instances that demonstrate
cooperation among all three Committees, specifically
the collaborative workshop that the 1267 Committee's
Monitoring Team, the experts of the 1540 Committee
and CTED organized recently in Dakar, and the

comparable workshop that those three bodies will hold
in Botswana later this month, as has been discussed.
We encourage all three Committees to continue to
coordinate and to undertake more joint efforts.

