Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of
North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
presiding over today's meeting on such an important
issue. I also thank all the briefers for their valuable
contributions. For the sake of brevity, my oral
intervention will be shorter than the written statement,
which will be circulated. I would like to make a few
points, ifI may.

First of all, the Addendum to the Madrid Guiding
Principles, adopted in December 2018, calls upon
all of us to continue to conduct research and collect
information to enhance our knowledge and better
understanding of the nature and scope of the links
that may exist between terrorism and transnational
organized crime.

In that regard, the European Union strives to
achieve a multidisciplinary, multi-agency integrated
approach to effectively tackling crime, including
terrorism, while ensuring that all measures taken
respect human rights and fundamental freedoms. The
various law enforcement and other agencies in both
fields need to work together, to share information and
intelligence and to coordinate efforts at all levels in
order to effectively respond to the challenges posed in
both areas.

In that regard, I would like to highlight the important
role played by Eurojust, which contributes to improving
judicial cooperation in the fight against serious crime,
including terrorism, and the role of the European Union
Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation (Europol),
which supports the member States in preventing and
combating all forms of serious international and
organized crime and terrorism. Europol prepares a
terrorism situation and trend report every year. In the
most recent report, which has just been published,
Europol noted that there were a number of investigations
in the EU member States that demonstrated that issues
of money-laundering, human trafficking and migrant
smuggling and terrorism financing are interlinked.

In the EU, legislation to prevent and combat money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism is designed
to prevent the financial market from being misused for
those purposes. The legislation deals with both issues
together. It is imperative that we cut off the access of
criminals to capital by fighting money-laundering
effectively in order to successfully disincentivize
terrorism and organized crime. That legislation has
been amended recently with the aim of increasing
transparency about who beneficially owns companies
and trusts so as to prevent money-laundering and
terrorist financing via opaque structures; improve the
work of financial intelligence units with better access to
information through centralized bank account registers;
tackle terrorist financing risks linked to the anonymous
use of virtual currencies and of pre-paid instruments;
and improve cooperation and exchange of information
between anti-money-laundering supervisors and the
European Central Bank, among many other important
goals that we are pursuing at the European level.

The EU Action Plan on Drugs 2017-2020 also
provides a strengthened response to the newly emerging
health and security challenges in the area ofillicit drug
use and trafficking. While maintaining and updating
the core policy areas and cross-cutting themes of our
previous strategy, the new action plan identifies new
priority areas for action, including evidence gathering
on the potential connection between drug trafficking
and the financing of terrorist groups, organized crime,
migrant smuggling or trafficking in human beings. We
are currently working very hard on all those areas.

In conclusion, we consider that it is useful to
increase efforts to better understand further linkages
between terrorism and organized crime. For those
reasons and many others, we welcome this debate
and the opportunity that it provides to share and
highlight experiences.

