Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): As this is the first time
we take the floor in a public meeting this month, I would
like to reiterate our congratulations to the delegation
of Egypt on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We once again express
to you, Sir, our support in ensuring that your leadership
of this organ achieves full success. We would also
like to thank the Chinese delegation for its work last
month. We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his excellent, forthright views. And we thank Mr. Peter
Maurer, President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, as well as Ms. Joanne Liu, President of
Medecins Sans Frontieres, for their briefings today.

We think it was very useful to hear their perspectives

as part of this Council meeting. I should not like to

pass up this opportunity to thank the thousands of
humanitarian workers, doctors and other health staff,

many of them working unrecognized and in a selfless

manner, who daily willingly risk their lives in the noble

task of saving lives and alleviating human suffering in
such cruel conflict situations as the ones we are seeing
today. What they do sets an outstanding example of
humanity and hope for peoples being pummelled by
violence and horror.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomes
the adoption ofresolution 2286 (2016), on the protection
of wounded and sick people and health personnel,
facilities and means of transport in the context of
armed conflicts. We are proud to have been among
its sponsors. We would like to highlight the particular
degree of transparency with which the negotiations
were held, which is an excellent example of the way in
which we should work. We are grateful for the initiative
of Uruguay, Spain, New Zealand, Japan and Egypt in
moving forward the resolution.
We think this resolution is an appropriate political
response to the grave, systematic violations of
international humanitarian law, especially of the 1949
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols of
1977 and 2005, as well as the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, that take place daily in today's
bloody armed conflicts in important regions of the
world, in particular the Middle East and Africa. We
find it unacceptable that health workers and medical
personnel have become targets in war zones. It cannot
be tolerated that hospitals are bombed, that doctors
and the wounded and sick are murdered in hospitals
themselves, or even burned alive, as the Secretary-
General mentioned. It seems that for many, life no
longer has any value.

We are witnessing conflicts that dragging
humankind back to times of fascism and lethal wars
that are not regulated in any way. Venezuela has never
participated in a war or armed conflict since our War
of Independence freed us 200 years ago. We have never
participated or nor will we participate in a confrontation
as part of any coalition of war or destruction, and we
will never invade another country. For that reason,
we clearly understand the indignation and frustration
of the representatives of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and Medecins Sans Frontieres. The
resolution that we have just adopted cannot be allowed
to be simply diplomatic rhetoric.

To begin, I wish to state that members of the
Security Council that participate in coalitions,
wars or invasions are the very ones who must begin
by recognizing their actions in contravention of
international humanitarian. They must prevent their
allies or armies from participating in those types of
crimes. We believe that the first concrete step that must
be taken by the Security Council is to ensure that its
members who participate in such conflicts, coalitions
or wars denounce and punish their allies or armies that
flagrantly flout the laws that we are discussing today.
We are witnessing a descent into barbarism in absolute
violation of international law, and we must ensure that
it is stopped and avoided once and for all, starting here,
the Security Council.

We should be worried that, instead of leading to
concrete action on the ground, the resolution become
just another political rhetorical step serving countries'
specific interests, thus making the resolution merely
an instrument of propaganda favouring one side or
another. We believe that humanitarian and medical
personnel do not deserve that this discussion becomes
an issue of propaganda and confrontation among the
very countries that are confronting one another in
the field of battle. We believe that such violations of
international humanitarian law must be dealt with
transparently and on an equal footing. There are no
deaths or victims of one category or another. They are
all victims of barbarism, wherever it takes place and for
whatever reason or motive.

It is difficult for us to understand how it is possible,
at a time when we are using weapons with such
technological precision capable of killing remotely or
via satellite link-up at whatever distance, that there
could be errors and hospitals could be bombed, despite
the fact that they are public facilities whose locations
are well known. Their location is public knowledge to
all parties to the conflict, and indeed there may even
be warning protocols in place in situations to avoid
the bombing of such facilities. We do not understand
how that can take place, neither do we understand how
they can be cited as errors. We believe that attacking
humanitarian targets and hospital facilities has
become a deliberate act as a way of discouraging the
civilian population - as we saw in the previous Israeli
campaign against the Palestinian people - in full
knowledge of what they were bombing. Yet they still
bombed those facilities. As far as we are concerned,
such violations of international humanitarian law are
war crimes. Ignoring the law is not a excuse for anyone.
We believe that the situations that have occurred must
be investigated impartially, and the perpetrators cannot
serve as judge and jury in that type of situation.

We believe that such violations not only jeopardize
the well-being, security and lives of millions of
civilians and deepen the crisis, but also represent an
extraordinary challenge for medical and humanitarian
personnel. As the representatives of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Medecins Sans
Frontieres said earlier, it is difficult for them to carry
out their humanitarian work. We believe that we must
all assist so as to ensure that that situation is resolved
and that the Security Council takes action.

Finally, I recall that all States Members of the
United Nations are duty-bound to protect their civilians
and abide by the resolutions linked to international
humanitarian law. We also believe that the proposal to
have the Secretary-General report on the implementation
of this resolution on a country-specific basis and brief
the Security Council once a year on its implementation
is very important.

Our country, Venezuela, with the contributions
that it may be able to make from the political, ethical
and moral perspectives, will do everything possible to
ensure and help efforts to stop the horrors of war that we
are seeing. It is most important that we achieve peace
and enable the medical personnel to continue to carry
out their extraordinary humanitarian work in favour of
life and humankind.

