Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to to
use this opportunity to add my voice to others on behalf
of my Government to thank Special Representative
Haysom for the way he has carried out what I think
is an extraordinarily tough job, and one that he has
done with both flair and commitment. On behalf of my
Government, adding what to others have said, I thank
him very much indeed.

As we heard in today's briefing, Afghanistan still
faces an exceptionally tough road ahead. As it works
through myriad challenges, the latest civilian casualty
figures from the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) remind us of the ongoing
human cost. Others have talked about some of the
incidents that have happened recently. But looking
back over time, nearly 59,000 civilians have been killed
or severely injured since UNAMA records began. The
vast majority were at the hands of anti-Government
groups. Fifty-nine thousand is an extraordinary price
to pay. It is a price being paid in Badakhshan and in
Kabul, following attacks just yesterday. I offer my
Government's condolences for all those who lost their
lives or who were injured in those shameful attacks,
including those working at the Canadian Embassy. I
hope the Canadian Ambassador will convey that to his
Government on our behalf.

It is clear that our job is far from done. And it is
clear that the support of the Security Council and the
international community remains vital to Afghanistan.
Our collective action can have a direct positive impact
on the lives of the Afghan people. We need to show
that we are standing by Afghanistan in the months and
years ahead. I see three areas where we can do so.

First, on the matter of security, the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces are admirably holding
their own this year. They are repelling the Taliban's
spring offensive and forcing back Da'esh as it tries to
expand. But their task is formidable, and the longer-term
stability of Afghanistan is dependent on their success.
We therefore cannot just speak about our commitments
to supporting Afghan security, we have to demonstrate
it, too. The NATO Warsaw Summit in July will be
an opportunity for States to show that resolve. The
United Kingdom intends to provide $100 million each
year to the Afghan national forces from 2017 to 2020.
Meanwhile, 450 United Kingdom troops continue to
provide military support and training as part of NATO's
Resolute Support Mission. That includes helping the
Afghan national army officer academy, where 1,300
officer graduates have been trained, with more female
officers than ever.

In that regard, allow me to add my voice to that
of Spain in saying that I am very pleased that we are
including Afghanistan together on our joint work
programme on women and peace and security. I call
on other members of the international community to
show their support, not just through their words inside
the Chamber but through their actions and financial
commitments outside of it.

My second point concerns development. Development
and security are mutually reinforcing. Together we
need not only to build an Afghanistan that is stable
and resilient, but also self-reliant and prosperous.
Continued development assistance will be critical to
the future Afghanistan. It is therefore equally critical
that we do not see a drop-off in assistance this year,
particularly given the fragility of the Afghan economy.
We look forward to the international community going
to Brussels this year ready to make long-term financial
commitment to Afghanistan. We also look forward to
the Government of Afghanistan setting out the progress
it has delivered so far and its priorities for the coming
years, including on economic reform, job creation and
tackling corruption.

My third and last point is that, if we want security
and development to take hold in Afghanistan, then there
needs to be political stability. That is why the United
Kingdom supports the National Unity Government as it
tackles Afghanistan's challenges head-on. We strongly
believe that the best chance for reaching a negotiated
peace starts with the stability of the National Unity
Government, the effectiveness of the national forces
and the support of Afghanistan's neighbours. It is
therefore especially important that the Governments
of Afghanistan and Pakistan work towards a stronger
relationship. That is not only to stop the escalation of
incidents like the one last week at the Torkham border
crossing, but also to tackle the larger common threat of
violent extremism. It is my firm View that the long-term
interests of both Afghanistan and Pakistan are aligned.
Their success is dependent, in part, on how much both
countries recognize that.

Let me conclude with this final thought: Afghanistan
still faces grave security, development and political
challenges. Through the summits in Brussels and
Warsaw and through the Council, we have a real chance
to show the National Unity Government and the people
of Afghanistan that they do not face those challenges
alone. We need to keep bolstering the military, keep
supporting the economy and keep building international
and regional support. In doing that, we can help ensure
that 2016 really does turn - to use the words of the
Ambassador of Afghanistan - from the year of
survival to the year of consolidation.

