The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.

Father Charters (Holy See): The Holy See wishes
to thank the presidency of Peru for convening today's
open debate to discuss the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.

Last month, in his briefing to the Security Council,
Mr. Mladenov noted a dangerous escalation of violence
in Gaza, as well as continued violence in the West Bank
(see S/PV.8557). The lack ofunity on both sides, as well
as internal divisions, are abetting an environment of
distrust. Fuelled by dangerous rhetoric and extremist
ideology, that lack of trust can sadly and rapidly
devolve into violent acts that put the lives of innocent
Palestinians and Israelis alike at risk and negatively
impact the tense wider region. Such a situation cannot
permit this open debate to remain merely a rehearsal
of well-known facts and commentary on troubling
setbacks and impediments to reaching the much-sought
two-State solution within internationally recognized
borders. It must lead to action.

Through generous donations, mainly by means
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the international
community continues to ensure that education, health
care and other basic services can be provided for
Palestine refugees, lest the situation on the ground
become untenable. There is already high unemployment
and limited prospects for the younger generations,
alongside an ever-increasing demand for food and water.

Yet, while humanitarian and economic support
remain vital for creating the environment for
negotiations, they cannot replace negotiations. Political
will and constructive dialogue are required to establish
the conditions for lasting peace and a comprehensive
and sustainable solution. An important contribution that
Member States can make at this time is to encourage
parties to return to the negotiating table and offer
them the space and resources to commit to dialogue as
protagonists of their own peaceful future, side by side.

In our consideration of the Middle East, we cannot
overlook the still unstable areas in Syria, where the risk
ofa worse humanitarian crisis remains high. We cannot
be deaf to the cries of those lacking food, medical
care and schooling, or to those of orphans, widows
and the wounded. Yesterday, in his letter to President
Bashar Al-Assad, Pope Francis expressed his profound
preoccupation over the humanitarian situation in Syria
and, in particular, the dramatic conditions faced by
the civilian population in Idlib. He renewed his call
for their protection and for respect for international
humanitarian law.

The worsening humanitarian situation in Yemen
is also a cause for grave concern, in particular when
those most in need are deprived of food and medical
attention. The Council's unanimous adoption on
15 July of resolution 2481 (2019) to renew the mandate
of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement was a needed step to strengthen the
implementation of the ceasefire and to facilitate access
to provisions and essential supplies. There is a need
for coherence, however. How can we make eloquent
appeals for peace in the Middle East and even commit to
humanitarian action while at the same time continuing
to permit the sale of arms in the region?

Iraq, after the unspeakable crimes that the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant inflicted upon its
population, especially members of religious and ethnic
minorities, offers some hope as it moves forward along
the way of reconciliation and reconstruction through
the peaceful and shared pursuit of the common good
on the part of all elements of society. In addition, it is
essential that the international community continue to
encourage and seek out every possible opportunity for
negotiations and peaceful solutions to current crises in
the Gulf region.

This is a critical moment in which all countries ofthe
region must not squander peaceful advances by falling
back into hostilities sparked by the simmering conflicts
of regional Powers. Rather it is essential to promote even
more dialogue for a culture of tolerance, of acceptance
of others and of living together peacefully; in this way,
they can contribute significantly to reducing many
economic, social, political and environmental problems
that weigh so heavily on a large part of humankind.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the League of Arab States.


