Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to present our thanks to your
predecessor, Her Excellency Mrs. Joy ngu,
Permanent Representative of Nigeria, for her
distinguished efforts during her presidency in the
month of July. Our thanks also go to Mr. Ad Melkert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, and his team in Baghdad and in New York for
their vigorous efforts in assisting the Iraqi Government
and the Iraqi people.

The past year has witnessed a substantial drop in
violence and a manifest improvement of the security
situation in Iraq, despite some terrorist acts targeting
innocent civilians. With the implementation of a
bilateral agreement on the withdrawal of United States
combat troops from Iraq, Iraqi security forces, despite
some challenges they face, are assuming full
responsibility for securing the country and have
undeniably shown their ability to manage the security
of Iraq by carrying out powerful strikes against
terrorists and through law enforcement, regardless of
partisan, ethnic or sectarian considerations.

This year has also witnessed the successful
holding of legislative elections, which took place on
7 March and elicited considerable Arab, regional and
international attention. Monitors from the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the League
of Arab States, in addition to international observers
and civil society organizations, have all expressed their
confidence in the transparent and fair elections held in
Iraq.

The announcement of the election results was
delayed by the constitutionally mandated ratification
procedure, which entailed a recount of votes in
accordance with electoral law and regulations. We were
able to get beyond this stage because we referred the
Constitution and a decision of the Independent
Electoral Commission.

All of the major political parties are currently
making extensive contacts in order to hold a fruitful
session of the newly elected Council of
Representatives, which will elect a new Speaker of the
Council and the President and will then ask the new
Prime Minister to form a Government based on the
provisions of the Iraqi Constitution. We hope, and all
parties have agreed, that this new Government will be
formed without delay, as any delay will negatively
affect the security situation.

The improvement of the security situation in Iraq
has encouraged many Arab and foreign countries to
reopen their diplomatic missions and has significantly
contributed to the development of Iraq's friendly
relations at the regional and international levels, in
addition to the appointment of 53 Iraqi ambassadors to
various countries of the world that have expressed their
support for this development. Moreover, the
chairmanship of Iraq at the Arab Summit next year will
highlight Iraq's endeavours to become an effective and
responsible member of the Arab world and the
international community. Iraq will continue to
strengthen its friendship ties and cooperation with its
neighbours in order to regain its positive position
among them, living peacefully with its people and its
neighbours and reinforcing stability and security in the
region.

In the development field, on 4 July the Iraqi
Government launched a five-year National
Development Plan 2010-2014, which includes
approximately 2,700 strategic projects in various
sectors valued at $186 billion, in order to develop the
Iraqi economy and improve the quality of services
provided to Iraqis. The implementation of this plan will
provide 4 million jobs in order to address the problem
of unemployment in Iraq.

The most important issue that Iraq faces at this
stage remains freeing itself from the burden of
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. Pursuant to
the report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2009/385, it became clear to us that we
would have to follow two courses of action. The first
deals with issues concerning the situation in Iraq. The
second deals with issues concerning the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait.

Because of the importance and sensitivity of the
latter, there has been a common understanding among
all relevant parties, including our brothers in Kuwait,
that this path would be considered after the formation
of the new Iraqi Government. We earnestly hope that
movement on this path will be in consultation and
coordination with our Kuwaiti brothers in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. In this
regard, I wish to stress once again that Iraq is
committed to the implementation of all Security
Council resolutions without exception.

With regard to the first course of action, there are
three key issues: the remaining issues of disarmament,
particularly those relating to resolutions 687 (1991)
and 707 (1991), the remaining contracts of the oil-for-
food programme, and the issue of the protection of
Iraqi funds. I will talk about what we have done in this
process with transparency and high credibility.

With regard to the remaining issues of
disarmament, after the Security Council adopted
resolution 1762 (2007) in order to terminate the
mandates of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) under the
relevant resolutions, we had to pursue the remaining
issues in this area based on the aforementioned report
of the Secretary-General. On this basis, on 18 January
2010, we sent a letter to the President of the Security
Council and the Director General of IAEA, which
explained all of the steps we have taken, as well as the
steps we plan to take in this area.

We came to the conclusion that Iraq had fulfilled
its obligations and requested the Security Council to
consider the immediate lifting of all restrictions
imposed on Iraq under the Security Council resolutions
on disarmament and weapons of mass destruction and
ballistic missiles, including resolutions 687 (1991) and
707 (1991).

Based on those letters, the Security Council
issued a presidential statement on 26 February 2010
(S/PRST/2010/5) welcoming the letter from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq and the steps
carried out by Iraq and requesting IAEA to indicate its
position regarding Iraq's cooperation with the Agency.
On 11 March 2010, the Director General of IAEA
informed the Secretary-General that Iraq has excellent
cooperation with IAEA (see S/2010/150). We expected
a positive response from the Security Council in the
form of a resolution which would lift the remaining
restrictions on Iraq in the field of disarmament so that
Iraq would be able to benefit from scientific progress
and technology. However, this did not happen, possibly
because of the concern of the international community
and the Security Council, particularly the five
permanent members, at that time regarding
preparations for the 2010 Review Conference of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and the importance of the Conference yielding positive
results to end the stalemate of the past 10 years, as well
as other international concerns which were given
priority.

In addition to what I have just discussed, Iraq has
recently taken important steps in the area of
disarmament and non-proliferation. In this regard, I
would like to refer to the letter of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq to the Secretary-General and the
President of the Security Council dated 25 July 2010
(see S/2010/403). We have decided to voluntarily
adhere to the Additional Protocol to the
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement between Iraq
and IAEA. On 16 July 2010, Iraq provided notification
to IAEA, on the basis of article 17 of the Additional
Protocol, in response to IAEA's initial declaration.

Furthermore, we have set up a national committee of
experts, with the participation of the relevant Iraqi
authorities, for the liquidation of chemical residues of
the former chemical weapons programme and, on
28 June 2010, Iraq submitted a briefing to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) on this matter, and it received full approval
from that organization. We will proceed without delay
to liquidate those residues with the assistance of our
friends and the international community. We are also
privileged to have begun our membership of the
Executive Council of OPCW for the period 2010 to
2012.

The Iraqi Government also decided, on 13 July
2010, to join The Hague Code of Conduct against
Ballistic Missile Proliferation, and the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs is following the legal and
administrative procedures for joining. Moreover, the
Iraqi Government adopted a strict mechanism to
control dual-use items as part of its transparency- and
confidence-building measures with international bodies
on disarmament, all of which have been reported to
IAEA, OPCW and other disarmament bodies.

After all of these steps taken by Iraq, we are
looking forward to the Security Council's
consideration of this issue and its adoption of an
appropriate resolution to end all remaining restrictions
on Iraq in the field of disarmament.

As for the remaining contracts of the oil-for-food
programme, the Iraqi Central Bank received a letter
from the United Nations, dated 30 April 2010, which
stated that 65 disputed contracts remain. Consistent
with the Iraqi Government's desire to finish the
remainder of the oil-for-food programme as soon as
possible, a ministerial committee headed by the Deputy
Prime Minister for Economic Affairs was formed to
follow up and audit controversial contracts with the
relevant Iraqi ministries. The committee recommended,
in principle, to pay the sums due for 26 contracts
partially or entirely. As for the remaining 39 contracts,
the committee decided to settle and end this
programme completely before Iraq presents its third
quarterly report, based on paragraph 5 of Security
Council resolution 1905 (2009).

With regard to the protection of Iraq's funds and
the implementation of the successor arrangement for
the Development Fund for Iraq and the International
Advisory and Monitoring Board in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1905 (2009), Iraq is doing
everything possible to provide the requirements for the
protection of Iraqi funds, whether by ending the
financial claims of individuals and companies that
were inherited from the former Iraqi regime, or through
the settlement of its sovereign debts, or through contact
with banks and international institutions to seek
possibilities for adequate protection. Iraq has covered
all of those areas, as described in Iraq's second
quarterly report to the Security Council, issued in
document S/2010/365* of8 July 2010.

However, the assessment reached by the Iraqi
Government so far confirms that the protection of
banks and financial institutions is not up to the level of
protection that would be provided by a resolution of
the Security Council under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter. Thus, the Government of Iraq will
continue its efforts to take the appropriate decisions
after further contacts with the relevant authorities and
will determine its position in this regard at the time of
the forthcoming third quarterly report.

Removing the provisions of Chapter VII which
imposed on Iraq financial and other burdens that affect
its sovereignty has almost become part of our bitter
past, and we are serious in our determination to dispose
of them with the Security Council's help. What Iraq
has done over the years that followed the fall of the
former regime in the area of respect for and
commitment to the resolutions of international
10-47406
legitimacy should be responded to by the Security
Council with appreciation and consideration. We
request that the Council take the necessary measures to
liberate Iraq from all restrictions imposed on it by
Security Council resolutions, in order to enable Iraq to
exercise its natural role as an effective member of the
international community, to perform its duties and to
enjoy its rights, as was the case before the adoption of
Security Council resolution 661 (1990).

The Government of Iraq, while it highly
appreciates the role of UNAMI in providing advice and
support, looks forward to that role becoming more
effective and influential through the return of the
specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations to work in Iraq, making an actual direct
contribution to the process of building and
reconstruction. The constitutionally elected Iraqi
Government, while reiterating its desire to extend the
UNAMI mandate, hopes that this mandate will be to
provide the needed support and assistance through a
specific mechanism and with the prior approval of the
Iraqi Government.

