Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would first like to thank
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan,
His Excellency Mr. Jawed Ludin, for his participation
today in the Council debate on Afghanistan and
particularly for his statement. I would also like to
thank Mr. Ladsous, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his comprehensive
briefing. My appreciation also goes to Mr. De Mistura
for his informative briefing, and I would like to express
my sincere gratitude for his dedicated service during
his term as the Secretary-General's Special
Representative. Japan has greatly appreciated all his
efforts and work over almost two years. And I also
congratulate Mr. Jan Kubis on his appointment as the
new Special Representative. We are confident in his
ability to lead the Mission and wish him all the best.

Japan greatly appreciates the efforts of the
Afghan and German Governments in convening the
International Afghanistan Conference in Bonn, and
welcomes the renewed mutual commitments made
between Afghanistan and the international community
to achieving a stable, democratic and prosperous future
for Afghanistan. This year marks the tenth anniversary
since the new Afghanistan took its first step in nation-
building in 2001. Throughout the decade, that nation-
building, led by Afghanistan with the support of the
international community, has made considerable
progress. At the same time, numerous challenges still
remain to be tackled, requiring close cooperation
between Afghanistan and the international community.

First, it is vital to ensure stability and permanent
progress in the security transition, through the political
process. We welcomed the start of the transition
process in July, and the approval of the transition's
second phase in November. An Afghan-led national

reconciliation, with the support of the international
community, is indispensable to furthering the transition
process. It is also important to accelerate reintegration
so that the progress and results achieved in this area
can be consolidated. Japan is pleased that nearly 3,000
reintegrees have joined the Afghanistan Peace and
Reintegration Programme. We will continue to actively
assist Afghan-led efforts with the Programme.

The second issue is achieving sustainable growth
for Afghanistan. That goal can be attained only through
a strong partnership between Afghanistan and the
international community throughout the Transformation
Decade. The international community should cooperate
with the Afghan Government in strengthening the
sustainability and self-reliance of its economic and
fiscal management, in order to alleviate the expected
macro-economic impact of the transition.

The third issue is regional cooperation. A stable
and cooperative relationship between Afghanistan and
other countries in the region is indispensable to
achieving enduring stability for Afghanistan. We
therefore welcome the outcome of the Istanbul
Conference and stress the importance of promoting
regional economic cooperation in the development of
the whole region, by strengthening Afghanistan's links
to the regional and global economies.

We must further consolidate the transition process
and put the greatest possible effort into outlining a
clear picture for the Transformation Decade. The areas
of governance, security, the peace process, economic
and social development, and regional cooperation are
interlinked and should be addressed in a well-
coordinated manner. As the recent report of the
Secretary-General states (S/201l/772*), a balanced
approach to security and non-security considerations is
needed in order to promote the long-term stability of
Afghanistan up to and beyond 2014.

In that context, as announced at the Bonn
Conference, Japan intends to host a ministerial
conference in Tokyo next July as a follow-up to Bonn.
In addition to the coordination of international
economic assistance through the transition period, the
conference will address Afghanistan's strategy for
sustainable development, including regional economic
cooperation. We expect to have hold discussions aimed
at identifying the Afghan Government's most
immediate priorities in the quest for fiscal
sustainability and development needs. We hope to
cooperate closely with Afghanistan, the international
community and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in preparing for the
conference.

Japan looks forward to a comprehensive review
of UNAMA's mandate and of United Nations support
in Afghanistan. That will be a very important task for
the United Nations in the context of steering the future
course of Afghanistan. UNAMA continues to play an
important role, and Japan will continue to do its utmost
to contribute to its activities.

In conclusion, we would like to once again
express our sincere appreciation for the dedication of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General de
Mistura, and to reiterate our commitment to supporting
UNAMA's efforts under Mr. Kubis and all the men and
women of UNAMA who have demonstrated their deep
commitment to this difficult mission.

