Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): South Africa joins
other Member States in expressing our appreciation
to the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom for
convening this open debate focused on mediation and
the peaceful resolution of conflicts. We thank the
Secretary-General and the Archbishop of Canterbury,
in his capacity as a member of the Secretary-General's
High-level Advisory Board on Mediation, for their
contributions to this debate.

History has taught us that the use of military
force is far too costly as a means of achieving one's
political objectives. The destruction of infrastructure,
loss of life and environmental impact of Violent armed
conflicts are never worth the price of attaining one's
ends. Furthermore, the Security Council's ability to
make peace in conflicts while they are under way is
also a costly exercise.
Reflecting on the work of the Security Council, the
Council has arguably been most effective in dealing
with conflicts through the deployment of peacekeepers
and the imposition of measures under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations. That may at times be
tantamount to putting a bandage on a festering wound.
What we ought to be doing is to prevent the wound from
occurring in the first place and, ifit does, to ensure that
the necessary measures are in place to deal with it.

It is for that reason that we believe that our efforts
should be directed towards conflict prevention and
sustaining peace. That requires the Security Council to
support local and regional efforts in that regard. It also,
importantly, requires the Council to strengthen its own
instruments for the pacific settlement of disputes, in
accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter. The Charter,
for good reason, precedes the powers conferred to the
Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter.
Before considering the use of force in Chapter VII,
we must consider a peaceful political solution to the
conflict, as envisaged in Chapter VI. Article 33 of that
Chapter of the Charter specifically states that parties
to a dispute shall first of all seek a solution through
political means, including negotiation and mediation.
The settlement of disputes through those means has the
added advantage of assisting parties to the conflict to
recognize and address its root causes and embark on a
process of negotiation, thereby fostering a spirit of trust
and cooperation.

In its consideration of its mandate in the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Council has at its disposal a wide range of tools and
resources, which should be utilized to address conflict
situations to ensure that they do not occur and, if they
do, that they are dealt with effectively.

The promotion of the peaceful resolution of
conflict is a cornerstone of South Africa's own foreign
policy. That is born out of our historical experience
in successfully and peacefully transitioning to a
constitutional democracy based on respect for the
human rights of all persons, following decades of
oppression and discriminatory governance under the
apartheid regime.

As a strong proponent of the peaceful resolution
of conflict, including through mediation, South Africa
fully agrees with the Secretary-General's call for a
surge in diplomacy for peace, in which he calls upon
the Security Council to make greater use of Chapter
VI of the United Nations Charter. We therefore support
the promotion of the peaceful resolution to conflict
through mediation, peacemaking, peacebuilding and
reconstruction efforts. United Nations peacekeeping
should not be a means to an end, but instead complement
those essential tools of peacemaking. That will be part
of our priorities during our membership of the Council
as an elected member beginning in 2019.

As the Security Council deliberates on this important
topic, I wish to emphasize the vital role that women
play in mediation, peacemaking, peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction and development efforts.
In particular, we believe that the Security Council's
continued support for the development of female
mediators, and specifically women from countries and
regions affected by conflict, is imperative. Without
the adequate representation of women in those efforts,
the credibility of those processes is undermined. We
are confident that greater representation of women in
mediation efforts will correspond to a greater chance
of success.

South Africa recently hosted the fourth annual
Gertrude Shope Annual Dialogue Forum on Conflict
Resolution and Peacemaking, which took place under
the theme "Celebrating a legacy of liberation by the
pan-African women: taking forward the struggle for
gender equality". That theme is particularly apt as 2018
commemorates the centenary of the birth of Albertina
Sisulu - a guiding light and champion of human rights
and democracy in South Africa. That initiative serves
as a valuable platform for women to discuss issues
relating to African peacebuilding and development and
to reflect on their personal experiences in that regard.

Finally, my delegation emphasizes that the
Security Council should continue to support regional
mechanisms, including the African Union Peace and
Security Council, and prioritize consultations with
African mediators in specific conflict areas. Those
individuals should be called upon, where possible, to
briefthe Security Council to deepen its understanding of
those particular conflict situations under consideration,
as well as the process of mediation and its specific
nuances and challenges in different contexts.

