Mr. Wetland (Norway): It is my pleasure to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Sweden and Norway. Allow me
initially to express our profound gratitude to
Ambassador Takasu of Japan for his continued
leadership and the lucid remarks that he made at the
launch of our discussions here today.

Let me also say how pleased we are to see the
new Assistant Secretary-General of the Peacebuilding
Support Office, Ms. Jane Holl Lute, here among us. We
have absolutely no doubt about the professional
experience that she brings to this format, to this room,
and we will be working with her to make the
Peacebuilding Support Office an even more successful
part of United Nations activities. Best of luck to her
from all of us.

With the establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission we have started to fill the previous gap in
our institutional ability to help countries in the
transition from war to lasting peace. While we have
seen considerable progress during the lifespan of the
Commission - I believe it was the Ambassador of
Indonesia who used the term "infancy" here today, that
the Peacebuilding Commission is in its infancy - we
believe that some factors need increased emphasis. I
will address three of them here today.

First, we still have a way to go to ensure effective
coordination within the United Nations and with other
partners. One main purpose of the Peacebuilding
Commission is to bring together all relevant actors to
marshal resources and to propose integrated strategies
for post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery.

After two years of gaining experience, we must
stay focused on enhancing cooperation with the
international financial institutions, especially the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund, as well as
with other, regional organizations. The Peacebuilding
Commission should be given a more central role in
ensuring that the international community is a more
reliable partner to Governments in post-conflict
situations. The role of neighbouring countries is also
essential. In the case of Burundi, we wish to commend
in particular the Regional Peace Initiative for Burundi
and the South African Facilitation for their
indispensable role in support of a durable peace in
Burundi.

Secondly, we must recognize that peacebuilding
is part of our core agenda, and not a subsequent phase
or a subsidiary activity to peacekeeping operations.
Peacebuilding should be a central component for the
beginning of the transition from war to lasting peace,
and that must be recognized at all levels. It will require
constant political attention, on the part of the Security
Council and, indeed, the Secretary-General.

We therefore emphasize the practice of inviting
Peacebuilding Commission Chairs to brief the Council
on a regular basis, as well as opportunities for briefings
by the Assistant Secretary-General of the Peacebuilding
Support Office to the Security Council. Peacebuilding
means addressing the most critical areas of nation-
building, and that may entail slow progress and
setbacks at times. But we must never waiver in that
undertaking. It is all about instilling hope and showing
the promise of a new beginning.

Thirdly, peacebuilding will not happen unless
there is genuine national ownership. That is why
continued resource mobilization and early capacity-
building is key. We must never forget that the
populations of post-conflict countries are normally
found among the bottom billion. The fight against
poverty remains one of the essential reasons why
peacebuilding is crucial. It is crucial, therefore, that
commitments are implemented, and that applies also to
the national institutions and authorities themselves. But
peacebuilding is a partnership, and the international
community must shoulder its responsibility.

It is crucial that the Peacebuilding Commission
continues the search for an appropriate working format.
For that reason, the Peacebuilding Support Office
should strengthen its focus on strategic planning and
should be entrusted with utilizing the capacities of the
United Nations as a whole. The success of the
Peacebuilding Commission rests on the extent to which
it can target sectors that fall outside the coverage of
other funding institutions and contribute to early and
tangible results on the ground.

Peacebuilding can become a success story for the
United Nations. But even more importantly, it could be
the path to political stability and development and a
life in dignity for millions living in post-conflict
countries. As such, it is a real opportunity, but also a
challenge, and as such, it must continue to be a priority
concern for the Security Council.

