Mr. Yaiiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Like the speakers who have spoken before me, I too
would like to express our gratitude for the detailed
report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/669), as well
as for the full briefing we have heard from Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi regarding the work of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). We also wish to commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, both for assuming his new functions and for
the work at the head of the Mission.

As the representative of the Netherlands will be
making a statement on behalf of the European Union,
to which we will of course associate ourselves, I shall
confine myself to making a few brief comments.

We welcome the progress made by Timor-Leste
since we last met to consider this item, last May, and
we congratulate the people and leaders of Timor-Leste
for that progress. The Government has taken
responsibility for both the country's domestic and
external security in accordance with the deadline set. It
has also begun preparations for the holding of the first
elections since independence. In addition, Timor-Leste
has enacted key legislation for State institutions. Public
administration is being developed, and efforts are
ongoing to promote a culture of political dialogue and
dispute settlement, as can be seen from the significant
work done by the Commission on Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation.

However, as noted by the report of the Secretary-
General, much remains to be done in the months
remaining before the conclusion of UNMISET's
mandate. We are particularly concerned about the lack
of training for mid-level civil servants and the major
shortcomings still present in the judicial area. In that
regard, we fully agree with the Secretary-General's
observations in his report regarding trials for serious
crimes committed in 1999. For its part, Spain will
continue to lend its support to bring an end to impunity
for such acts.

It is clear that the international community must
not waver in providing security for Timor-Leste, a
country whose institutions are still fragile and whose
economic and social development pose a real challenge
in the medium and long term. There must therefore be
careful preparation through the United Nations system
for the transition from UNMISET and other
coordination and cooperation mechanisms.

Timor-Leste's relations with its neighbours are of

fundamental importance to the full development of that
country. We are pleased that the Government of Timor-
Leste has been conducting those relations in a
constructive spirit. We hope that bilateral negotiations
with Australia aimed at the demarcation of the
maritime border between the two States, as well as
those regarding the exploration and exploitation of
hydrocarbons in the area, will reach a successful
conclusion as soon as possible. Likewise, the
demarcation of the terrestrial boundary between
Indonesia and Timor-Leste will continue to be a key
factor for stability. The document signed on 30 June by
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the two States is
without a doubt a very important step forward that
should be welcomed by the international community.
That document will no doubt help to promote stable
relations and prosperity for the affected populations
along the borders.
Spain also wishes to welcome the recent
announcement by the Government of the Republic of
Indonesia that a bill is to be introduced seeking to
establish a commission on truth and reconciliation.
Such a body could indeed help heal the wounds of the
past. We therefore trust that the good level of relations
and cooperation between Indonesia and Timor-Leste
will continue to take root in order to guarantee peace
and security for both peoples.

