Ms. Juul: I am honoured to participate, in my
capacity as President of the Economic and Social
Council, in this open debate on the question concerning
Haiti, a clear example of the complementary work of the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.

The situation of Haiti has been on the agenda of
the Economic and Social Council since 1999, primarily
through the work of its Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Haiti, which was set up in response to a Security
Council request to the Economic and Social Council,
under Article 65 of the Charter of the United Nations,
to provide recommendations on the country's long-
term development. The work has included interactions
between the Security Council and the Chair of the
Ad Hoc Advisory Group, Ambassador Marc-Andre
Blanchard of Canada. The Chair informally briefed
the members of the Council on the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group's findings and recommendations following a visit
to Washington, DC, and Haiti earlier this year. In our
view such briefings are a useful information-sharing
practice that should continue, and I would like to take
this opportunity to thank Ambassador Blanchard for
his outstanding work in that regard.

However, the Ad Hoc Advisory Group's most
recent report, dated 20 June (E/2019/80), should sound
the alarm for the international community. It highlights
the fact that Haiti remains under significant economic
and social stress, that it has persistent humanitarian
needs and that those factors, traditionally considered to
be purely development issues, are the root cause of the
current political instability and deteriorating security
situation. The figures speak for themselves: 60 per cent
of the country's population lives below the poverty
line; more than 40 per cent lacks access to health and
nutrition services; 2.6 million people are currently food
insecure and in need ofhumanitarian assistance - twice
as many as in 2018; 36 per cent of young people are
unemployed; and 85 per cent of college graduates leave
Haiti in search of better opportunities elsewhere.

The statistics regarding Haiti's youth are of
particular concern. Stability is at risk if economic
policies and lack of educational opportunities leave
young people without jobs. Unemployment makes
young people feel disenfranchised and uncertain
of their future, which, as we know, are conditions
that can easily lead to youth falling prey to criminal
organizations and violent gangs.

Haiti is also one of the countries most vulnerable to
climate change. Its vulnerability to natural disasters adds
significant complexity to the fragility of its economic
and social situation. As we speak in this Chamber
today, Haiti is facing both physical and socioeconomic
factors that have converged to threaten its stability. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development recognizes
that there can be no sustainable development without
peace and no peace without sustainable development.
To improve the lives of the people of Haiti and ensure
peace, we need to undertake major efforts to reduce
poverty and improve access to education, health care
and decent work, while also implementing climate
adaptation and mitigation strategies.
Let me turn to the question of the transition of
the United Nations presence in Haiti. We welcome the
decision of the Security Council for the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti to ensure collaboration
among all United Nations political, development,
humanitarian and financial entities, as well as other
local and international partners operating in Haiti. Now
more than ever, partnership among all stakeholders is
needed to effectively respond to the country's problems.
The transition of the United Nations presence to a more
development-oriented configuration should not lead
to less engagement by the international community.
It should lead to more. We should learn from previous
transition experiences and equip the United Nations
country team with adequate resources and capacity to
do its job. With the aim of turning Haiti into a model for
future United Nations-supported transitions in complex
settings, we should redouble ourjoint efforts to support
the people of Haiti and to put in place the conditions for
long-term sustainable development and stability.

The need for continued collaboration between the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council
is evident. We must work towards breaking down the
traditional silos between the peace and development
pillars of the United Nations. Only then can our
collective efforts be more coherent and effective and
address the interconnected challenges facing Haiti. We
owe that to its people.

