Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): The Security
Council is mandated by the United Nations Charter
with the primary responsibility for maintenance of
international peace and security, including by coercive
action. What it does and the manner in which it goes
about doing its work are, however, of interest to the
entire international community. The Council's work as
well as its working methods thus become of
importance for us all.

I would like to place on record, Mr. President, my
delegation's deep appreciation that you and your
delegation have organized this open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council, despite a
clear lack of enthusiasm on the part of some members
of the Council, who openly state that the issue of the
Council's working methods is the exclusive preserve of
its permanent members. I also want to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation for the efforts
of our colleague from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ivan
Barbalic', for chairing the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

I also want to align myself with the statement that
is to be made by my colleague from Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Security Council's composition - rooted in
the situation obtaining in 1945 - and its working
methods are both divorced from the contemporary
reality of international relations. Its non-transparent
rules of procedures remain "provisional", even after
the Council's existence for six and a half decades. The

Council's reluctance to consult with those affected by
its decisions, its refusal to harness the capabilities of
the wider United Nations membership and its all too
evident eagerness to apply methods of coercion under
Chapter VII, to the neglect of provisions under
Chapters VI and VIII, are not only anachronistic, but,
as experience has shown on a day-to-day basis, also
counter-productive. They also detract from the
Council's effectiveness and efficiency in the
implementation of its mandate to ensure international
peace and security. Despite all of that, the Council is
ever more eager to encroach on the Charter-mandated
role of other United Nations organs.

The time has come, therefore, for the Council to
seriously consider why many of its decisions are not
having their intended effect; why a large number of
Member States are not able or willing to respond to its
numerous requests for national reports on
implementation of its coercive decisions; why it has to
resort so often to coercive measures under Chapter VII;
why it does not command enough trust and respect
from the international community - or even
confidence in itself - to mandate measures under
Chapter VI; why it fails to take recourse to cooperation
with regional organizations under Chapter VIII to solve
regional problems; and, most important of all, how the
Council can address its failures and increase its
effectiveness and efficiency.

Let me share an Indian perspective on how the
Security Council could better its performance. First,
the permanent members of the Security Council must
recognize, not only individually but also collectively,
that the Council must be reformed to make it reflect the
contemporary realities of the international system.
Secondly, the international community as a whole must
be cognizant that enlarging the Security Council to
reflect contemporary geopolitical realities would
improve its representative character. It would also
increase the representation of developing countries -
which comprise the vast majority of the United Nations
membership - who are ready, capable and willing to
shoulder responsibility and contribute through all
required means to the maintenance of international
peace and security. Thirdly, there is need for real
improvement in the Council's working methods to
enhance its legitimacy, effectiveness and efficiency.
Cosmetic changes will not help. Real improvements
demand change in both process and approach, which
requires reform of the composition of the Council.
Insofar as the working methods of the Security
Council are concerned, the first and foremost necessity
is to make them transparent. Access to documentation
and information is an issue of particular concern. The
tendency of the Security Council to hold closed
meetings that have no records should also be curbed.

We then have the issue of "pen holders". Quite
apart from the fact that it takes quite a while to
understand what the concept of a pen holder is and
which member is holding which pen for which issue, it
is difficult to understand why pen holding should
basically be a monopoly of permanent members, with
concentration in even fewer fingers.

The quality of briefings that we receive often
gives rise to questions of their being skewed and not
really neutral, objective and based on observed facts. I
also find it strange that reporting of the Council's
proceedings tends to be judgmental. For example, on
both occasions during our term on the Council when
vetoes were exercised, the Department of Public
Information reports used the expression "failed to
adopt" to describe what transpired.

Based on our experience during the past 11
months, I would like to suggest some specific points
for consideration. First, the Council should amend its
procedures so that items do not remain on its agenda
permanently. There are matters that have been
discussed for decades. In such cases, further attention
should require that some valid reasons be proffered by
those seeking retention of those items on the agenda.
Second, the Council's consideration of issues should be
rationalized, so that issues do not come for
consideration so often and routinely as to bog down the
limited time that the Council has at its disposal.

Third, Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter must be
fully implemented, by consulting with non-Security
Council members on a regular basis, especially
Members with a special interest in the substantive
matter under consideration by the Council. Fourth,
non-members must be given systematic access to
subordinate organs of the Security Council, including
the right to participate. Fifth, the participation of troop-
and police-contributing countries in decision-making
about peacekeeping operations must extend to the
establishment, conduct, review and termination of
peacekeeping operations, including the extension and
change of mandates and specific operational issues.

Sixth, countries having a specific interest in a
particular agenda item must be consulted before an
outcome document on that item is adopted. Seventh,
the Council should concentrate its time and efforts on
dealing with issues concerning its primary
responsibility for international peace and security as
mandated by the Charter, rather than encroaching on
the mandate of the General Assembly. Eighth, before
mandating measures under Chapter VII of the Charter,
the Council should first make serious efforts at pacific
settlement of disputes through measures under Chapter
VI. In that connection, the Council must also improve
its cooperation with regional organizations, particularly
with the African Union, since a large volume of the
Council's work concerns the African continent. Such
cooperation must be serious and include providing
assistance to the African Union in its capacity-building
efforts as per their requirement and not just when it is
convenient or fashionable.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the considered
View of my delegation that genuine reform in the
working methods of the Council really requires a
comprehensive reform in the membership of the
Council, with expansion in both permanent and
non-permanent categories and improvement in its
working procedures. This is essential for both the
credibility and the continued confidence of the
international community in this institution.

