Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic ofVenezuela
has the honour to speak on behalf of the 120 States
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Just three days ago, the Movement's Ministerial
Committee on Palestine met in Caracas to review the
most recent developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Regrettably, the
situation remains critical and is clearly unsustainable.
At that meeting, we unanimously adopted a political
declaration in which we renewed our permanent
solidarity with the Palestinian people, their inalienable
rights and their just cause.

The States members of the Movement reiterate
that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with the Israeli
occupation at its centre, remains a serious threat to
international peace and security and requires urgent
attention and action, in accordance with international
law, the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
the Charter of the United Nations itself and available
multilateral diplomacy instruments.

The Security Council has a clear responsibility
to ensure the maintenance of international peace and
security. This organ must uphold its obligations under
the Charter and act accordingly to implement its own
resolutions, which are not only the basis for a peaceful,
just and lasting solution to the conflict, but also legally
binding on all States Members of the United Nations.
That is why we are deeply concerned by the fact that the
Security Council has been unable, for too long now, to
fulfil its mandate on such an important issue, owing to
the use of the veto by one ofits permanent members. We
call on the Security Council to overcome its paralysis
with regard to the Palestinian question and to fulfil its
responsibilities under the Charter.

The Movement continues to believe that resolution
2334 (2016) is the only Viable path to peace as it
establishes the essential requirements and parameters
for achieving a just settlement on the basis of the
two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders and
respecting the terms of reference historically endorsed
by the international community, in accordance with
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map,
with a view to ensuring that the Palestinian people
can realize their inalienable rights, including the right
to self-determination and independence in their State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We
therefore call for full respect for resolution 2334 (2016)
and the effective implementation of its provisions
and the obligations outlined therein by the occupying
Power, including also in terms of the obligations of
States with respect to distinction - an issue that is
paramount for determining the responsibilities borne
by entities tasked with administering justice.

With regard to the Gaza Strip, the situation remains
of great concern to the Movement, in particular the
grave humanitarian situation, which, regrettably,
continues to deteriorate day by day. The Movement
therefore reiterates its call for the complete lifting of
the Israeli blockade, which continues to subject more
than 2 million Palestinian girls, boys, women and
men in Gaza to indescribable humanitarian, social
and economic suffering. The crisis must be addressed
in a comprehensive manner, in accordance with
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law, all relevant United Nations
resolutions, within the context of the overall situation
resulting from the ongoing illegitimate and belligerent
Israeli foreign occupation of Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and all calls for an end to
the occupation.

In that regard, we reiterate the need to support the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in ensuring its continued
and uninterrupted provision of vital humanitarian and
development assistance to the more than 5.4 million
Palestinian refugees in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria,
as reaffirmed by the international community at the
Agency's recent donors conference.

We also express our concern about the deterioration
of the socioeconomic conditions faced by Palestinians
under occupation. Those conditions have been
exacerbated by the financial crisis of the Palestinian
Government due to Israel's illegal withholding of
Palestinian tax revenue. We call for an end to that
unfair and punitive practice, while demanding respect
for the agreements signed.

Given that Israel has clearly renounced its
obligations as an occupying Power to provide
protection to the Palestinian civilian population under
the Fourth Geneva Convention, the States members
of the Movement are obliged to reiterate their call on
the international community to ensure the protection
of the Palestinian people. That is an urgent matter as
it pertains to alleviating the critical insecurity of the
occupied Palestinian territory and preventing the loss
of more innocent lives.

The Movement reiterates its concern about the
fact that Israel is not being held accountable to justice
for all the violations it has committed, many of which
could even be considered war crimes. The lack of
justice only fuels impunity, leads to new crimes and
further destabilizes the situation on the ground, thereby
diminishing the prospects for peace, as noted in the
report of the internationalndependent international
commission of inquiry on the protests in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory (A/HRC/40/74), established by
the Human Rights Council. That is why we continue
to call for international action - by the Security
Council in particular - to guarantee the immediate
cessation of violations being systematically committed
by the occupying Power against the Palestinian civilian
population under occupation. Israel must fulfil its
obligations and responsibilities under international law.

With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan, the Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions that have been or may be taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, such as the illegal decision of
December 14 1981, seeking to modify the legal status,
physical nature and demographic composition of the
occupied Syrian Golan and its institutional structure,
as well as all of Israel's measures to apply its own
jurisdiction and administration in this area, are null
and void, lack validity and of no legal effect. Therefore,
we once again demand that Israel comply with
resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw completely from
the occupied Syrian Golan along the borders of 4 June
1967, in compliance with resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). We also reiterate our condemnation of the
arbitrary and unilateral declaration by the United States
on recognizing the Golan Heights as part of Israel, and
renew our call on the Security Council to also condemn
this act of provocation.

Regarding Lebanon, the Movement's member
States reaffirm the need for Israel to withdraw from all
Lebanese territories - including the areas of the Shaba'a
farmlands, the Kfar Shuba hills and the Lebanese part
of the village of Al-Ghajar - behind the Blue Line. We
urge Israel to cease its persistent and serious violations
of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon,
in accordance with the relevant international resolutions
and resolution 1701 (2006) in particular.

Finally, we reiterate our calls on the international
community to act collectively and responsibly to
defend international law and to step up all necessary
efforts in support of the Palestinian cause, with the
ultimate objective of ending this historic and grievous
injustice. We reaffirm our commitment to promoting
a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to
the question of Palestine in all its aspects, including
the suffering of Palestinian refugees. We also reaffirm
our support for the heroic Palestinian people in their
struggle to achieve justice and realize their inalienable
rights and legitimate national aspirations, including the
right to self-determination, freedom and independence
in their State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

