Mr. Christian (Ghana): Let me begin,
Mr. President, by expressing my delegation's
appreciation to you for convening this meeting, which
should enable us, once again, to deliberate on ways of
advancing peace in the Middle East. We also wish to
thank Mr. Alvaro de Soto, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority, for his comprehensive briefing.

Progress had been made in the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) without serious incidents until
the confrontation between the Israel Defense Forces
and the Lebanese Armed Forces on 7 February 2007.
Before that unfortunate occurrence, we had expected
that the cessation of hostilities would hold and would
ensure the stabilization of the security and military
situation along the Blue Line. We commend the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for its
quick response to the crisis and for establishing a
buffer zone between the two armies, which we hope
will continue to exercise maximum restraint. We need
not remind Israel and Lebanon of the long and arduous
road to peace and of the need to deepen their
commitment to the implementation of a permanent
ceasefire based on the full acceptance of the relevant
provisions of the Taif Accords and of resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1680 (2006).

Given the period of relative calm created by the
mutual ceasefire agreed on between Prime Minister
Ehud Olmert and President Mahmoud Abbas, we can
expect nothing other than the intensification of efforts
towards reviving the stalled Middle East peace process.
In this regard, we have noted the efforts being made by
the Quartet to launch meaningful negotiations to solve
the long-standing conflict between Israel and Palestine.
We hope that the Quartet's efforts will lead, initially, to
the consolidation of the ceasefire within an
international framework with a definition of its
parameters and rules and its extension to the West
Bank. We are indeed hopeful that the trilateral meeting
between Prime Minister Olmert, President Abbas and
United States Secretary of State Ms. Condoleezza Rice
will chart the way forward and re-energize the peace
process. It should then be possible for the Quartet to
look again at the Road Map with a view to restating its
goals, principles and final destination, with the aim of
securing a two-State solution to the Middle East
conflict within an acceptable framework.

We welcome with cautious optimism the Mecca
accord reached between Palestinian Authority
President Mahmoud Abbas and Hamas leader Khaled
Meshal. We have been very concerned about the
fighting between Fatah and Hamas loyalists that has
claimed several lives. We hope that the agreement to
form a government of national unity will lead to an
immediate end to factional violence between the two
parties and the stabilization of the political and security
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory.

Given the current efforts towards peace in the
Middle East, it would be expedient for the Palestinian
government of national unity to commit itself to the
Quartet principles of non-violence, recognition of
Israel and acceptance of previous agreements and
obligations, including the Road Map.

The stifling of international aid and the financial
boycott imposed by Israel on Palestine have led to
severe disruptions to Palestinian basic services and
have impacted negatively on an already fragile
economy. We therefore appeal once again to all
concerned to release such withheld funds and thereby
bring succour to the Palestinian people. We join other
like-minded countries in expressing our displeasure at
the demolition of the historic road connecting
Bab-Al-Maghariba with the holy Al-Aqsa mosque
compound in addition to two rooms adjacent to the
Al-Buraq wall. We also express concern over

construction work initiated by Israel in the Old City of
Jerusalem. Such provocative actions have in the past
led to unnecessary tension and recrimination between
Israel and those opposed to its actions in this regard.
The suspension of construction work by the Israeli
authorities should enable them to take stock of the
negative consequences of their actions and decide
firmly to cease all activities on the mosque compound.

There can be no military solution to the
Palestinian question; the vision of an independent,
viable and sovereign State living side by side with
Israel in peace and security will be achieved only
through compromises and negotiations in good faith.
The Security Council's task of being actively engaged
in the resolution of this problem, on the basis of its
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and a revitalized
Road Map, cannot be overemphasized.

