Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
High Representative Inzko for his briefing.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkans. To maintain its peace and stability,
promote economic and social development and achieve
harmonious coexistence among the various ethnic
groups is in the common interests of the countries of
the region and of the international community.

On the Bosnia and Herzegovina issue, the
international community should listen to the views
of all relevant parties, take a balanced and prudent
approach and hear the concerns of all interested
parties. China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, respects the choice of the Bosnian people
in determining their future, and supports Bosnian
people of all ethnicities in achieving harmonious
coexistence and common development.

China welcomes the efforts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina aimed a promoting national reconciliation,
encouraging economic and social development and
strengthening the rule of law. We hope that Bosnian
people of all ethnicities will work actively to consolidate
the political and social progress achieved, engage
in dialogue and consultation to settle differences,
completely implement the Dayton Peace Agreement
and continue to strive for greater progress in all areas
so that they can all share in the peace dividend.

China welcomes the efforts of High Representative
Inzko aimed at promoting the political process in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We hope that, in accordance with his
mandate, he will play a constructive role in promoting
the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement.

China welcomes the Security Council's adoption
of resolution 2384 (2017) to renew the mandate of the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
Althea operation. We hope that EUFOR will continue
to maintain close cooperation with Bosnia and
Herzegovina and play a constructive role in safeguarding
its peace and stability. China stands ready to work
with the international community in order to continue
to contribute to the achievement of lasting peace and
stability and development in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

