Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, the United States of America, France,
Guatemala, Peru and my own country, Uruguay. I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate to discuss the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/139) on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The Group of Friends welcomes today's presence
of the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Interim Head of MINUSTAH, Mr. Nigel
Fisher. We thank him for his comprehensive briefing
and for taking responsibility for the Mission in this
crucial period. The Group would also like to express
its gratitude and recognition to Ambassador Mariano
Fernandez Amunategui for his dedicated work as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti and Head of MINUSTAH.

The strengthening of the rule of law and democratic
institutions, the establishment of a political culture
conducive to consensus-building and the improvement
of socioeconomic conditions are key elements to
achieve greater and sustainable stability and prosperity
in Haiti. In that regard, the Group of Friends of Haiti
strongly encourages all political actors in Haiti to
deepen their dialogue and cooperation towards their
country's democratic consolidation. The Group
reiterates the importance of the timely realization,
with MINUSTAH's assistance, of free, transparent and
fair partial legislative, municipal and local elections.
They constitute an essential and urgent step towards
lasting stability, recovery and development in Haiti.
The effective establishment of the country's Electoral
Council will constitute a major milestone in that process.
In that regard, the Group of Friends looks forward to
positive developments related to the appointment, as
soon as possible, of members of a transitional college
of the permanent Electoral Council.

The Group ofFriends ofHaiti recognizes the critical
role of MINUSTAH in ensuring stability and security
in Haiti and commends MINUSTAH for continuing to
assist the Government of Haiti to ensure a secure and
stable environment.

The Group of Friends notes that the overall security
situation in Haiti has remained relatively stable since the
previous report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/678),
although it was marked by an increase in civil unrest
and serious crimes. That has allowed MINUSTAH to
implement the drawdown established in resolution 2070
(2012) without undermining the security and stability
of Haiti.

The Group welcomes the submission of a concise
version of the MINUSTAH consolidation plan 2013-
2016, which has been discussed with the Government
of Haiti and which includes a description of the scope of
the conditions-based consolidation plan, the risks and
challenges, a core set ofmandated tasks that the Mission
should focus on with the respective benchmarks, and
the continuation of the work of consolidation of its
substantive, security and support pillars, all with
the objective of allowing the Haitian authorities to
gradually assume their fundamental responsibilities for
their country's future.

The Group of Friends reiterates the importance of the
commitment by the Government of Haiti to strengthen
the rule of law and to make further progress in security
sector reform. In that regard, the Group would like to
emphasize the critical role the Haitian National Police
plays in Haiti's security and stability and to stress the
importance of completing the ongoing strengthening,
professionalization and reform of the police force in
order to enable it to assume full responsibility for the
country's security.

The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates its
commitment to the zero-tolerance policy of the United
Nations towards sexual exploitation and abuse. In that
regard we expect all United Nations personnel to adhere
to the highest standards of conduct. The Group urges
all actors involved to take responsibility for ensuring
that such cases are prevented, allegations investigated
and those to blame held accountable.

The Group welcomes the significant progress made
in 2012 in the resettlement of persons displaced by the
2010 earthquake. However, we are also concerned about
the deterioration of living conditions in the remaining
camps and about the situation of women and children in
particular, an example of the humanitarian challenges
that Haiti continues to face.

The Group of Friends is aware of the continuing
efforts being made by the Government of Haiti,
MINUSTAH and others to protect vulnerable groups,
but also notes with concern the need to improve the
response ofthe criminaljustice sector to rape complaints
and serious crimes against children. We therefore call
urgently for increased efforts to prevent and respond to
violence against women and children.
These and other challenges, such as the ongoing
efforts to eliminate the cholera epidemic, remind us of
the importance of maintaining cooperation between the
international community and the Government of Haiti
in order to meet the needs of the Haitian people. In that
regard, the Group of Friends of Haiti acknowledges the
efforts ofthe donor community and asks its members to
fulfil the pledges they have made without delay.

The Group of Friends of Haiti understands
that security, development and stability are closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. We therefore
underscore the importance of addressing the issue of
unemployment and the delivery of basic social services
in a meaningful way. At the same time, the Group points
out that there can be no genuine stability or sustainable
development in Haiti without strengthening democratic
institutions and a credible democratic process. In that
context, the Group emphasizes the importance of
promoting the rule of law by strengthening Haitian
institutions, and further reaffirms MINUSTAH's
responsibility for supporting the Haitian State in
the areas of good governance, the expansion of State
authority and the promotion and protection of human
rights, in accordance with its mandate.

Finally, the Group ofFriends reaffirms its solidarity
with and commitment to the people and Government
of Haiti in their pursuit of stability, reconstruction,
recovery, socioeconomic development and democratic
consolidation. We support and salute the women and
men of MINUSTAH for their dedication and tireless
efforts to promote recovery and stability in Haiti.

