Mr. Blok (Netherlands): It should be self-evident
that a Government's first duty is to protect its citizens.
And the first duty for the Governments united in the
Council is to protect civilians under threat from war,
violence and suffering. After all, if we are not here to
protect people, what are we doing?
I would like to thank Indonesia for putting this
important theme at the centre of today's discussion,
and you, Madam President, for inviting me here. I am
also grateful for the informative briefings provided by
Mr. Maurer, Mr. Borello and the Secretary-General, for
whom improving peacekeeping operations is rightly
a priority.

Twenty years ago, in this very Chamber, my
country joined those voting in favour of resolution
1265 (1999). Then, as now, it was our conviction that,
in conflict, civilians must be protected. The Council
made a promise. It expressed

"its willingness to respond to situations of armed
conflict where civilians are being targeted or
humanitarian assistance to civilians is obstructed"
(resolution 1265 (1999), para. 10).

Indeed, this shows that the Council is guided by
civilians as its rationale for action.

Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), a
lot has happened. We have seen a paradigm shift in
our thinking; a mission with civilian protection in its
mandate is now the norm. The 18 Kigali Principles were
established. They are aimed at improving the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. As endorser, we join the
Secretary-General in its call for more signatories.

Last year, with South Sudan and Yemen in mind, we
added the issue of conflict and hunger to outlaw the use
of starvation as a tool of war. Our aim is to root out the
crime of starving civilians by banning it and punishing
the perpetrators. The protection of women against
sexual Violence also became an important theme.

Yet, as we are gathered here to commemorate
20 years of our efforts to protect civilians, we have to be
frank enough to ask ourselves inconvenient questions.
Is there a real reason to celebrate? Translating lofty
words and good intentions into day-to-day realities in
highly complex conflict environments is not easy. If
civilians expect to be protected by incoming missions,
and they are not, this may lead to frustration and a
loss of credibility. It undermines the legitimacy of
peacekeeping missions, of the United Nations and the
Council and, in the end, their ability to prevent human
suffering. And that is the last thing we want.

Civilian protection is not some last-minute add-
on to peacekeeping. It should be a core goal of each
mandate. It has to be funded and part of the standard
operating procedures of the force. We should support it
also in our discussions in the Fifth Committee.
In 1999, the Council emphasized the responsibility
of States to end impunity and to prosecute those
responsible for genocides, crimes against humanity
and serious violations of international humanitarian
law. That brings me to the following vital point - the
importance of accountability. As I have said before in
this Chamber, violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law should not go unchallenged.
Humanitarian law is not optional. It is not a luxury.
It is the bedrock of what defines our humanity.
Upholding humanitarian law is crucial to our very
credibility. Violations should be subject to independent
investigations, mandated by the international
community. And yes, perpetrators should be afraid,
aware that they will be called to account. They should
be lying awake at night in the knowledge that one day
they will face justice.

Today, I want to focus on the sheer number and
gravity of the horrible crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). We all know the
facts and have seen the images. We should all work to
ensure that the perpetrators of those heinous crimes are
brought to justice and to enable the Security Council to
state this fact clearly: ISIS committed genocide against
the Yazidis.

After fact-finding, evidence gathering, investigation
and attribution, prosecution is the final and most
important link in the accountability chain. Without that
final link, justice is not served. ISIS perpetrators of
mass atrocity crimes should be prosecuted, preferably
in the region, and if feasible, under the jurisdiction of
an ad hoc or hybrid international criminal tribunal. I
am fully aware of the complex obstacles on the road
towards that goal, but we have to keep in mind that
justice is a prerequisite of lasting peace and security.
We must join forces and take it step by step.

The Netherlands will do all in its power to help
bring us closer to and reach that goal. At the opening of
the next session of the General Assembly in September,
the Netherlands will initiate a ministerial meeting
on the prosecution of ISIS fighters. Today, I invite
Security Council members and others to join us on that
road towards justice. We owe it to the victims.

