Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): At the outset, we
would like to express our sincere gratitude to Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo for his progress report. In the same
vein, we support the work of the Office of the
Prosecutor and have a deep appreciation for the efforts
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) to deliver
justice to the victims of atrocities committed in Libya.
These efforts are in line with our commitment to the
fight against impunity for serious crimes.

South Africa supported resolution 1970 (2011),
referring the situation in Libya to the International
Criminal Court. We did so on the basis of our long-
standing commitment to the fight against impunity for
serious crimes. We do not support any effort or action
that creates a perception of the Court being used for
political expediency or as a tool for the furtherance of
political objectives. It is for that reason that we
continue to call for the Council to be principled on all
cases in Libya that were referred to the International
Criminal Court. We are mindful of the primacy of
national jurisdiction, even in the case of the Libyan
situation. In this regard, we have taken note of the
formal submission presented by the Libyan authorities
to the ICC. We look forward to the decision of the
Court and we hope that there will be cooperation with
whatever decision the Court reaches.
We reiterate our call for the investigation of
crimes across the board, not focused only on the pro-
Qadhafi forces, since that would perpetuate the
perception of a Victor's justice. We remain concerned
about the political and security situation in Libya.
However, we commend the Libyans for the steady
progress they are making in their quest to build a
democratic Libya based on equality, freedom and
respect for human rights.

We urge the Libyan authorities to address the
situation of detainees, in particular African migrants
and black Africans suspected of having supported the
regime of Muammar Al-Qadhafi. Their continued
arbitrary detention and reports of torture do not bode
well for efforts to build a society based on respect for
human rights and dignity.

