Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for his latest detailed
report on the situation in Haiti (S/2010/446). I would
also like to thank Special Representative Mulet for his
skilled and dedicated leadership and for his thorough
briefing today. I also thank Ambassador Merores for
his summary of the situation from the perspective of
the Haitian Government.

The United States expresses our strongest support
and deepest thanks to all the staff and personnel of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for their extraordinary work under very
difficult conditions. We share the view that the political
situation in Haiti remains fragile, but the progress
being made towards holding elections in November is
positive. We recognize the hard work of MINUSTAH
to push this prospect towards reality and to provide
broad support to the upcoming elections. Peaceful and
credible elections and the transfer of power to a new
Government will be key milestones in Haiti's progress.

We also welcome the efforts by MINUSTAH to
assist the Haitian National Police and others in
providing a secure and stable environment, and we
commend their work to maintain general stability
throughout this very challenging period. The United
States is deeply concerned about vulnerable
populations in the internally displaced person (IDP)
camps and neighbouring communities, and especially
about the extent of sexual and gender-based violence.
Although we understand the difficulties regarding the
lack of reliable and comprehensive data, any level of
sexual or gender-based violence is unacceptable, and
we appreciate the ongoing efforts of MINUSTAH to
address this situation. We applaud the plan to utilize
the military component in a more community-based
approach, which, we agree, should have an impact on
sexual and gender-based violence in and around the
IDP camps.

Addressing the critical issue of sexual and
gender-based violence must be part of a wider effort to
empower women throughout the reconstruction
process, and we encourage MINUSTAH to expand its
efforts beyond the IDP camps and their vicinity to
other areas both in and outside Port-au-Prince. The
United States agrees that the increased flow of
weapons and drugs into Haiti is a destabilizing factor,
and we encourage MINUSTAH to look at ways to
leverage its existing capabilities, wherever possible, to
help interdict this flow.

We understand that the deployment of military
forces, based on the increases authorized in resolution
1908 (2010), seems to be proceeding well. We look
forward to seeing their contributions to stability and
security.

The Secretary-General's report mentions the
discussion of force drawdown. We recognize that this
increase is indeed temporary in nature. That said, we
believe that any discussion of drawdown must be based
on the security conditions on the ground in Haiti, on
the achievement of security benchmarks and, after the
hurricane season, on the completion of the elections
and the peaceful transition of power early next year.

The deployment of police forces has been
sometimes challenging, but it is largely on track. We
encourage nations to support resolutions 1908 (2010)
and 1927 (2010) and to deploy police in support of this
critical mission. The United States has 45 police
personnel in Haiti, and we are working to double the
size of our individual police contingent in the coming
months. We welcome contributions from other Member
States.

