Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for holding this important public
meeting on the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
thank also Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for
introducing the eighth report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
Likewise, we express our appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for his briefing
on the situation of children in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo conflict.

We extend a very warm welcome to Mr. She
Okitundu, Foreign Minister of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we thank him for his
comprehensive statement.

As we all know, the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has undergone very significant
changes for the better over the last few months. Not
only has the ceasefire continued to hold, but the
disengagement of forces on the ground has proceeded
rather smoothly, except in Equateur Province, where
there have been some difficulties. We are confident,
however, that the commitment in this regard given by
the Front de liberation du Congo at the meeting of the
Joint Military Commission (JMC) and the Political
Committee in Lusaka last month, and reiterated
personally by Mr. Bemba at the Security Council
mission meeting with him in Kampala, will be fully
honoured without any further delay.

We also call upon the Rassemblement congolais
pour la democratie (RCD) to comply fully with
Security Council resolution 1304 (2000), which calls
for the demilitarization of Kisangani. The RCD cannot
continue to flout the Security Council resolution in this
regard.

We now look forward to the total withdrawal of
all foreign forces from the soil of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we welcome the plans
worked out to this end by the parties at the Lusaka
meeting of the Political Committee and the JMC
recently. The withdrawal plans require the parties to
the conflict to communicate important information on
movements of their troops and other relevant
information by fixed dates. The information is also
vital for MONUC to plan and prepare for phase III
deployment.

While we welcome the proposal of the Secretary-
General that MONUC deployment in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo be maintained in a state of
transition to phase III until the conditions on the
ground permit deployment under phase III, we believe
that full phase III deployment must not be unduly
delayed. In particular, we believe that the delay should
not be the result of failures on the part of the parties to
live up to their commitments under both the Lusaka
accord and subsequent agreements for their
disengagement and total withdrawal from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also hold the
view that during the transition to phase III, MONUC
deployment should attain the ceiling of 5,537 set under
phase II.

Now that the process of the inter-Congolese
dialogue, under the leadership of Sir Ketumile Masire,
is about to get under way, the Congolese armed groups
must decisively give up their military options and gear
up to join the political dialogue, and together with the
political parties in the country and civil society help
prepare the constitutional framework for democratic
rule in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They
must not miss out on the new opportunities to serve
their country through the democratic process in the
new political liberalization President Kabila has
triggered in the country.

The armed groups must also cooperate fully with
MONUC in the important task of bringing peace and
normalcy to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Above all, the armed groups must understand that any
obstructionist action on their part will not be
acceptable to the Security Council and the international
community generally.

During the visit of the Security Council mission
to the Great Lakes region, the leaders we met reminded
us repeatedly that lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and indeed in the region,
cannot be secured without disarming, demobilizing,
repatriating and rehabilitating the negative forces,
including the former Rwandan Armed Forces and the
Interahamwe, that are responsible for much of the
trouble the region has seen in recent years. This should
indeed be a high priority, as also recognized under the
Lusaka Agreement.

The process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration must be undertaken by the parties
concerned as a concerted action through dialogue
among leaders of the region. MONUC will have an
important responsibility in this regard, and it must get
ready as soon as possible to assume its role. We urge
the international financial institutions and the donor
community to contribute generously towards the DDR
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region.

As the conflict abates and normalcy gradually
returns, the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will have to engage in massive all-round
reconstruction to put the economy back on the rails and
to consolidate peace and democracy. This can be
achieved only with large-scale support, again from the
international financial institutions and the donor
community. We hope that the parties that are engaged
in the illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have taken serious
note of the resolve of the Security Council, following
the report of the Panel on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, that it will act appropriately if the
plundering is not swiftly brought to an end.

The humanitarian situation resulting from the
conflict remains grim in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We acknowledge with gratitude the efforts
of the humanitarian organizations that are involved in
alleviating the sufferings of the Congolese people. We
have heard Mr. Olara Otunnu, and we feel deeply
distressed by the picture he has presented on the plight
of children in the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. My delegation fully subscribes to the
five-point plan that he is recommending in favour of
the children of the Congo.

I wish to warmly commend MONUC, which is
doing tremendous work in difficult circumstances in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo under the
dynamic leadership of Ambassador Morjane. We
witnessed this abundantly in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo during the visit of the Security Council
mission.

Finally, my delegation supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the mandate of
MONUC be extended by one year.

