Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General and
to Ms. Coomaraswamy, Ms. Veneman and the non-
governmental organization (NGO) representative
Mr. Oling Olang for their attention to the problems of
protection of children in armed conflict and for the
useful information they have provided on the state of
affairs in this area.

We are pleased to note the clear progress made in
this area, which has already been referred to
sufficiently here. At the same time, there is ample room
for enhancing the effectiveness of efforts of the entities
that are involved in this endeavour. The issue of the
rights of children in conflicts and in post-conflict
situations has occupied a solid place in the work not
only of the Security Council, which has been dealing
with this issue on the basis of the broader context of its
primary responsibilities - maintaining international
peace and security - but also the work of the Third
Committee of the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission. A new
impetus to the efforts to the international community in
this area came from resolution 1612 (2005). In this
regard, making this work system-wide, on the
condition that there be a rational division of labour
among United Nations structures in accordance with
their mandates, continues to be a pressing task.

We studied the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2006/826) with great interest. We note its focus on
practical aspects and the fact that it contains a great
deal of information. Nevertheless, we should note that,
as in the past, it does not always reflect reliable or
verified information, and the frequently anonymous
sources of information are not examples of objectivity
or reliability. More considered assessments would only
serve our cause, since this would raise confidence not
only in the information but also in the
recommendations that the report contains. With respect
to those recommendations, the one that stands out is
the proposal to ensure that the Security Council give
equal attention to all situations of concern and also to
all grave violations of the rights of children affected by
armed conflict. We support the notion of the need to
give equal weight to all grave violations, including not
only the use of child soldiers, but also the other five
categories of violation. Implementing that would alter
the basis on which the reports on that issue are
prepared, including with respect to the compilation of
lists of violating parties. That is also referred to in the
report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services. The
proposal to give equal care and attention to all
situations must be clarified. It needs to be determined
whether that concerns the lists in the annex to the
relevant report of the Secretary-General, or whether it
concerns all conflict situations worldwide.

We are certain that from the standpoint of the
tasks of the Security Council under the Charter, its
focus should, above all go to the most acute and large-
scale armed conflicts on its agenda, and not only those
in Africa. That does not mean that the situation of
children in other conflict areas would go without the
attention of the United Nations. There is an entire
range of bodies authorized to protect the rights of
children and to fight against the impunity of the
perpetrators of violations.

In that context, we wish to turn to the activities of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the
Security Council Working Group, whose establishment
has been a turning point in the practical
implementation of the decisions of the Council in the
area of the protection of children. The monitoring and
reporting mechanism must be implemented in strict
compliance with Security Council resolution 1612
(2005). After all, the resolution provides that it be
established as a priority in situations under
consideration by the Council, which would make it
possible to more fully and effectively make use of the
capacities of the Security Council.

In that connection, it is important that the
information provided by the mechanism be objective,
up-to-date, accurate and reliable. The monitoring and
reporting mechanism itself needs to function with the
involvement of national Governments supporting and
complementing their measures to ensure the protection
and rehabilitation of children. That is required by
resolution 1612 (2005).

In the arrangement associating the monitoring
and reporting mechanism with the Security Council,
the key role is played by the Security Council Working
Group, which is designed to prepare balanced
recommendations to improve the situation of children
in specific situations. We believe that the plan of action
of that new body for 2007 will be geared to country
subjects already before the Council, while the Group
will continue to work in a spirit of cooperation
emphasizing constructive measures.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express
the hope that the comprehensive system-wide efforts of
the Organization, in cooperation with interested States
and civil society, will remedy the dire situation of
children in armed conflict.

