The Secretary-General: First of all, I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for taking time to preside
over this meeting on a subject of great importance to
the United Nations.

In May last year, the Security Council requested a
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict. I am pleased to present my report
(S/2009/304). It is the product of intensive, wide-
ranging consultations. It sets out an approach to
peacebuilding that is better resourced, managed and
coordinated. The Peacebuilding Commission discussed
it last week. I welcome its commitment to championing
this important agenda.

Building peace is about much more than ending
war. It is about putting in place the institutions and
trust that will carry people forward into a peaceful
future. We often have a limited window of opportunity
in which to do this. The report focuses on that crucial
two-year period when conflict has ended but insecurity
often persists and peace is fragile. If peace is to be
sustainable, the international community must make
the most of that moment and provide the right support
at the right time.

Decades of international experience have taught
us that, while every case is unique, certain types of
support are almost always needed. Time and again,
war-ravaged people have asked us to help them
establish security and safety, restore basic services and
core Government functions, support a political
transition and jump-start economic recovery.

These are not easy tasks. I have seen the
difficulties first hand. I have travelled to many
countries emerging from conflict, including the Sudan,
Haiti, Liberia and Timor-Leste. I have seen the costs of
a slow or inadequate response to urgent post-conflict
needs. Yet, I have also seen the profound difference
that a well-planned and managed effort can make.
Let me highlight the five interconnected
messages of my report.

The first pertains to national ownership. Peace
will not take root if it comes from outside. Building
peace is primarily a national challenge and
responsibility. The United Nations and the international
community should play a catalytic and supporting role.

The second message pertains to international
leadership. Member States expect the United Nations
to lead the international community. I have created a
senior-level mechanism that will ensure that the right
leadership and support teams are in place as early as
possible.

The third message concerns coherence. Effective
peacebuilding requires input from all parts of the
United Nations system and key partners. Peacebuilding
is not separate from mediation, peacekeeping or
development aid. It is all of these working together.

The fourth refers to a common strategy.
Immediately after conflict, everything feels urgent and
there are many pressing needs. We need to align behind
a shared approach with realistic priorities against
which national and international actors can allocate
scarce resources.

The fifth message concerns predictable and
credible delivery. Member States need to help ensure
that we have sufficient international capacity to
respond rapidly and flexibly to the most urgent needs:
basic safety, security and services; strengthening the
rule of law; supporting political processes; and
revitalizing the economy.

To that end, we need a clearer understanding of
responsibilities within the United Nations, outlining
who will respond in each of these key areas. We also
need a deeper and more diverse pool of international
civilian expertise. We need prepositioned pooled
funding, such as the Peacebuilding Fund, to jump-start
action, followed by faster funding from other sources.
And we need more and better strategic partnerships
with the World Bank, regional organizations, civil
society and the private sector.

Member States, for their part, have a crucial part
to play. I urge them to speak with one voice across
different multilateral forums and to align bilateral
support with the common strategy in each country.
09-41769

Almost a decade ago, in its debate on the theme
"No exit without strategy", the Security Council
articulated the many challenges associated with the
later stages of peacebuilding, when it is time to wind
down an international peace operation. In Sierra Leone,
as was discussed in this Chamber very recently, we
have seen many of the "no exit" lessons being applied.
In asking for the report before us, the Council
recognized that it also needs to support peacebuilding
more effectively from the outset. This requires the
engagement and coordination of many different actors,
and it requires adequate funding. Some key United
Nations actors face serious challenges in securing
timely financing.

I encourage the Council to look carefully at these
issues as they pertain to existing and future mandates,
and as part of initiatives already under way to review
peacekeeping mandates. I also encourage members, in
the context of next year's review of the Peacebuilding
Commission, to consider how they can make more
effective use of that body.

My current report is part of a series of initiatives,
including my recent report on mediation and the
ongoing work on peacekeeping. These efforts share a
common goal - to enable the United Nations and its
international partners to respond more effectively to
countries in crisis in ways that are better tailored to
needs on the ground.

I am determined to do my part. I am committed to
driving the necessary changes through the United
Nations system, but I need the Security Council's
support and commitment if we are to achieve real
change. I look forward to working with Council
members to meet these challenges.

