The President: I will now make some remarks in
my capacity of representative of the United States.

Let me join others in thanking Under-Secretary-
General Le Roy, Chairman Mkapa, Minister Siddiq and
Secretary General Amum for their participation today.

In recent months, the Council has shown
unprecedented unity in supporting the implementation
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). The
international community and the members of the
Council must continue to speak with one voice on the
Sudan or risk creating opportunities for spoilers. With
the support of the United Nations and the international
community, the referendum registration process has
concluded peacefully and credibly. A successful
referendum for Southern Sudan on 9 January will be
critical to long-term peace and stability in the Sudan.
Registration was an important step towards that goal.
The effective completion of registration in the Sudan
indicates that polling can and must be concluded on
schedule.

As we have been reminded today, the status of
Abyei remains unresolved. The Chair of the African
Union's High-level Implementation Panel, President
Mbeki, has been working actively with the CPA parties
to find a way forward on this important issue. The
United States fully supports his efforts. Any resolution
regarding the future of the Abyei area must respect the
legally affirmed rights of the people of that region, and
it must be reached with the consent of both parties.

We also face additional upcoming challenges,
including the effective conduct of the Southern Sudan
referendum itself. We urge both sides to ensure a
transparent, safe and unobstructed environment for
campaigning and polling. We urge the Government of
the Sudan and the Government of South Sudan to
honour their financial commitments to the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission and the Southern
Sudan Referendum Bureau as quickly as possible. This
funding is essential to the conduct of the referendum.

The parties must also settle other outstanding
CPA issues, such as border demarcation and the
conduct of popular consultations for Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states. They must reach
agreement on post-CPA issues, including citizenship
and the security of minorities and vulnerable
populations, such as Northerners in the South and
Southerners in the North. On the critical issue of
citizenship, the United States strongly urges the parties
to reach an agreement that is in line with applicable
international obligations and does not arbitrarily
deprive any individual of citizenship.

Let me commend the United Nations for its
efforts as it helps the CPA parties to implement the
referendum, including by procuring and distributing
ballots. We call on the parties to the CPA to cooperate
with the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and
facilitate full and unfettered freedom of access and
movement for all United Nations peacekeepers.

Unfortunately, however, this meeting comes at a
critical time, one that has been marred by troubling
violence. The United States strongly condemns the
Government of the Sudan's actions in Khor Abeche,
South Darfur. We have heard deeply disturbing reports
of Sudanese Armed Forces blocking the movement of
civilians, then looting and burning the village. These
reports deserve the Council's serious attention and
effective responses by the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

The United States wishes to remind all parties, as
well as UNAMID and United Nations Headquarters,
that UNAMID's Chapter VII mandate authorizes it to
carry out its mandated responsibilities with or without
the permission of the Government of the Sudan. As we
invest billions of dollars and risk peacekeepers' lives,
we expect no less.

It is more important than ever that all parties
avoid inflammatory words and actions that undermine
peace and stability and violate international law. In
particular, the United States calls on the Government of
the Sudan to immediately halt aerial bombardments. We
condemn the bombardments of the 12 and 24 November
and 6 December into the Kiir River valley, which
resulted in the displacement of at least 1,000 people.

We again call on the Government of the Sudan to
end the arrest and harassment of human rights activists
and journalists and to release those who have been
imprisoned unjustly, including those jailed for
exercising such basic rights as freedom of speech,
freedom of expression and freedom of assembly.

Darfur remains a top priority for the United
States. This is reflected in the recent appointment of
Ambassador Dane Smith as our Senior Advisor for
Darfur. We remain seriously concerned by the violence
and humanitarian needs in Darfur, as well as by the
lack of accountability. At the same time, all States must
redouble their efforts to stem the flow of arms into
Darfur and faithfully implement the United Nations
sanctions regime.

The United States remains deeply committed to a
brighter future for all the people of the Sudan. As
President Obama noted at the United Nations in
September,
"What happens in the Sudan in the days ahead
may decide whether a people who have endured
too much war move forward towards peace or
slip backwards to bloodshed. And what happens
in the Sudan matters to all sub-Saharan Africa,
and it matters to the world."

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
24
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.
10-69649
