Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I would first like to thank you for scheduling
this meeting of the Council on this crucial issue of
great importance today. I would also like to convey my
delegation's encouragement to Mr. Otunnu for his
commitment to the cause of children. His presentation
just now and the report of the Secretary-General
lucidly indicate practical recommendations for
adopting concrete measures for protecting children
during armed conflicts. I will also take this opportunity
to thank Ms. Bellamy, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and convey
to her my delegation's appreciation for her agency's
work.

This morning we heard the moving testimony of
Alhaji Babah Sawaneh. Yes, he was a child soldier, but
we must not forget that it was the war commanders
who made him a child soldier against his will. How
many children are there in the world who have been
robbed of their childhood by wars and conflicts of all
types? So many children in Palestine have never had a
childhood, have known only insecurity and have
witnessed the death of their parents or of other
children. The same has happened to children in Liberia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda,
Burundi and Afghanistan. I also see the children of
Iraq, whose childhood - and even life - continues to
be severely affected by one of the harshest sanctions
regimes. Even here in the United States, what will
happen to the children who lost their parents on 11
September, having done nothing to deserve to become
orphans? All these children and so many others
demand our attention. There are so many in the world!

The question of children in armed conflict has
become a priority concern for the international
community. Children today are either targets of
Violence or the perpetrators of it; in every instance,
they are at the very heart of the conflict. They are
among the first to fall victim to the deterioration of
humanitarian situations, and they become an essential
part of any peace-building operation. The destruction
of the social fabric, the increase in infant mortality and
the gradual erosion of the family structure because of
the displacement of populations create complex
problems to which we have to find an answer.

The report of the Secretary-General takes up all
of these aspects relating to the situation of children and
armed conflict. He has put forward a coherent and
ambitious strategy to protect these children. My
delegation subscribes to the Secretary-General's
recommendations and believes that it is important to
start implementing them. We welcome the fact that the
question of children in armed conflict has already been
given particular attention by the Security Council.
Many Security Council documents have referred with
disquiet to the fate of these children and have devoted
specific provisions in resolutions or in presidential
statements to this issue. These provisions have been
followed up in the field. This trend should be
strengthened in any matter that is brought before the
Security Council.

Nevertheless, we believe that protecting children
in wartime depends to a large extent on the behaviour
of the parties to armed conflicts. It is therefore up to
the international community, and more specifically the
Security Council, to send a strong and clear signal to
all that they must strictly respect obligations and
commitments regarding the protection of children. To
this end, it is of prime importance to consolidate the
legal framework and to encourage States to sign legal
instruments relating to the protection of children.
Respect for commitments entered into under these
instruments, as well as verifying their implementation,
is an essential aspect of what needs to be done in order
to better protect these children.

The protection of children affected by armed
conflict is a constant concern throughout the process of
a peacekeeping operation. The mandates of such
operations must contain explicit provisions that will
ensure respect for the rights of children. The Security
Council resolutions on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the situation in Sierra
Leone were important steps in this respect. The
inclusion of concern about the protection of children in
the mandates of peacekeeping operations facilitates
their demobilization and focuses attention on the
seriousness of the issue. Furthermore, this makes it
possible to monitor the parties to the conflict to prevent
any further recruitment of children.

Protecting children affected by armed conflict
during peacekeeping operations further requires
appropriate training for military, civil and police
personnel involved in operations on the ground. In this
connection, the initiative of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of establishing an informal
working group to train peacekeeping personnel in child
protection is something that deserves to be fully
encouraged.

It is also important that peace agreements take
account of protecting child soldiers. This should be an
integral part of any negotiation on a settlement of a
conflict. The demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers has the advantage of putting an end to the
spiral of Violence that has taken place in certain parts
of the world and makes it possible for children to fully
recover their dignity. The support of international and
regional organizations and the mobilization of internal
resources are necessary to successfully carry out such a
programme. In this connection, we believe that the
international community should initiate new strategies
and targeted programmes for the benefit of girl
children whose rehabilitation is even more difficult.

We believe that it is necessary to strengthen
cooperation among all the actors in the field, not only
among the United Nations agencies but also with non-
governmental organizations. We believe that this
approach deserves great consideration.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to thank
the French delegation for coordinating the work on the
draft resolution, to which we subscribe. We believe that
this is indeed an ambitious draft that will have a
favourable impact on the protection of children
affected by armed conflict. It will, in a very timely
manner, strengthen the juridical arsenal in this area.

