Mr. Moreno (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour of participating in this debate on behalf of
the 118 members of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Movement has followed the events in Gaza
with the utmost concern. On 29 December, the
Coordinating Bureau of the Movement, which I have
the honour of chairing, issued a statement in response
to the military aggression launched by Israel in the
Gaza Strip. Subsequently, on Monday 5 January, only
48 hours ago, the Coordinating Bureau issued a new
statement on the escalation of military activities. The
Movement's position with regard to the situation in
Gaza has been made duly clear to you, Sir, in your
capacity as President of the Security Council, as well
as to the President of the General Assembly and to the
Secretary-General.

The Non-Aligned Movement vigorously
condemns the escalation of the military aggression
being carried out by Israel, the occupying Power, in the
Gaza Strip. The Movement is gravely concerned by and
condemns in particular the Israeli ground invasion into
Gaza, in flagrant defiance of the calls of the
international community for a cessation of military
activities and of the regional and international
diplomatic efforts under way to resolve the current
crisis.

The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its deep
regret at the loss of innocent life as a result of the
Israeli military attacks against the Strip, including the
killing of hundreds of Palestinian civilians, among
them many children, the injuring of several thousand
persons, and the massive destruction of property and
infrastructure in the Gaza Strip.

The Movement reiterates that this unacceptable
Israeli military aggression against the Palestinian
civilian population in Gaza constitutes a grave
violation of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, and that it is
intensifying the cycle of violence and threatening
international peace and security, as well as the fragile
peace process between the two sides.

The Non-Aligned Movement calls for the
immediate cessation of all military activities and
violence and for the implementation of an immediate
general ceasefire. Israel should immediately end all its
military attacks and strictly abide by all of its
obligations as the occupying Power under international
law and relevant United Nations resolutions. In this
regard, the Movement urges Israel to unconditionally
comply with its obligations under international law,
including the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949.

In view of the indiscriminate bombings affecting
the civilian population, including women and children,
as well as the severe humanitarian crisis prevailing in
Gaza, the Non-Aligned Movement also calls for the
immediate provision of protection for the Palestinian
civilian population in the Gaza Strip, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of international
humanitarian law.

The Movement expresses increasingly grave
concern with regard to the humanitarian crisis being
faced by the Palestinian population in Gaza as a result
of the ongoing military actions, the continued closure
of all border crossings and the obstruction of access to
humanitarian aid, including food and medicines, and
the reduction of fuel and electricity supplies to the
Gaza Strip by Israel. In this context, the Non-Aligned
Movement calls upon Israel to end the collective
punishment of the Palestinian people and to allow for
the immediate and sustained opening of the border
crossings into the Gaza Strip in order to ensure the free
access of humanitarian aid and other essential supplies
and goods, as well as to facilitate the passage of
persons to and from the Gaza Strip.
09-20163

In light of the gravity of this crisis, the
Non-Aligned Movement expresses its profound
disappointment at the inability of the Security Council
to uphold its responsibilities to maintain international
peace and security. Despite more than a week of
sustained military attacks that have gravely affected the
civilian population and heightened instability and
tensions in the region, the Council has regrettably been
unable to take any concrete measures to end the
aggression. Once again, the Movement requests the
Security Council to act urgently to address this grave
situation.

NAM. stresses that the international community
must intensify and coordinate its efforts to put an end to
this crisis and must take the required actions to support
and promote the peace process and ensure compliance
with international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law. That is the key to a
peaceful settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
and the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole, and is the only
way to guarantee a lasting peace in the region.

The Movement is convinced that there can be no
military solution to the conflict. In that context, NAM
reaffirms its commitment to a peaceful solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and to the right of the
Palestinian people to exercise self-determination and
sovereignty in an independent State of Palestine based
on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

