Mr. Peleg (Israel): On the day on which three Israeli
women were murdered by Palestinian terrorists, and many
more, including children and babies, were wounded, 13
members of the Security Council have raised their hands in
support of a one-sided draft resolution which singles out
Israel. We would like to thank the delegations that did not
support the draft resolution. Today's debate, and the
debates that preceded it in the Security Council and the
General Assembly, hark back to the dark days before the
Madrid Peace Conference, when the Arab countries were
engaged in political warfare against my country and, time
and again, would attempt to misuse the Security Council.
Furthermore, the convening of the Security Council, the
General Assembly and other international forums in which,
time and again, Israel was lambasted, unfortunately
contributed to an atmosphere which was further interpreted
by terrorist organizations as conducive to operations against
Israel.

In recent weeks, the Palestinians have been engaged
in a concerted effort to bring international pressure to bear
against Israel and to avoid addressing the outstanding issues
through a mechanism established as part of the current
peace process. However, the Palestinian attempts to
politicize these issues and to generate international
pressure can only damage the trust between the parties, be
counterproductive and raise doubts over Palestinian
readiness to negotiate in good faith. It is not as if the
Palestinians have not committed any violations of our
agreements. Whenever such violations have occurred,
however, Israel has raised the issue directly with the
Palestinians.

Israel undertook to implement the first phase of the
further redeployment process, to release all female
Palestinian prisoners and to reopen negotiations on a
range of issues, including safe passage, the airport and the
Gaza port. In all these respects Israel has complied with
its commitments. The Palestinians undertook to complete
the process of revising the Palestinian charter, to fight
terrorism, to prevent violence and to conduct Palestinian
Council activities in areas of Palestinian jurisdiction -
and not in Jerusalem. The Palestinian side has failed to
demonstrate its intention or will to comply with every one
of its commitments. To the contrary, the Palestinians have
chosen to generate political pressure within and outside
the region and to avoid the direct bilateral talks that are
the very basis of the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, and
the only hope for progress.

The Interim Agreement obliges the Palestinians to
act against all expressions of violence and terror. This
obligation was restated and strengthened in the Note for
the Record attached to the Hebron Protocol of 17 January
1997, by which the Palestinians undertook both to combat
terrorist organizations and infrastructure and to apprehend,
prosecute and punish terrorists. Notwithstanding these
clear obligations, recent months have seen a marked
decline in the extent of Palestinian activity directed
against terrorists. Not only has the Palestinian Council
ceased to arrest individuals suspected of terrorist activity
and ceased to take measures against the terrorist
infrastructure, but it has continued to release members of
terrorist groups, many of whom have been actively
involved in the organization and perpetration of acts of
terror.

Today, at 1.30 pm. Israel time, at a cafe in the heart
of Tel Aviv, a suicide bomber detonated a charge he was
carrying, killing himself and the people in the immediate
vicinity. Three women are dead as a result of this attack,
in which more than 40 others, including children, were
wounded. The terrorist organization Hamas has claimed
responsibility for the attack.

 

A few days ago, Israeli security services warned of
imminent terrorist attacks, saying that the release by the
Palestinian Authority of several Hamas terrorists, including
murderers involved in attacks on Israelis, together with
various and sundry statements made by Palestinian
exponents, were being interpreted by terrorist organizations
as giving a green light for terrorist attacks on Israel.
Palestinian officials made no effort to counter this
interpretation. The Palestinian leadership therefore bears the
overriding responsibility for today's tragedy.

One of the Hamas terrorists released recently by the
Palestinian Authority is Ibrahim Makdama, the chief of the
Hamas organization's secret military wing. Today Makdama
addressed a mass rally in Khan Yunis. Let me quote some
excerpts from his speech:

"Jerusalem will not be liberated through negotiations,
demonstrations or rallies, but rather through
continuous jihad. We will continue on the path of
jihad. We should not have mercy on our enemies. Our
people have an obligation to chase them, whether they
live in Tel Aviv or in Latin America. We will make
Netanyahu curse the day he was born and hope that
Jerusalem will be swallowed by the sea."

This was said by a terrorist, a Hamas terrorist who was
released only a few days ago by the Palestinian Authority.

Furthermore, the Interim Agreement contains a
specific provision which not only requires the Palestinian
leadership to abstain from violence and hostile propaganda,
but also obliges it to take legal measures to prevent any
incitement from taking place under its jurisdiction.
Nonetheless, the Palestinian leadership frequently calls for
jihad against Israel and praises prominent terrorists, such as
Yihye Ayash, the engineer. The Palestinian leadership
recently threatened that if Palestinian demands are not met,
this

"will bring the region and its people back to violent
confrontation and disasters, an outcome that will be
the sole responsibility of the Government of Israel."

The peace process is based on the resolution of differences
by peaceful means and the renunciation of violence. Veiled
threats of violence such as these undermine the foundations
of the dialogue between the two sides. Moreover, as the
September riots tragically demonstrated, the language of
incitement rarely remains in the realm of words alone.

The negotiations on the permanent status are
scheduled to resume this month. Israel has made all the
necessary preparations for the resumption of these talks.
These negotiations will be difficult and arduous, with all
of the ups and downs associated with negotiations. We
hope that the Palestinians will not rush to the United
Nations if obstacles should arise. Instead, they should
work directly with us to overcome these obstacles,
making use of the nine joint committees that were
established just for this purpose.

I hope that the members of the Council will ask
themselves whether, instead of engaging in a senseless
debate initiated by the Arabs in a blatant misuse of the
Security Council, they should direct their efforts to
condemning incitement and calls to holy war; and
whether they should call on the Palestinians to return to
the negotiating table, not to regard the United Nations as
a substitute for direct talks and to fight terrorism
unequivocally.

