Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
for his briefing. More than 20 years after a deadly
conflict, the Dayton Peace Agreement continues to
be the cornerstone of institutional stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Today's unanimous adoption of resolution 2384
(2017) serves to highlight that all the members of the
Council share the same cardinal principles with regard
to Bosnia and Herzegovina. First, it serves as a reminder
of the imperative need to respect the principles and
institutions set up by the Dayton Peace Agreemen;
secondly, of the need to respect the aspiration of all
the components of the country in favour of a European
perspective; and, thirdly, of the need to support the
presence of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Althea, with an executive mandate.

The unity of the Council around those common
elements sends a signal of peace that is essential for
the calming of the political climate in a context that
remains marked by great polarization among political
stakeholders. The unity of the Council recalls the
support of the international community for the
independence and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which cannot be questioned by any one
of its entities, as well as for respecting the choices of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, insofar as they comply with
international law and the framework established by the
Peace Agreement. In that regard, we call on all Bosnian
political actors to respect the central institutions
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to refrain from any
initiative that could undermine those institutions, such
as the referendum project. The establishment of the rule
of law is a prerequisite for a calm political debate.

We call for great vigilance with regard to any
initiative likely to introduce new divisions in the
country. We once again urge all parties to cooperate
with the institutions mentioned in the Peace Agreement,
including the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Office of the High Representative.
The latter must focus its efforts on facilitating a
peaceful dialogue on a daily basis between the different
communities and the different entities involved.

France calls on all actors to abandon divisive
rhetoric. The time has come to focus on the
implementation of the economic and social reforms
that constitute the common aspirations of all citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless oftheir community
of origin. That is also true for electoral reform. France
calls on all political parties to enter into a serious
dialogue. Otherwise, the legal framework for elections
risks being flawed.

However, despite that fragility, France remains
convinced that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is now on the path towards normalization, thanks in
particular to the European perspective. Our objective
for the next few years remains, without calling into
question the founding principles of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, to change the international presence, taking
into account, in particular, the progress of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its European path. France is pleased
that the European perspective is now the main driver of
development and consolidation of the country. Frances
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union.

In that regard, we welcome several positive
developments for Bosnia and Herzegovina on the road
to European integration. The official submission to
the Bosnian authorities of the questionnaire to launch
the European Commission's examination of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's candidacy for the European Union
is certainly part of those positive developments. It is
part of a context in which the prospect of European
integration enjoys massive support among the Bosnian
population and it is the subject of real unanimity
within institutions, from the Presidency to the cantons,
including political entities, which is something that we
can only welcome enthusiastically.

In that context, the European Union will continue
more than ever to support the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in the implementation of reforms
that meet the economic and social aspirations of the
population. The reform agenda is central to that end.
We are therefore concerned about the slowdown in
the reforms, which started at the beginning of the
year. In the framework of the questionnaire, we will
attach particular importance to demonstrating the full
functionality of the coordination mechanism in the
European matter.

Finally, the Althea military operation will also
continue its work by adapting itself as best as it can to
the security situation on the ground in order to enable
the Bosnian security forces to operate autonomously. In
the coming weeks, it will be the subject of a strategic
review led by the European Union, which will guide its
efforts for the years to come.

Twenty-one years after the horror of war, 25
years after the beginning of the conflict, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is moving in the right direction today,
with the support of the European Union and its other
partners. The responsibility of the international
community, and in particular of the Council, is to
encourage it along that path, so that it definitively turn
the page on quarrels of the past.

