Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): The delegation of
Kazakhstan thanks the Dominican presidency of the
Council for organizing this open debate. We commend
you for the choice of this very timely and critical issue
and look forward to greater awareness and action in
that regard.

We also express our appreciation to today's
briefers - Mr. Achim Steiner, Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, and Under-
Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo - for their
comprehensive insights.

We acknowledge that the planet's climate is an
ever-increasing security problem, with innumerable
direct and indirect consequences in many regions of the
world. We see the direct interlinkages between human
insecurity and violent conflict, and between climate
change and the lack of development. They are based
on the vulnerability of local places and social groups,
the nature of livelihoods and the role and capacity of
States with regard to development and peacemaking,
as well as access to natural resources that sustain
livelihoods. Likewise, rising sea levels endanger the
very existence of small island developing States.
Sustainable development helps to mitigate climate
change. It is impossible to alleviate the environmental
damage without it.

In that context, Kazakhstan focuses on the problems
that occur elsewhere owing to the degradation and
desertification of land, the lack of drinking water and
the increasingly frequent hurricanes, earthquakes, wild
fires and landslides that lead to disruption, culminating
in violent conflicts. We therefore are proactive by
gaining a comprehensive understanding of the risks
and vulnerabilities associated with climate-related
disasters, by setting up early warning systems and by
adopting risk reduction and disaster preparedness and
management strategies. Those are reinforced by timely
information-sharing and risk management through a
multilateral approach among Member States, as well as
the United Nations and other international organizations.

There must be better synergy among the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council as they work to implement the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
the Paris Agreement and the most recent robust set of
implementation guidelines for the Paris Agreement,
adopted in Katowice. We can therefore look forward to
the climate summit debate in September this year for
more effective road maps.

The global state of the environment in recent
decades threatens all regions, including Central Asia.
Kazakhstan is affected by global warming, in particular
by the dramatic pace at which glaciers are melting,
which greatly risks drinking and irrigation water
supplies in the region being exhausted by 2050. That is
a global problem experienced in Peru, Tajikistan, Nepal
and many other countries. In that vein, the Central
Asian Regional Glaciological Centre, established in
close cooperation with UNESCO, will contribute its
input to that global challenge.
Kazakhstan is also negatively impacted by the
Aral Sea disaster, which gravely affects the sustainable
development of the region, as also mentioned by our
Uzbek colleagues. My country spares no effort in
mitigating the negative effects of the dramatically
shrinking Aral Sea over the past four decades. We
actively engage in fruitful transboundary water
cooperation among the Central Asian States within the
mandate of the International Fund for Saving the Aral
Sea. Because of that laudable initiative, in recent years
we have increased the area of the Aral Sea by 1,000
square kilometres and doubled its volume from 15 to
almost 30 cubic kilometres. We have also recovered
19 lakes in the Aral Sea basin. However, international
support is still relevant for the region.

In addition, since 2016, we have taken the lead by
establishing the Central Asia Centre for Emergency
Situations and Disaster Risk Reduction in Almaty to
mitigate the risk of emergencies and their consequences
and to coordinate a joint response through regional
and international cooperation. The Centre plans to
act as an operating base in the event of a large-scale
emergency in Central Asia. It is important to note that,
together with other donor agencies and international
organizations, the Centre has initiated and implemented
more than 20 joint programmes and projects in the field
of emergency situations and disaster risk reduction
to the tune of $1.7 million. Afghanistan has been
granted observer status at the Centre. The Centre could
therefore potentially become the regional centre for
disaster management in Central Asia and Afghanistan.

New globalization trends imply transnational and
cross-border threats, which require a new paradigm to
address them. That, in turn, necessitates the transition
from a country-specific to a regional strategy.
Kazakhstan therefore proposes establishing a United
Nations regional centre on the Sustainable Development
Goals in Almaty, aimed at enhancing the synergy
among United Nations agencies, regional Governments
and civil society to mitigate and manage crises, build
resilience and ensure sustainable development.

Kazakhstan reiterates its commitment to conserving
the Earth's precious resources for the common legacy
and wealth of all the peoples in the world.

