Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
Government of Mr. Milosevic has taken a long time to
come to a political agreement on Kosovo. Mr. Milosevic
never showed any real interest, from 1989 onwards, in a
status for Kosovo that met minimum international
standards. He never showed any real interest in the
negotiations in France this past winter. He was preparing
something else for Kosovo. The world has witnessed the
devastating effects. What a tragedy for the Serb people that
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) allies had
to act, after trying every other avenue, with force. The
Yugoslav Charge d'Affaires said at this meeting that the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia did not threaten anybody.
Clearly, 1.8 million Kosovo Albanians fell below the
category of "anybody" for the Yugoslav authorities. We
have now stopped Mr. Milosevic's ethnic cleansing
machine in its tracks.

The authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Serb Parliament have now accepted the principles
and demands set out in the G-8 statement of 6 May and in
the Chemomyrdin-Ahtisaari paper. What a cost to the
people of Yugoslavia that Mr. Milosevic did not accept
them at Rambouillet three months ago. Instead he tried the
despicable route of murder, systematic rape, destruction of
housing, displacement: he attempted to destroy the lives and
the homeland of a whole people. In that he has been
defeated.

But this is not a victory - not for the families who
have lost loved ones, not for those whose lives have been
torn apart, and not for those whose homes have been
destroyed. Our job now is to help them home safely, to get
their lives back to normal, and to help assure their future in
the Balkans without further fear of persecution.

This Chapter-VII resolution and its annexes clearly set
out the key demands of the international community, which
Belgrade must satisfy. The interpretation and conditions
which the delegation of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
has attempted to propose have been rejected. The resolution
also provides for the deployment of an international civil
presence, led by the United Nations, for the continuing
work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, and for an effective international security
presence to re-establish a safe environment in Kosovo.
This force must command the confidence of Kosovo
Albanian refugees if they are to return home. That is why
NATO has made clear that it will be essential to have a
unified NATO chain of command under the political
direction of the North Atlantic Council in consultation
with non-NATO force contributors. This force, with
NATO at its core, will be commanded by a British
general. The United Kingdom will provide the leading
contribution of at least 13,000 troops.

This resolution applies also in full to the Kosovo
Albanians, requiring them to play their full part in the
restoration of normal life to Kosovo and in the creation of
democratic, self-governing institutions. The Kosovo
Albanian people and its leadership must rise to the
challenge of peace by accepting the obligations of the
resolution, in particular to demilitarize the Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA) and other armed groups.

To have come this far, to have secured Belgrade's
acceptance of all our demands, has required a huge
diplomatic effort. My Government pays tribute and
expresses its gratitude to Mr. Chernomyrdin, President
Ahtisaari and Mr. Talbott for their outstanding
contribution. The positive engagement of the Russian
Government, via its Special Representative and in the
preparation of this resolution by Ministers of the Group
of Eight, has been vital.

Our common challenge is now to use the momentum
towards peace generated by this settlement to move the
whole region decisively away from the tension and ethnic
conflict of the past and towards durable peace and
prosperity. This is going to require a sustained
international effort. We therefore welcome the
resolution's emphasis on a comprehensive approach to the
economic development and stabilization of the region.

We are taking today the first step towards lasting
peace in Kosovo. A vast amount of work remains to be
done. But this resolution, and the shared resolve which it
reflects, constitutes an essential contribution to the
process. It brings the United Nations, and our Secretary-
General, to the forefront of international action to give the
Balkans a stable future in a modern Europe. It has the
unqualified support of the United Kingdom.

