Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My delegation also
extends a warm welcome to the delegation of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), composed of
the Foreign Ministers of Angola, Botswana, Mozambique
and Zimbabwe. We are grateful to the members of SADC
for the initiative they have taken to accelerate the Angolan
peace process. It is our strong hope that this initiative,
combined with the consistent effort of the three observer
States, will mark a turning point towards the completion of
the peace process on the second anniversary of the signing
of the Lusaka Protocol. We agree with the assessment made
by the Foreign Ministers of SADC that peace and stability
in Angola are prerequisites for peace and development in
the southern African region as a whole.

We share the general frustration and the
disappointment expressed by the SADC members at the
extremely slow progress in the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol. Indeed, the Angolan peace process has

 

stalled since the last extension of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) mandate
three months ago. Although we recognize that the near
completion of the quartering of the UNITA troops and the
continued holding of the ceasefire are no small
achievements, key political and military issues remain
unresolved. We regret the persistent delays in the
formation of the unified armed forces, in the extension of
state administration to the entire country and in the
establishment of the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation. UNITA's attempts to hinder the demining
operations of UNAVEM. III are also a matter of serious
concern to my Government.

The current stalling of the peace process is largely
attributable to UNITA's failure to honour its
commitments, into which it freely entered. We were
disappointed that the Third Extraordinary Congress of
UNITA ended without taking the necessary decisions to
facilitate the settlement of outstanding issues. The
subsequent failure by Mr. Savimbi to attend the SADC
summit meeting on the grounds of political conditions has
only reinforced the international community's doubts
about the credibility of UNITA's commitment to the
peace process.

Given the tremendous amount of effort and resources
the international community has devoted to the Angolan
peace process, including nearly $1 million each day out
of the already strained United Nations peacekeeping
budget, we cannot settle for less than a shining success in
what has become the largest United Nations peacekeeping
operation. We believe it is time to send an unequivocal
message to UNITA that the Security Council's patience
is not unlimited and that any further procrastination by
UN lTA in the implementation of its obligations under the
Lusaka Protocol and its pattern of last-minute concessions
will no longer be tolerated. In this context, we are in
favor of the idea proposed by SADC to apply additional
measures in the event that UNITA fails to comply with its
obligations within a prescribed time-frame.

We call on UNITA to fulfill without delay the tasks
enumerated in the "Mediation Document" formulated by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The
speed and sincerity with which UNITA cooperates with
these tasks will be a test of the credibility of UNITA's
continued commitment to the peace process. Among the
most urgent tasks at this crucial stage is the completion of
the selection of UNITA soldiers for incorporation into the
Angolan Armed Forces (FAA), without which the process
of demobilization and social integration of ex-combatants

 

cannot move forward. In this regard, we urge UNITA to
send immediately its four remaining generals for integration
into the FAA.

We share the view that the lack of mutual trust and
confidence between President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi
lies at the heart of the stalemate in the peace process. That
is why my Government attaches great importance to an
early meeting between the two leaders in Angola. We look
forward to the expeditious settlement at that meeting of all
outstanding issues, including the special status of
Mr. Savimbi.

One positive aspect of the Angolan peace process is
that, while the ceasefire continues to hold, the achievement
of political objectives through military means has now
become virtually impossible. It is incumbent upon the
international community to make one last-ditch effort to
revive the momentum of the peace process and ensure its
successful completion by putting maximum pressure on the
parties, as well as by assisting in the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of Angola. In this context, I would like to
express my delegation's readiness to support the combined
efforts of the SADC Foreign Ministers and the three
observer States to work out a draft resolution.

Finally, my delegation supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation to extend the mandate of
UNAVEM. III for only two months. My delegation
expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on the situation in Angola and to his
Special Representative, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, for
his devotion and commitment to ensuring the success of the
Angolan peace process. We also pay tribute to the men and
women serving in UNAVEM. III.

