Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Protecting
civilians in armed conflict is a universal obligation
under international humanitarian law, not a policy
decision by States. Targeting civilians, health-care
providers, schools or other protected persons or
facilities is a crime, irrespective of considerations of
military necessity. Nevertheless, we have witnessed a
gradual and dramatic erosion of respect for the most
basic rules of warfare. It is our collective responsibility
to reverse that trend through the special role entrusted
to the Security Council, at the core of whose mandate
is the protection of civilians.

The large-scale suffering of civilian populations
continues in many ongoing conflicts - in Syria, Yemen,
Myanmar and the Central African Republic, among
other places. The many violations include starvation,
sexual and gender-based violence as a method of
warfare - often also committed against men and boys,
such as in the Central African Republic - and attacks
on medical workers and facilities, which continue
to increase at an alarming rate despite the strong
condemnation by the Security Council in resolution
2286 (2016). The continued lack of implementation of
that resolution should be a call for action to the Security
Council, and the membership as a whole, as the erosion
of the international rule of law is of concern to all of us.

Preventing mass atrocities from occurring in the
first place is the most effective protection of civilians.
We are encouraged by the fact that 116 States have
joined the code of conduct of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group on mass atrocity
crimes. We hope that more States will soon subscribe to
that important political commitment, especially those
that are interested in serving on the Security Council.
We will continue to work towards its consistent
implementation by requesting its application and by
engaging with the United Nations system to that end.
We encourage the Secretary-General to continue to
bring to the attention of the Council situations where
atrocities are committed or where an outbreak of
violence is likely, in line with the powers of his Office
under the Charter of the United Nations.

The situation of the Rohingya in Myanmar is
among the most pressing examples of such situations.
We welcome the recent visit of the Security Council to
Myanmar and Bangladesh. At the same time, the visit has
not inspired a sense ofurgency in the Council's actions.
There is little indication that the Council will address
the accountability dimension of the ongoing crisis.
However, it is clear that ensuring justice is part of the
conditions necessary to allow for the safe and voluntary
return of the forcibly displaced Rohingya population.
It is precisely for such kinds of situations that the
International Criminal Court (ICC) was created 20 years
ago. We commend the Court's Prosecutor for exploring
the option of investigating the forced displacement of
the Rohingya as a crime against humanity. However,
we also continue to believe that the Security Council
should use its competence to refer the situation 4 and
therefore all crimes committed in the conflict - to the
Court. The Council has so far shown an unfortunate
inclination to separate the justice dimension from the
humanitarian crisis when it seems clear that the latter
cannot be addressed without the former. In our View,
that will not work. That situation remains an' excellent
illustration of the fact that the Council needs to address
mass atrocities in order not only to protect civilians but
also to do its work effectively.

In conclusion, let me echo the call of the Secretary-
General, who this morning asked for the full support
of all States for the International Criminal Court, and
join the many speakers who called for the universal
ratification of the Rome Statute. We would also like to
remind the Council that armed conflict itself poses the
greatest threat to civilian populations. From 17 July,
which is the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
the Court will have jurisdiction over an additional
crime - the most serious forms of the illegal use
of force. We therefore call on all States to ratify the
Amendments to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court on the crime of aggression, thereby
giving the ICC jurisdiction over that crime.

