Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me start by joining
earlier speakers in extending a warm welcome to
President Thabo Mbeki. Brazil commends his
leadership and the excellent work of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel. I thank Special
Representatives Ibrahim Gambari and Haile Menkerios
and Joint Chief Mediator Djibril Bassole for their
statements. More importantly, we commend them for
their invaluable work.

This meeting reflects and consolidates the
relatively new integrated approach the United Nations
has been taking to Sudanese affairs. Such an approach
is imperative, since the various Sudanese crises are all
merely different manifestations of the tension between
centre and periphery in the Sudan, political, economic
or cultural. Today's briefing also celebrates the fruitful
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, combining the Charter-based authority
of the Security Council with the African Union's
extensive knowledge of the political and cultural
context in which African conflicts occur, and Africans'
determination to play an active and constructive role in
the resolution of such conflicts. In Sudan, in particular,
that partnership is indispensable, given the importance
of the country's affairs not only to its immediate
vicinity, but also to the continent as a whole.

This meeting is also an effort by the Security
Council to be ahead of events and engage in truly
preventive diplomacy. My delegation encourages the
Council to conduct similar exercises with respect to
other issues on its agenda that require the same kind of
forward-looking attitude.

I would like to make brief comments on a few
aspects of the issue at hand. On Sudan as a whole, we
attach great importance to the coordination of the
various international actors involved. If international
action is to be fully effective, not only do we have to
deal with Sudan in a holistic manner, but we also need
to ensure that multilateral and regional organizations,
peacekeeping missions, mediation teams, special
envoys, donors and other stakeholders move in the
same direction and support each other. For that to
happen, we must rely on adequate coordination
mechanisms.

The well-coordinated support of the international
community was crucial to the positive outcome of the
negotiations that led to the adoption of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). Its full
implementation will require the same unity of purpose,
in particular to assist the parties to overcome their
differences and mutual distrust. That is key not only to
help them make the difficult decisions that still lie
ahead, but also to build productive and cooperative
relations after the referendum. The meetings held in
Addis Ababa in early May, particularly the consultative
meeting of 8 May, were positive steps in the right
direction. The challenge now is to ensure that those
initiatives are focused and effective and that they
receive the proper follow-up.

Another aspect of utmost importance is ensuring
that the referendums are not only fair and credible but
are also perceived as such by the parties and the
population. To that end, no efforts should be spared in
appropriate preparation. The United Nations must be
ready to assist the parties, at their request, in whatever
they need, including in the determination of the
modalities for the holding of the referendums and
popular consultations.

Assistance must also be provided, as requested by
the parties, to facilitate arrangements on wealth-
sharing, power-sharing, citizenship rights, borders and
currency, among other sensitive issues, irrespective of
the outcome of the southern referendum. Needless to
say, such assistance must be rigorously consistent with
the CPA and must in no way prejudge or influence the
results of the referendums and popular consultations.
The strict impartiality of the United Nations is the
political sine qua non condition of this necessary
exercise in preventive diplomacy.

The wide acceptance of the results of the
southern referendum and its timely implementation
will also depend on the prevalence of an environment
that is at least minimally peaceful. To that end, it will
be important to intensify current efforts to address the
immediate challenges posed by food insecurity,
intertribal clashes and fragile security institutions. The
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and
bilateral and multilateral donors have a particularly
relevant role to play in that regard. A modicum of
stability will also be needed in the aftermath of the
referendum.

This means that the United Nations presence in
Sudan will likely be required beyond the transitional
period established by the CPA in order to help maintain
peace, provide security and implement the outcome of
the referendum, whatever it might be. Such a presence
would need to rely extensively on the human and
material resources currently available to UNMIS.
Given the time required by the United Nations to
mobilize and deploy resources to the field, it is
important that the Secretariat develop very solid
contingency plans and, if necessary, submit to Member
States, as appropriate, a full assessment of the
Mission's further needs. The Security Council should
also begin to reflect on the possible role that the
Peacebuilding Commission might play in both the
unity and secession scenarios.

Finally, I wish to say a few words regarding
Darfur. Reaching a peace agreement before January
2011 is very important. If that proves impossible, at
least a stable ceasefire seems necessary. We fully
support efforts by the Mediation to stimulate the
unified representation of all rebel movements.
Appropriate enforcement of the arms embargo is also
key. We also support measures taken to secure ample
participation of Darfurian civil society in the search for
peace. In that regard, we welcome the announcement,
during President Mbeki's visit to Khartoum last week,
of the holding of the Darfur-Darfur conference. My
delegation hopes that the participants in the initiative
will discuss the issues of guaranteeing political
representation to the groups excluded from last April's
elections.
Fully implementing the CPA and ending the
Darfur conflict are formidable challenges. If we are
successful there, we will have gone a long way towards
helping bring enduring peace and long-term stability to
the whole African continent. We cannot but succeed.

