Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
trust that your expertise and wisdom will guarantee the
success of the Council's work this month.

We would also like to express our appreciation to
your predecessor, Ms. Susan Rice, Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations, for her effective management of the
work of the Security Council last month.

(spoke in English)

In its advisory opinion of 9 July 2004 relating to
the Legal consequences of the construction ofa wall in
the occupied Palestinian territory (see A/ES-10/273)
the International Court of Justice recalled, in
paragraphs 74 to 76, the position of the Security
Council in respect of the city of Jerusalem. The Court
noted specifically in paragraph 75 how the Council, in
resolution 298 (1971), advanced

"all legislative and administrative actions taken
by Israel to change the status of the City of
Jerusalem, including expropriation of land and
properties, transfer of populations and legislation
aimed at the incorporation of the occupied
section, are totally invalid and cannot change that
status".

The actions undertaken by Ateret Cohanim last
week in demolishing the Shepherd Hotel cannot
therefore, as much as Ateret Cohanim may seek
otherwise, change the legal status of East Jerusalem as
occupied territory or, to put it more succinctly, cannot
turn it from territory that is not Israeli into territory
that is. However strenuously it may justify its actions
in supporting the settler agenda, the Israeli
Government is virtually alone in the world in
recognizing these actions by Ateret Cohanim and other
groups, like E1 Ad, to be lawful under, it would have us
believe, a combination of Israeli military and
administrative law.

And yet the applicable law in respect of the
exercise by Israel of military control over the occupied
Palestinian territory is clear: it is not Israeli law that
reigns supreme there, but international humanitarian
law applicable to all high contracting parties as well as
obligations that are ergo omnis. Israel's administrative
and military regulations insofar as the West Bank is
concerned must therefore be utterly consistent with the
Fourth Geneva Convention, and its control guided
strictly by its obligations as the occupying Power.

The position of the International Court of Justice
on this very last point is unambiguous. It maintained in
paragraph 78 of its 2004 opinion that

"The territories situated between the Green Line
. and the former eastern boundary of Palestine
under the Mandate were occupied by Israel in
1967 during the armed conflict between Israel
and Jordan. Under customary international law,
these were therefore occupied territories in which
Israel had the status of occupying Power.
Subsequent events in these territories have
done nothing to alter this situation. All these
territories (including East Jerusalem) remain
occupied territories and Israel has continued to
have the status of occupying Power."

It also merits noting that there are no territorial
exceptions to this finding: all of the territory of the
West Bank, as described by the Court, is considered
occupied. A closer reading of resolution 242 (1967)
also bears this point out, as we explained before the
Court on 24 February 2004. In his oral submission, the
late Sir Arthur Watts Q.C., counsel for Jordan, noted
how resolution 242 (1967) "affirmed unanimously the
principle of Israel's withdrawal of its armed forces
from the territories occupied in the recent conflict".
That meant, and could only mean, territories on the
non-Israeli side of the Green Line.

Thus the Green Line is the starting line from
which is measured the extent of Israel's occupation of
non-Israeli territory. Having originated in 1949 as an
armistice line, it became in 1967 the line to the Israeli
side of which Israel had to withdraw its forces and on
the non-Israeli side of which territory was occupied by
Israel. It is also perhaps worth recalling that in
negotiating what became resolution 242 (1967), the
principle interlocutors reached the understanding that
there would be a withdrawal from all non-Israeli
territory, with only minor reciprocal border
rectifrcations.

For decades, Israel has been settling on territory
that does not belong to it, against the wishes of the
Palestinian people, to whom the territory does belong
and who yearn for their freedom. While it is now
readily accepted, the settlement policy can only be
undone through a negotiated agreement between the
Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Government. For
the latter to offer to hold talks with the Palestinian
President while simultaneously allowing groups like El
Ad and Ateret Cohanim to continue their usurpation of
Palestinian lands under the veil of Israeli law, the very
imposition of which is ultra vires, is contemptible and
not becoming of a people who themselves have
historically suffered greatly at the hands of others.

That settlement building has continued unabated
over many years is true, notwithstanding the rising
chorus of indignation on the part of the international
community towards it. Yet there was hope that
comprehensive peace could be secured before it was
foreclosed altogether by the growth in the number of
settlements. That hope is being extinguished fast.
Why? Because even if its legal status cannot be
changed, so near are we to seeing East Jerusalem
sealed off from the rest of the West Bank, from the
cumulative effect of both the separation wall and the
actions of the settler movement - all supported by the
Israeli Government - it will shortly simply not be
believable to us that any future Israeli Government
could reverse it.

For even if there were to be a peace deal struck
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority requiring
Israel to cede East Jerusalem, will there be an Israeli
Government willing to implement such a deal and be
prepared to go to war with its settler community over
the latter's increasingly entrenched position in East
Jerusalem, no matter what other occupied territories
Israel has withdrawn from in the past? And if there
were to be no negotiated settlement over Jerusalem
because the settler organizations will have rendered the
point moot through their actions, then the peace we all
desire - a comprehensive, just and durable peace -
will have been murdered by an avoidable circumstance;
and Israel will be alone to chart an impossible course
for itself in de facto control over an Arab population
soon to be in the majority.

If those individuals on the right in Israel believe
in more noxious measures for addressing the reality
soon to be staring them in the face, the international
community, specifically the International Criminal
Court, will possibly have a say in the matter too.

The actions of the settler movement in the
occupied Palestinian territory must therefore be stopped.
And the deep suffering of the Palestinian people must be
brought to an end through the establishment of their
own State on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security.

When the Security Council held its first meeting
on 17 January 1946, the very horrors of the Second
World War, including the Holocaust, were freshly in
the mind of its members. If there was one objective it
had to fulfil in the future, it was to preclude the
recurrence of the sort of wars that left much of the
world in ruin twice in the twentieth century. Sixty-five
years and two days later, that objective remains as
relevant as ever. The Council must therefore show
itself strong enough to diffuse and overcome those

spinning winds that, through their centrifugal forces,
will draw countries - indeed whole regions - into a
single colossus of an emergency quite beyond anything
we see today. A single violent shock in the heart of
Jerusalem could, for example, achieve this on its own.
For the Council to simply wait for it to occur is hardly
adequate preparation for what gigantic consequences
will surely flow from such a transformational event.

The Israelis will occasionally say to us that
resolving the conflict is less a matter of law than
psychology. Given the rhythms and the very real
traumas of Jewish historical experience, they are
cautious about placing their trust in anybody, let alone,
they say, in us, the Arabs. Perhaps we must concede
that we could have done more to better understand this
point - done more to develop greater trust by, inter
alia, better explaining the terms of the Arab Peace
Initiative to the Israeli public.

On the other hand, the actions of States must also
be guided by the rules, which the Council itself must
uphold. Our deep opposition to the policy of settlement
building and our repeated strong condemnation of it,
which we reiterate today, is not founded on some form
of primordial enmity or bigotry towards the Jewish
people. Any assertion to that effect is itself thoroughly
distasteful to us. What it is built on is the continuing
three-decade-long violation of international
humanitarian law, as confirmed by the International
Court of Justice. In paragraph 120 of its 2004 advisory
opinion (see A/ES-10/273), the International Court of
Justice held that,

"As regards these settlements, the Court
notes that Article 49, paragraph 6, of the Fourth
Geneva Convention provides: 'The Occupying
Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its own
civilian population into the territory it occupies.'
That provision prohibits not only deportations or
forced transfers of population such as those
carried out during the Second World War, but also
any measures taken by an occupying Power in
order to organize or encourage transfers of parts
of its own population into the occupied territory.
In this respect, the information provided to the
Court shows that, since 1977, Israel has
conducted a policy and developed practices
involving the establishment of settlements in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, contrary to the
terms ofArticle 49, paragraph 6, just cited."
The Court continued:

"The Security Council has thus taken the View that
such policy and practices 'have no legal validity'.
It has also called upon 'Israel, as the occupying
Power, to abide scrupulously' by the Fourth
Geneva Convention and: 'to rescind its previous
measures and to desist from taking any action
which would result in changing the legal status and
geographical nature and materially affecting the
demographic composition of the Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem and, in
particular, not to transfer parts of its own civilian
population into the occupied Arab territories'
(resolution 446 (1979) of 22 March 1979)"
11-21051
The Court went on to remind us that the Council
reaffirmed its position in resolutions 452 (1979) and
465 (1980). The Court concludes that

"the Israeli settlements in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory (including East Jerusalem)
have been established in breach of international
law."

