Mr. Klein (United States of America): Thank you
very much for your strong leadership of the Council
this month, Mr. President. You and your very capable
team have guided us efficiently and kept us on track
and on time throughout this busy month of August.

Today I would like to share my delegation's views
on some areas where the Security Council has been
productive this month, and also to look ahead to a
few areas that will require our continued attention in
September and beyond.

The Council's trip this month allowed us to
witness first-hand the stakes of our deliberations. The
visit to South Sudan was particularly timely, given
the deteriorating political, humanitarian and security
crisis unfolding there. The visit allowed the Council to
hear from many stakeholders and to directly convey a
number of important messages, including the fact that
the Council is prepared to impose consequences on
spoilers of the peace process, and that we will continue
to focus closely on developments. Another area where
we saw a measure of progress this month was related
to the removal and destruction of chemical weapons in
Syria. We commend the efforts of the United Nations,
particularly those of the personnel working on the
ground. Our international partners have been absolutely
instrumental in the removal and ongoing destruction
of Syria's declared chemical weapons. Still, serious
questions remain, and the international community,
including the Council, must continue to hold the
Syrian regime accountable for meeting its international
obligations.

We found our two thematic debates this month - on
the protection of humanitarian workers (see S/PV.7244)
and on conflict prevention (see S/PV.7247) - to be
complementary and worthy of our continued attention.
Some 108 million people are now in need ofhumanitarian
assistance worldwide, and violence is displacing more
people than ever before. Humanitarian workers are often
the vulnerable first responders to crises. The increasing
frequency of attacks on humanitarian workers and the
number killed in 2013, especially in Syria, alarm us.
Our discussion on conflict prevention drove home
the need to head off humanitarian crises before they
occur. The United States commends the United Nations
efforts, particularly those of the Department of Political
Affairs, to monitor and analyse developments around
the world and to alert the Security Council and the
international community to brewing crises.

In addition to the humanitarian crisis in Syria,
which I mentioned just now, many topics will require
our continued attention in September and beyond. Five
issues stand out.

The first issue is the Central African Republic. We
will see an important transfer of authority to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
next month, and we will need to closely track the
political transition progress and humanitarian issues.
We expect the Secretariat to keep us informed on
progress in bringing MINUSCA up to full strength and
on any help that it needs in that regard.

The second issue is the Middle East. The
announcement of the ceasefire in Gaza on Tuesday
was welcome. We hope very much that this ceasefire
will prove to be lasting, that it will put an end to rocket
and mortar attacks and that it will allow for talks
under Egyptian mediation to continue and to address
the underlying issues and achieve a durable and
sustainable solution. That includes a stronger role for
the Palestinian Authority, reconstruction and relief and
addressing the need for demilitarization. As Secretary
of State Kerry said, the delivery of urgently needed
humanitarian assistance to the people of Gaza must be
accelerated. The United States is prepared to work with
our international partners on a major reconstruction
initiative. We look forward to working with the Council
on suitable ways for us and for the United Nations to
support long-term solutions in Gaza.

The third topic is Ukraine, which is clearly an
issue that the Council must continue to follow closely.
We look forward to Assistant Secretary-General
Simonovie's new report on human rights, scheduled
to come out tomorrow. But as the Council showed just
earlier this afternoon (see S/PV.7253), the security
situation remains troubling. As Ambassador Power
just said in this Chamber, Russia's action amounts to
a deliberate effort to support, and now fight alongside,
illegal separatists in another sovereign country.

Fourthly, next month we will need to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) while addressing the impact of ebola in
Liberia and on the Mission. We strongly support
UNMIL and express our deep appreciation for the
willingness of countries to continue to contribute troops
to it. The United States Embassy in Monrovia remains
open, and our peacekeepers remain in the Mission. We
share concerns regarding the safety of peacekeepers
and hope the Secretariat will keep the Council informed
about measures it is taking to allow the Mission to keep

operating. For our part, we are working intensely with
the World Health Organization and others on this issue
and are providing considerable resources of our own in
the fight to contain ebola in Liberia and elsewhere.

This month also concludes with peacekeepers of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
under assault and the downing of a helicopter of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan. Next month
we will have to consider what measures are necessary
to deal with threats to peacekeepers.

Finally, the adoption of resolution 2170 (2014), on
the threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
the Nusrah Front, was welcome. But it also underlines
that more needs to be done, particularly to address the
problem of foreign terrorist fighters. To highlight the
importance of that threat, President Obama will chair
a high-level Council briefing on that topic during the
General Assembly high-level week next month.

Lastly, I would like to thank delegations for their
expressions of support. We look forward to working
with the Council on these issues and so many others
during our upcoming presidency in September.

