Mr. Serrano (European Union): Mr. President,
many thanks for giving the floor to the European

Union. The candidate countries of Turkey, Croatia and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
countries of the Stabilisation and Association Process
and potential candidates of Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia, as well as the
Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
declaration. I will read an abridged version of my
statement.

I wish to thank the Chairs of the Committees
established under resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004) for their reports. We note that, since
the most recent debate on this topic in May 2010 (see S/PV.6310), a number of relevant developments have
occurred, which demonstrates the usefulness of having
these regular briefings.

The European Union highly commends the efforts
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Mayr-Harting, and its Monitoring Team to strengthen
due process in the Committee's work.

The adoption of resolution 1904 (2009), at the
end of last year, was a significant step forward in the
continued efforts of the Security Council to ensure that
fair and clear procedures exist for listing and de-listing
decisions. We believe that ensuring procedural
guarantees for the individuals and entities designated
by the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee will
strengthen the effectiveness of the sanctions and
contribute to their credibility.

In that regard, we welcome the creation of the
Office of the Ombudsperson and the appointment of
Judge Kimberly Prost as Ombudsperson. We wish her
every success in the fulfilment of her challenging
mandate and offer her the full support of the European
Union (EU). The full cooperation with, and the
provision of all relevant information to, the
Ombudsperson and the consideration of her
observations are essential.
The EU remains committed to ensuring the
implementation of the decisions adopted by the
Committee in its own legal order. The most recent
judgement of the EU General Court in the Kadi case
indicates that legal challenges remain ahead. However,
we are confident that those challenges can be
overcome. They should not be considered as putting in
question the EU commitment to upholding the
principles of the United Nations Charter and the
collective obligations of its member States under it. In
that regard, a continued dialogue between EU
institutions and the Security Council remains essential
to address these common issues in order to find
common solutions.

We welcome the completion by the Committee of
the comprehensive review of the consolidated list at
the end of July, thereby fulfilling an important mandate
under resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009). The
implementation of the new provisions of resolution
1904 (2009) should further enhance the quality and
credibility of the sanctions regime.

The European Union would also like to commend
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), under the
able leadership of Ambassador Apakan of Turkey, as
well as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) for their ongoing work, and in
particular the emphasis on capacity-building and the
facilitation of technical assistance to countries
requesting it, bearing in mind the respective mandates
and roles of the CTC and CTED. We recall in this
context the continuing support of the EU for capacity-
building projects in close cooperation with CTED.

We also appreciate the recent activities of the
Committee and CTED to address specific counter-
terrorism issues through thematic debates and
briefings, as well as the many regional workshops. We
look forward with interest to the upcoming mandate
renewal. In this context, we continue to encourage
deeper integration of human rights in the work of the
CTC and CTED with Member States, as well as closer
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and its entities.

The European Union fully supports the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), and we warmly thank Ambassador Heller of
Mexico for conducting the Committee's efforts. The
EU strategy against the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction of 2003 and the EU new lines for
action adopted in 2008 provide the framework for
concrete EU action in that regard.

The European Union has been active in ensuring
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), both
internally, inter alia through regular updates of its
regulation on export controls on dual-use goods, and
externally, by promoting the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in third countries and
supporting a number of projects and regional
workshops.

In closing, I would like to commend once again
the crucial and complex work of these three specialized
Security Council Committees to prevent and combat
terrorism. More generally, we wish to underline the
importance of good cooperation between the
Committees and all relevant United Nations actors in
this field.

The European Union would like to underline once
again that any measures that we undertake to prevent
and combat terrorism must comply with our obligations
under international law, in particular human rights law,
refugee law and international humanitarian law.

The European Union would like to join others in
thanking the members, experts and Chairmen of the
three Committees for their important work. I would
like to assure them of the full commitment of the EU to
support the Committees' work.

