Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): First of all, I wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. I begin today by
expressing Japan's sincere respect for the efforts of Mr.
Harri Holkeri, former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, to improve the situation in Kosovo.
We also extend our heartfelt congratulations to Mr.
Soren Jessen-Petersen on his appointment as the next
Special Representative for Kosovo.

As the new Special Representative is expected to
commence his work in the near future, today's public
meeting will be an excellent opportunity to reassess the
situation and the policies in place up to the present. I
am confident that Mr. Jessen-Petersen will also make
his best effort in his new post, taking into consideration
the conclusions drawn from today's discussion.

The Government of Japan wishes to make three
points today. First, against the background of the
lessons of the March violence, we welcome the fact
that the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
and UNMIK, with the help of concerned countries,
have drafted a framework document for the devolution
of responsibilities to local authorities. My Government
hopes that, through the careful implementation of the
framework, the human rights of minorities will be
better protected and the establishment of a democratic
and multi-ethnic society will be accelerated.

At the last public meeting on this item (see S/PV.4967), a number of representatives mentioned the
importance of making tolerance a reality in Kosovo.
Japan firmly believes that establishing such tolerance
is the key to the successful implementation of the
Kosovo standards. In this context, we welcome the
implementation of inter-community talks on several
subjects, and particularly the consultations that
included both Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs,
which have led to an agreement on the establishment of
institutions for human rights and the return of refugees.
We would also like to emphasize that the rebuilding of
homes destroyed in the March violence should be
completed as soon as possible in order to improve
mutual trust among the communities involved.

Lastly, building tolerance will require a positive
change in the mental attitude of the people; that is, they
must have reason to hope for a better life for
themselves. Regrettably, recent news reports indicate
that the unemployment rate in Kosovo is again rising
and is now approaching 70 per cent. This situation, in
which the people are enduring unacceptably high
unemployment and are thus unable to have any hope
for their future, must be changed. UNMIK and the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, with the
assistance of the international community, must
redouble their efforts to address this issue within the
framework of the Kosovo Standards Implementation
Plan.

Based on our firm belief that stabilizing the
situation in Kosovo is essential for the stability and
prosperity of the entire region, my Government has
contributed, to date, approximately $186 million in
assistance for that purpose. We remain committed to
the goal of achieving stability and prosperity in South-
Eastern Europe, in cooperation with the international
community as a whole.

