Mr. Trovoada (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to present to the
Security Council the report of the Secretary-General
on developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2016/14l).

Since the publication of the report, the situation in
Guinea-Bissau has continued to be characterized by
ongoing differences within the political class. Those
differences were in evidence during the vote on the
Government's programme on 23 December 2015, during
which 15 members of the ruling African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde (PAIGC)
abstained, despite instructions from the party. In
response, the PAIGC decided to expel them and called
for their replacement in the National Assembly. To that
end, the Permanent Commission met on 15 January
2016 and declared the revocation of the terms of office
the 15 members.

Today, these political differences, which had been
confined to Parliament, have unleashed a true political
and legal imbroglio. The Speaker of the National
Assembly, on the one hand, and 3 of the 15 expelled
members, on the other, have separately petitioned the
Regional Court of Bissau to adjudicate the decision
of the Permanent Commission to revoke the mandates
of the aforementioned members of Parliament.
On 8 February, the Court issued an interim order
invalidating the suspension of the mandate revocation,
contrary to its original decision, which ordered those
same members to comply with the decision of the
Permanent Commission of the National Assembly.

In that context, on 1 February the President of
the Republic took the initiative of bringing together
the different parties to the conflict to seek, through
dialogue, a consensus outcome to the current political
impasse in Parliament. He decided to invite to the
presidential palace the Speaker of the National
Assembly and representatives of the PAIGC, the Party
for Social Renewal (PRS), the 15 Assembly members
whose mandates had been revoked, and representatives
of civil society for meetings that took place in the
presence of representatives of the group of five
international partners of Guinea-Bissau: the African
Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the European Union
and the United Nations. President Vaz shared the
correspondence he had received concerning the current
crisis, including that in which he had been asked to use
his judicial influence to resolve the crisis. Each party
presented its position and its underlying political and
legal arguments.

On 2 February, the President convened a second
meeting at which the parties reiterated their respective
positions. On the one hand, the National Assembly
and the PAIGC maintained that the members had been
excluded legally; on the other, the 15 expelled members
were supported by the PRS, which considered their
exclusion to be illegal. Following the second round of
discussions, on 4 February the leader of the PAIGC sent
a letter to the President of the Republic, requesting that
the format of the meetings be modified and arguing that
the dialogue should be conducted among institutions
rather than individuals.
Consequently, neither the National Assembly nor
the PAIGC have participated in subsequent meetings,
including that of 10 February, which took place in
the presence of former President Olusegun Obasanjo,
the Special Envoy of the President of Nigeria, and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-
Leste, Mr. Hernani Coelho, who holds the rotating
presidency of the CPLP, accompanied by Mr. Murade
Murargy, Executive Secretary of that organization,
in addition to representatives of the group of five
international partners.

In the meantime, I went to Senegal and Guinea from
3 to 8 February to talk with the leaders of those two
neighbouring States about recent political developments
in Guinea-Bissau. During our meeting, President Macky
Sall, Acting Chair of ECOWAS, expressed his concern
about the current political stalemate and assured me that
ECOWAS would continue to support the stabilization
process in Guinea-Bissau. He stressed, however,
the importance for the subregional organization of
receiving financial assistance to maintain its military
mission, the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau,
beyond 30 June. President Alpha Conde', who is also
ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau, shared with me
the same concerns as his Senegalese counterpart.

The more the institutions of the State and the
principal political players are divided, the more the
ongoing political situation will gain in complexity,
thereby delaying the implementation of essential
reforms. As the national stakeholders attempt to
resolve their differences, and following the recent
contradictory decisions of the Regional Court of
Bissau, I again urgently appeal to them to attach all due
importance and priority to frank and sincere dialogue,
in strict compliance with the Constitution and the law.
Any other formula outside these parameters will only
perpetuate the cycle of political instability that has so
long prevailed in the country.

Moreover, if it were to persist, this institutional
stalemate would damage the people's chances of
enjoying basic social services such as health care and
education, condemning them to continue to pay the
price for the failure of their political elite to keep their
promises for a future better. I take this opportunity
to congratulate the people of Guinea-Bissau on the
role constructive they have played during this period
difficult by demonstrating restraint and outstanding
civic spirit.

I therefore reiterate my appeal to the political
leaders to put the national interest above all individual
or group considerations. It is time for these leaders
to focus on seeking sustainable solutions instead of
indulging in mutual accusations that do nothing to settle
the crisis. For its part, the international community
has repeatedly demonstrated its determination to
help Guinea-Bissau to continue along the path of
development and peace. I encourage it to pursue its
activites on behalf of the country in an even more
concerted and coordinated manner.

If the institutions of the Republic and key
stakeholders were to agree on a road map or a stability
pact, that could be a starting point for establishing
conditions conducive to institutional stability, at least
until the end of current legislature. This prerequisite
is fundamental to the implementation of the "Terra
Ranka" development programme, which was endorsed
by international partners at the round table of Brussels,
in March 2015, and enjoys significant approval among
the people of Guinea-Bissau.

I therefore urge all stakeholders, especially the
President of the Republic, the Speaker of the National
Assembly, the Prime Minister and the political parties,
to stick to the path of dialogue and to consider the
possibility of adopting a stability pact in the interests
of the nation. As the Secretary-General indicates in
his latest report on Guinea-Bissau, the United Nations
stands ready to support any initiative to strengthen
stability in that country, provided that its leaders
demonstrate the political will to commit themselves to
that end.

Despite the progress made in strengthening
domestic security, I remain concerned about the
increase in organized crime in the country, due to the
current crisis and the concommitent weakening of
State institutions. The recent acts of armed robbery
at the home of a member of the Government and the
residence of a United Nations international staff
member illustrate the deterioration of the environment
security in Guinea-Bissau.

As members can see, the political situation in the
country is worrisome, and maintaining United Nations
commitment remains essential. I therefore reiterate the
Secretary-General's request that the Security Council
extend the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, which expires
on 29 February, in order to allow the mission to maintain
its activities and programmes to consolidate peace and
the rule of law in Guinea-Bissau.

