Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Allow me to congratulate you, Madame, on your
initiative in organizing this open debate, which
usefully complements previous debates on the
conditions necessary to a sustainable end to conflicts
and the genuine rebuilding of the countries on the
Council's agenda.

Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
made on behalf of the European Union.
"There will be no development without security
and no security without development. And both
development and security also depend on respect
for human rights and the rule of law."
(A/59/2005, annex, para. 2)

That principle, enunciated in the 2005 report "In larger
freedom", is the cornerstone of Luxembourg's
commitment to an effective multilateral system with
the United Nations at its heart, and it is with that
fundamental interdependence in mind that Luxembourg
supports the processes of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security sector reform, as well as
early recovery, socio-economic development and the
establishment of the rule of law.

Since 2000, Luxembourg has been among the
countries that respect the goal of allocating 0.7 per cent
of their gross national income to official development
assistance (ODA), as noted by the representative of
Cuba. Our ODA has exceeded 1 per cent since 2009.
Our engagement is committed to the eradication of
poverty and the realization of the Millennium
Development Goals, including as a long-term
investment for peace and security and with a view to
preventing the outbreak of new conflict.

Luxembourg's development cooperation also
implements programmes that bring a security
perspective directly to the development approach. For
example in northern Mali, in the region of Kidal, we
support a sustainable development programme aimed at
reducing the local population's poverty by improving
access to basic social services andjob opportunities, and
at reinforcing the leadership of the Mali administration
in the development of the region. In parallel, and in
partnership with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crimes, Luxembourg supports the Government of
Mali's efforts to fight illicit trafficking and organized
crime in that region, which is heavily affected by the
presence ofAl-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb.

As you indicated in your concept note
(S/2011/50), Madame President, the Security Council
should not take on the responsibilities of other
principal organs and agencies. But if the Council wants
to define sustainable strategies to end conflict, it is
vital that it consider the analyses and efforts of
development organs and actors and strive to coordinate
well with those actors. The establishment of
sustainable security and stability requires a tangible
development perspective.
Peacebuilding is the key stage between the
establishment of security and the socio-economic
relaunching of a country. Peacekeepers themselves are
early peacebuilders. Their presence should create a
security environment conducive to the deployment of
reconstruction and development activities. We
encourage the Council to enhance its relationship with
the Peacebuilding Commission so that it can
systematically seek the Commission's advice when it is
about to renew the mandate of a peacekeeping
operation, including with respect to countries that are
not on the agenda of the Commission. In that regard,
we welcome the recent interactive dialogues with the
Chairs of the Liberia and Burundi configurations and
the active engagement of the Chair of the
Commission's Organizational Committee and the
Chairs of the five country-specific configurations in
today's debate.

Convinced of the fundamental importance of an
integrated approach, Luxembourg has been actively
engaged in post-conflict peacebuilding since the
inception of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.

The adoption of any type of security approach to
a conflict must be preceded by a thorough analysis of
its root causes. In that way, efforts can be made in
close coordination with all stakeholders, including
women, to enable a country to emerge from crisis and
foster its development. In that context, we must not fail
to include the management of a country's natural
resources or issues related to land rights. In that regard,
the Council should draw on all expertise available
within the United Nations system. It is essential that
the Council receive reports of the Secretary-General
that take into account the points of view and analyses
of all relevant departments on a given conflict or
theme.

Among the principal organs of the United
Nations, the Economic and Social Council is ideally
positioned to provide a socio-economic development
perspective to the Security Council's discussions
preceding the definition of a peacekeeping mandate.
Closer cooperation between the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission can in turn
reinforce the coherent action of the United Nations
system so as to foster the sustainable development of
countries emerging from conflict. That is why
Luxembourg, during its Presidency of the Economic
and Social Council in 2009, took the initiative of
convening the first joint meeting between the Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission, held on the topic
of food and economic crises in countries emerging
from conflict.

Allow me to conclude with a few comments on
climate security. In our view, the adverse impacts of
climate change have clear repercussions on the security
and development of many States, in particular small
island developing States. At the very least, we should
think of climate change as a threat multiplier, as the
Secretary-General notes in his report on climate change
and its possible security implications (A/64/350),
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/281 of
2009. We therefore encourage the Security Council to
further pursue the discussions it began in 2007 on this
important issue.

