Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): First, I would like to join
others in conveying our warm sentiments of friendship
and best wishes to Ambassador Greenstock. His
contribution to the deliberations of the Security
Council was no doubt valuable and will be long
remembered. I am sure that his many outstanding
qualities will be an asset in his new assignment. It is
also my pleasure to join others in welcoming Mr.
Seydou Diarra and his delegation to today's public
meeting. Let me also thank the Spanish presidency for
convening this meeting. It testifies to the continued and
sustained attention that the Security Council gives to
the situation in Cote d'Ivoire.

The visit to the United Nations of Prime Minister
Diarra comes in the wake of the recent mission of the
Security Council to the West African subregion, among
whose main destinations was Abidjan. Earlier, in April,
the Security Council discussed the situation in Cote
d'Ivoire in a public meeting, with the participation of a
high-level ministerial delegation from the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

cote d'Ivoire has a clear road map to peace in the
form of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. The people
of Cote d'Ivoire have courageously and wisely opted
for that path. The success of the peace process hinges
on the faithful implementation of that agreement. That
is also the mandate of the Government of national
reconciliation. We thank the Prime Minister for his
briefing today, which outlined the significant progress
made in the implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement, as well as some key areas in which work
remains to be accomplished.

We support the Council's action. We encourage
the authorities and all parties in cote d'Ivoire to work
towards full implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement. We hope that the people of cote d'Ivoire
will be able to achieve the desired objectives of peace
and stability in the spirit of national reconciliation. In
that regard, we laud the efforts being made by the
Government of C6te d'Ivoire.

cote d'Ivoire has withstood the turmoil that
accompanied the unfortunate developments that, one
after the other, have struck the country since September
last year. However, the crisis is not yet over. A lot of
damage has been done in all spheres of national life:
political, security, economic, social and human rights.
Beyond national frontiers, the subregion as a whole has
suffered the negative fallout of the crisis in Cote
d'Ivoire. Therefore, the need and urgency of remedying
the situation is felt by all. cote d'Ivoire is fortunate
that in its hour of crisis, it has been the beneficiary of
timely assistance and support at various levels:
bilateral, regional and international. We appreciate the
role played by France and ECOWAS in stabilizing the
situation there. The United Nations is also actively
engaged in the peace process through the United
Nations Mission in C6te d'Ivoire (MINUCI) and the
Special Representative, Mr. Tevoedjre, who is present
here. His special efforts merit special mention.

Apart from the political process, the challenge of
economic rehabilitation and reconstruction requires the
continued support of the international community.
Pakistan joins the appeal to the donor community for
adequate contributions in that regard.

One central conclusion that emerges from the
consideration of conflict situations in Africa and
elsewhere is the need for parallel progress on several
interrelated tracks: credible security, developing
consensus solutions, humanitarian relief for suffering
people, provisional justice and economic revival,
including through adequate economic assistance.
Addressing those complex issues should be the
responsibility not only of the Security Council but of
all organs of the United Nations - perhaps through the
mechanism of composite committees, which our
delegation has suggested on previous occasions.

