Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Mrs. Vlora
Citaku, Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Kosovo, for their presence here today and
for the statements they delivered. I also welcome
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and commend the work he and the
entire staff of his Mission are carrying out in Kosovo.

Tomorrow, Kosovo will celebrate the third
anniversary of its independence. What assessment can
be made of the development of this young State? First
of all, everyone must agree that the fear that chaos
would ensue, expressed by some at the time of the
declaration of independence, was unfounded. The
institutional framework that Kosovo set out for itself is
being respected by its authorities and supported by its
population. Legislative elections were held in
December. They went well overall - better than in
many other countries that are older than Kosovo.

As the Secretary-General noted in his report
(S/2011/43), the level of participation by Kosovar
Serbs in those elections was the highest since 2001.
The Security Council has every reason to congratulate
itself for this. Whatever our positions are on the

ll-23603
question of status, this high participation rate proves
the greater maturity on the part of the population and
shows their willingness to share a common future.

To date, 75 States have recognized Kosovo. Each
recognition brings greater stability to Kosovo and to
the entire region. But these recognitions are not enough.
Kosovo must indeed still make progress in many areas.
The rule of law must be strengthened, and this must be
accomplished through a strengthening of institutions
and of the fight against corruption and organized crime.
Judicial institutions must be consolidated.

In his report, the Secretary-General characterizes
the security situation as relatively calm but potentially
volatile. While incidents are, thankfully, less frequent
than they were a few years ago, there are still too many
of them. It is unacceptable that vehicles driven by
Serbs are the target of rock-throwing, even if these
attacks are essentially symbolic.

Moreover, the actions of Serb extremists in the
north of Kosovo are equally unacceptable. Acts of
intimidation and pressure by these extremists directed
against the Serbs in the north of Kosovo and aimed at
preventing them from living on good terms with all of
the communities must not be tolerated. The experience
of Serbs living south of the Ibar River, in particular in
the new municipalities created under the Ahtisaari plan,
shows that peaceful coexistence is possible.

A process of dialogue must be established soon
between the two neighbouring States. The European
Union is ready to facilitate this dialogue, which we
hope to see begin as soon as the Government of
Kosovo is formed. For this dialogue, which will have
to do with technical subjects of common interest, to be
fruitful and bring about concrete results for the
population, it must take place without interference by
one country in the territory of the other.

All of the States of the former Yugoslavia have
been granted the same chance at achieving European
integration. Each one is making progress at its own
pace in this process of European rapprochement. One
of these States has already joined the European Union.

However, the horrors of the war years remain
ever-present for the populations concerned. The
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has carried out exemplary work and has
ensured that justice is done. Two accused remain to be
arrested as soon as possible to answer for their actions.
A disturbing report adopted recently by the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
included allegations - presented in the
hypothetical - of organ trafficking that allegedly took
place in Kosovo and Albania at the end of the war. An
inquiry carried out several years ago on the basis of the
same rumours failed to confirm those rumours. We
would like for light to be definitively shed on this
matter and for the proof, if it exists - and until now it
has not been presented - to be provided to the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
which has the mandate and capacity to successfully
carry out the necessary investigations.

A new Government will take office in Kosovo. It
must spare no effort in helping the young State
continue to make progress. Many different tasks will
have to be tackled at once: the rule of law, good
governance, the fight against corruption,
inter-community dialogue, economic reconstruction,
dialogue with Serbia and the strengthening of its
international relations.

For its part, France will continue to closely
follow the situation in Kosovo and will help it come
into line with European norms, as we are also doing
today with Serbia.

