Ms. Ochoa Nifio (spoke in Spanish): I am grateful,
Mr. President, for the invitation to address the Security
Council. It is an almost indescribable experience to
have the honour to be here before members to make
this statement.

I have been working in mine action in Colombia
for the past seven years, first with a civil-society group
and now as an official of the United Nations Mine
Action Service (UNMAS). UNMAS in Colombia
plays the critical role of technical adviser to the
national mine action authority, at a moment when
the negotiation, design and implementation of the
Final Peace Agreement between the Government of
Colombia and Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia - Ejercito Popular (FARC-EP) necessitates
a functional, efficient, and effective Mine Action
sector. Since 2002, the national authority - the
Directorate for Integrated Action against Mines - has
been leading the development of the mine action sector
and the introduction of civilian humanitarian demining
in Colombia.

I have seen first-hand the enormous impact and
consequences that landmine and explosive remnants of
war contamination have had on the lives of my fellow
Colombians and on the development of my country.
For that reason, it has been incredibly gratifying
for me to be working with UNMAS to support the
process of removing the threat posed by landmines
and explosive remnants of war. Seven years ago, the
mine action sector in Colombia was at an early stage of
development and facing the daunting task of tackling
an enormous problem. Allow me to mention a few facts
from that time.

Colombia ranked second worldwide in the number
of victims caused by landmines and explosive remnants
of war. In more recent years, Colombia has recorded
fewer victims, but remains in the top five. Seven
years ago, more than 50 per cent of Colombia's 32
departments recorded contamination - predominantly
then, as now, in the most remote and underdeveloped
rural areas. In those places, landmines serve to deny
access to services, restrict mobility and prevent the
use of productive land, thereby leaving little hope to
them recover from poverty. Moreover, the south of the
country is home to indigenous communities, who in the
past were trapped and cut off due to the presence of
landmines, which meant they could not walk in or out
of their territory; the humanitarian aid they needed was
completely blocked.
My initial assignment took me to one of the most
affected districts in my country at the time. I trained
the first 50 of Colombia's civilian deminers. We set
up groups under my supervision that were made up of
Victims of the conflict, former military personnel and
ex-combatants. I saw them all working together with a
common goal, that is, to clear landmines and explosive
remnants and thereby help communities: a genuine
example of reconciliation.

Day by day, I learned that humanitarian mine action
was, in so many areas of my country, key to initiating
the socioeconomic reconstruction of communities.
That has never been more clear than in the context of a
peace process, as we in Colombia have seen.

In 2014, after many years of negotiations, the
peace process was at a difficult stage and confidence
levels between the Government and the FARC were
at a low point. Many even feared that the process
might collapse altogether. Given the circumstances,
the FARC-EP agreed to participate in the Gestures of
Peace process. Humanitarian demining, along with,
for example, the release of child soldiers, was chosen
as one of those Gestures. In that particular context,
the additional benefit of the humanitarian demining
initiative was that it enabled the Government and the
FARC-EP to demonstrate their commitment to peace
and to pursuing coexistence and reconciliation. As a
result, the Colombian army and the FARC-EP began to
work in cooperation, a significant milestone on the path
to peace.

For more than a year, the humanitarian demining
activities under the Gestures of Peace initiative
constituted the sole concrete action jointly implemented
by the negotiating parties. As a member of UNMAS, I
had the good fortune to be invited to participate in the
initiative. I was able to observe that, despite starting
from a point of mistrust, along the road both the FARC
representatives and the army were able to define shared
terms and goals and establish coordination mechanisms
to enable them to deal jointly with the challenges that
arose. Ultimately, humanitarian demining as a Gesture
of Peace succeeded in making mine action a key issue
in the eventual Final Peace Agreement.

Anti-personnel mines and explosive remnants of
war remain an enduring legacy of any conflict, whether
or not a peace agreement has been signed. Their presence
continues to have socioeconomic consequences for the
people affected and is an obstacle to the large-scale
delivery of humanitarian assistance and development
in many areas of a country. Dealing with the problem
means not just eliminating the physical threat in the
soil but also setting up structures and processes that
can help individuals and communities recover from the
impact of mines.

In the case of Colombia, various provisions of the
Peace Agreement took specific steps and defined the
roles that mine action could play in that context. First,
it recognizes humanitarian demining as a precondition
for implementing other public policies, including those
related to replacing illicit crops and the collective return
of internally displaced persons. It is also fundamental
to development plans. Secondly, former combatants'
participation in the humanitarian-demining process
can be explicitly accepted as a form of punishment
within the transitional justice framework outlined in the
Agreement. Thirdly, their participation is considered
to be an act of reparation for the damage caused by
the conflict and as a way to help to reverse its effects.
Lastly, mine action is seen as a way to provide former
combatants with options for economic and social
reintegration and employment opportunities. It also
represents a unique opportunity for the United Nations
to maintain its support for affected communities, such
as those in Colombia, in particular because mine-action
initiatives help to promote efforts to achieve sustainable
peace. This is a process that UNMAS has had an
opportunity to initiate. Various kinds of demining
action, for example, might contribute to disarmament
activities being carried out under the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia.

UNMAS is supporting the relevant national
authority in its development of national demining plans
and in prioritizing the country's worst-affected areas.
In addition, as a guarantor of international standards,
UNMAS has been working on the adoption of national
standards that will enable Colombia to improve the
efficiency of its operations and will ensure a faster
response in the communities where it is needed. We
have recently had the privilege of starting to train
former combatants, which will lead to the creation of a
civilian humanitarian demining organization that will
enable Colombia to achieve its goal of reintegrating
20 per cent of demobilized combatants.

There is a monumental challenge ahead for
Colombia - the consolidation of peace in the wake
of the signing of the Peace Agreement. Humanitarian
mine action will be a crucial activity in helping to put a
definitive end to the violence and establish a foundation
for peacebuilding and development activities for all
Colombians. The Security Council has a vital role to
play in ensuring that demining can contribute in other
areas to improving the lives of communities affected
by mines and that it can result in the benefits that are
so evident in my country. I am proud to be here and
working for UNMAS, as an agent for change and for
strengthening mine action in Colombia. I hope that the
Council will continue to ensure that Colombians can
count on its support in dealing with the challenges that
they face. I am grateful for the enormous opportunity
to address the Council today.

