Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): First, let me thank
Assistant Secretary-General Mohamed Khaled Khiari
for his briefing on developments in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. My intervention this
afternoon will focus on denuclearization and the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

On the issue of the denuclearization, South Africa
welcomes the meetings that have been held between the
leaders of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and the United States. We encourage the parties to
continue on that path in order for peace to prevail on the
Korean peninsula. The hosting ofthe three inter-Korean
summits, paving the way for the normalization of
relations between South Korea and the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, as well as the joint projects
and enhanced people-to-people activities that have
taken place in the past year, need to be encouraged to
continue in order to strengthen the peace track.

Despite the setback following the unsuccessful
outcome of the working-level meeting held in Sweden
in October, wejoin others in expressing our delegation's
support for a negotiated solution that addresses the
issue of the Korean peninsula in a holistic manner.
We urge the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
to fulfil its commitments, including those taken under
the Six-Party Talks. It is only through dialogue that
seemingly intractable disputes such as these can be
resolved. It is therefore important that the Council
continue supporting the dialogue on the Korean
peninsula. South Africa calls upon the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to pursue a path towards
the complete denuclearization of the Korean peninsula,
rejoin the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and fulfil its safeguards obligations to the
International Atomic Energy Agency.

With regard to Security Council sanctions against
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, South Africa
wishes to reiterate our view that all sanctions against the
country should be implemented in a balanced manner,
including the four pillars as outlined in resolution 2397
(2017), namely, support for the political process on the
Korean peninsula; the implementation of all sectorial
sanctions, travel bans and assets freezes; and, last, but
not least, humanitarian exemptions.

We would like to urge the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to fully implement its obligations
under the various resolutions of the Security Council.
We join other Council members in expressing our deep
concerns about the dire humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and wish to
remind the Council that resolution 2397 (2017) empowers
it to exempt, on a case-by-case basis, the provision of
humanitarian assistance and other economic activities
and cooperation to the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. We call on the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) to avoid any delays to such
approvals so as not to negatively affect the provision
of humanitarian assistance to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

In conclusion, South Africa calls upon all
stakeholders involved to refrain from any action that
might undermine the pursuit of a negotiated solution on
the Korean peninsula, increase tensions or disturb the
peace process that is emerging in the region.

