The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of June, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Jean-Bernard Merimee,
Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations,
for his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of May. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Merimee for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Rwanda

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(S/1995/457)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of Zaire
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Lukabu Khaboaji N 'Zaji (Zaire) took the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda, document 5/1995/457.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1995/465, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following revisions to be made to the
text of the draft resolution contained in document
S/1995/465 in its provisional form:

in subparagraph (d) of operative paragraph 3, all the
words following the words "police force" should be
deleted so that subparagraph (d) will read as follows:

"Assist in the training of a national police
force;"

in operative paragraph 5 the word "such" should be
inserted between the word "that" and the word
"arms" in the penultimate line of the English version
of the draft resolution;

in operative paragraph 6 the word "related" at the
end of the third line from the bottom in the English
version of the draft resolution should be deleted, and
the words "to Rwanda" in the penultimate line of the
English version of the text should be replaced by the
words "referred to above";

in operative paragraph 7 the word "or" in the
penultimate line of the English version of the draft
resolution should be replaced by the word "and",
and the following words should be added at the end
of the paragraph:

"concluded to replace that Agreement in order
to facilitate the implementation of the new
mandate;".

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l995/411, which contains the
text of a letter dated 19 May 1995 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

The first speaker is the representative of Zaire. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
 


