Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by warmly thanking Kuwait, Peru and
the United Kingdom for their efforts in organizing
and conducting this mission, which was a particularly
important moment for all ofus. I also thank Bangladesh
and Burma for their hospitality.

The field visits, in particular to the zero line,
Kutupalong camp and northern Rakhine, and the
various interviews allowed Council members to
determine for themselves the severity of the suffering
of the Rohingya, the extent of the destruction in
northern Rakhine and the complexity of the crisis and
the urgency with which it must be resolved. I should
like to give an overview of what France took away
from the visit and the priorities that we believe should
guide international action, in particular by the United
Nations, in support of Rohingya refugees.

In Bangladesh, we witnessed the admirable efforts
and generosity of the Government and of the local
population, which, in all, are hosting more than 1 million
Rohingya refugees, who are particularly vulnerable
and live in very precarious conditions. That exemplary
hospitality must be sustained. We also noted that the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and all the relevant United
Nations and humanitarian agencies and organizations
are doing an outstandingjob in that regard. For France,
the immediate strengthening of international support
would mean action on three fronts.

First, the funding rate for the humanitarian response
plan must be increased, as it remains well below that
required to meet current needs. According to the most
recent assessment provided by UNHCR, the rate stands
at 16 per cent.

Secondly, there is an urgent need for appropriate
measures and steps to be taken to meet needs and protect
the Rohingya in order to prepare for monsoon-related
security and health risks in refugee camps. Such
measures, which the Government of Bangladesh has
started to take, include the reinforcement and relocation
of shelters.

Thirdly, we must continue to assist Bangladesh,
humanitarian workers and local host communities in
ensuring that the living conditions of the Rohingya
refugees are as bearable as possible, while preserving
the promising national goal of economic development
for Bangladesh. It is essential that specific attention
be paid to the needs of children, including with
regard to education, and of women who have suffered
unspeakable violence.

Interviews in Burma served to reiterate the
expectations of the Security Council to civil and
military authorities, which are very clearly expressed
in the presidential statement of 6 November 2017
(S/PRST/20l7/22). France's priority remains the full
implementation of that statement. Commitments have
been made, but that is not enough, as the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom just underscored.
France therefore calls upon the Burmese authorities to
take the following measures.

First, it is important to address the root causes of

the crisis by fully cooperating with the new Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General and by committing to
implementing all of the recommendations in the Annan
report. The Rohingya, whose nationality the Burmese
Government has withdrawn based on a law adopted in

1982, make up the largest group of stateless persons in

the world. There can be no just or sustainable solution
for their plight, or assurance of the rule of law in

Burma, if they are not recognized as Burmese citizens
and allowed to fully enjoy their rights and fundamental

freedoms. That will be achieved only when their

citizenship is restored.

Secondly, the Burmese authorities must conduct
investigations and prosecute those who commit
systematic human rights abuses in Rakhine state,
including sexual violence, and cooperate with the
United Nations on the issue. The testimony heard by the
members of the delegation on the violence and abuse
suffered by the Rohingya is harrowing. The destruction
observed in northern Rahkine state of homes, mosques
and villages burned to the ground speaks for itself.
The Rohingya are victims of ethnic cleansing; there
is no other word for it. Prosecuting the perpetrators of
such crimes is a moral, legal and political imperative.
Starting today, the Burmese authorities can send a
positive sign by agreeing to cooperate with the Human
Rights Council's fact-finding mission, establishing an
on-site office of the High-Commissioner for Human
Rights and cooperating with him.

Together we must also reflect on the best way to
collect and protect evidence, which, when the time
comes, will enable the perpetrators of such atrocities to
be prosecuted in a fair andjust trial with full respect for
the law. France recalls that the forced displacement of
people constitutes a crime against humanity under the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, and
we note that Bangladesh is party to it.

Thirdly, restoring immediate, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access is imperative. It is essential that
the Burmese authorities sign the memorandum of
understanding with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Development Programme so as to demonstrate
their commitment to respecting international standards
on refugees. The onus is on the Burmese authorities
to create conditions conducive to the safe, voluntary
and dignified return of refugees who, regrettably,
are not all in the same location. Accepting technical
assistance and expertise from the specialized agencies
of the United Nations is the best way to achieve that
goal. The challenges are real. Under no circumstances
can inaction be justified. Specific commitments with
regard to the points Ijust mentioned will serve to create
the necessary conditions.

This year we mark the seventieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration on Human Rights, which I recall
was adopted following the genocide and massacre of
the Second World War to prevent the recurrence of such
a tragedy. Let me conclude by citing article 1.

"All human beings are born free and equal in
dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason
and conscience and should act towards one another
in a spirit of brotherhood."
I urge the Council to see reason and appeal to its
conscience because the plight of the Rohingya
underscores that respect for the most fundamental
principle of the Charter of the United Nations is at
stake. Its Preamble reaffirms faith in fundamental
freedoms, dignity and the worth of the human person.
The Security Council and we, the Members of the
United Nations, are duty-bound to ensure respect for
those principles.

