The Secretary-General: I wish first of all to pay
tribute to you, Sir, and the Government of Bangladesh and
its Permanent Representative for convening this meeting on
a critical aspect of our work and our mission to end
suffering and alleviate hardships around the world.

Let me at the outset express the hope that this meeting
will build on the progress made at the first meeting of the
Council devoted to humanitarian activities, hosted by Brazil
last January.

The experiences of the past decade, from Africa to the
Balkans to Asia, have taught us that our humanitarian
mission holds both greater promise and greater peril than
almost any other part of the United Nations work. We have
seen how humanitarian action can save lives, but we have
also seen how it can be exploited and abused by parties
unwilling to abide by international humanitarian principles
and only too willing to subvert such action to further their
own inhumane policies.

As we meet today, it is clear that Mozambique
presents us with a most urgent case of need. Even as the
assistance in some places has been too little too late, I am
pleased that the Council is addressing the plight of the
people of Mozambique and that the overall response has
been very generous.

Mozambique today is only the most urgent of a
number of cases. Over the last year, from the Balkans to
the Sudan, from Venezuela to Afghanistan to Central
Africa, the world has been confronted with humanitarian
emergencies that seem only to grow in horror and in pain.
Wars and natural disasters, often joined in a terrible
combination, continue to cause massive loss of life,
tremendous suffering and great dislocations of peoples and
groups. The need for effective humanitarian assistance has
never been greater.

In all these situations, we must ask ourselves: Are we
doing enough? Are we helping those most in need or just
those most immediately in reach? Is our aid the right aid
for the emergency in question? Is it affecting a conflict in
a way that may perpetuate it rather than end it? These are
the questions that we must keep asking in order to ensure
that we provide the best, most effective humanitarian
assistance. We must strengthen our capacity to bring relief
to victims, but we must also devise more effective
strategies to prevent humanitarian emergencies from arising
in the first place.

I recently presented the case for better and more
cost-effective prevention strategies for both man-made
and natural disasters in my annual report on the work of
the Organization. And within the United Nations, I have
launched a major effort to develop a system-wide
framework for warning and preventive action.

The fact is that humanitarian aid does not exist in a
vacuum. In some cases - such as Mozambique today, or
with the floods in Venezuela or the earthquake in Turkey
last year - we face true natural disasters. In others,
however, we confront man-made disasters which are
rooted clearly in war and tyranny. From the Great Lakes
to Bosnia, we have learned that while the humanitarian
imperative is sacred, there is also a humanitarian
dilemma. This is the dilemma that too often has forced us
to provide food and clothing not only to the victims of
conflict, but also to its architects. It is the dilemma that
too often allows combatants to use humanitarian aid and
its recipients as tools in war. It is the dilemma that at
times has turned camps created for the needy and
vulnerable into havens for extremists and bases from
which they could continue their acts of hatred. It is the
dilemma, finally, that makes clear that humanitarian
assistance is no substitute for political action.

One thing is clear, however: these humanitarian
dilemmas have made the global humanitarian mission
more important, not less.

Today, I wish to emphasize three major issues facing
humanitarian action: first, how such action can make a
positive contribution to efforts to restore and maintain
peace and security; secondly, how we can continue to
make progress in integrating humanitarian and
political-military elements of peace operations; and
thirdly, how we can ensure that the legal and principled
basis of humanitarian action is respected and
strengthened.

It is clear that in many instances, the causes of
humanitarian and security crises are the same, or that the
one arises from the other. It is equally clear that while
conflict and war are the main causes of humanitarian
crises, involving violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law and producing mass
population displacement, such crises often perpetuate
instability.

There are no more acute examples of this vicious
and violent cycle than the current crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the crisis in Angola. The

 

crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
implicated a dozen States and over 50 million people, and
had its roots in the humanitarian crisis in the Great Lakes
region.

It is clear, therefore, that humanitarian action not only
serves to protect the victims of conflict from further loss
and suffering, but can actually contribute to maintaining
peace and security. This is true in both negative and
positive terms. Negatively, weak support for humanitarian
action can result in delays to refugee reintegration, lack of
adequate assistance to demobilized combatants and failure
to restore livelihoods or rebuild societies. In positive terms,
effective humanitarian action to help civilian populations
can give them a sense of stability, restore respect for human
rights and lay the foundation for reconciliation.

It is equally important that humanitarian concerns be
given early consideration when comprehensive peace
agreements are negotiated, as well as in peacekeeping
missions. This helps ensure that there is sufficient advance
planning on the humanitarian side for operations undertaken
to implement a peace agreement and that early efforts can
be undertaken to mobilize resources for recovery in the
immediate aftermath of a conflict, which is essential if there
is to be lasting peace.

In addition, the success of a peace agreement
frequently depends, at least in part, on humanitarian work,
including permitting refugees to return or resettling
displaced persons; giving assistance to demobilized
combatants; restoring the livelihoods of people affected by
war; and giving fighters alternative ways to earn their
living. Recent examples where such humanitarian work has
helped consolidate peace agreements can be found in
Mozambique, Cambodia and Central America; more
recently in Guinea-Bissau; and, hopefully, in Sierra Leone.

I also believe that we must rededicate ourselves to
ensuring that the legal and principled basis for humanitarian
action is maintained, respected and strengthened. The legal
framework for humanitarian action in war is provided by
universal norms embodied in international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law.

The basic purpose of these intersecting bodies of law
is to ensure that civilians are protected from the impact of
war, and when that does not occur, that the essential needs
of all victims are met and their fundamental rights
respected. We must do more to ensure that this principle is
understood and applied in every part of the world.

Finally, I wish to make a few points about the vital
issue of resources. As I have said, inadequate support for
humanitarian action can have adverse effects - both by
exposing civilians to the risk of increased suffering and
by undermining the positive contribution of humanitarian
action to peace and security.

The Security Council can strengthen its support for
humanitarian action in at least three ways. First, it can
press Member States to commit themselves fully to
providing the financial support needed for humanitarian
programmes. Recent Council efforts to do this in the case
of Angola have shown a direct positive result. Secondly,
the Council could consider including in peacekeeping
mandates provisions for financing the early stages of
post-conflict reconstruction and the restoration of the rule
of law. Thirdly, the Council should address the fact that
post-conflict peace-building activities are routinely
hampered by the failure to sustain the flow of resources,
leading to gaps between the provision of direct
humanitarian assistance and the restoration of longer-term
reconstruction and development.

The lamentable truth is that far too many of the
peace agreements that are signed collapse before they are
implemented or relapse into conflict after initial
implementation - in part, because there are not enough
resources to foster essential post-conflict recovery and
stability. The Council must find ways to avoid this tragic
and wasteful pattern of events.

In closing, let me express my gratitude to the
Council for drawing the attention of the international
community to the challenges facing humanitarian action.
It is my hope that, from now on, humanitarian concerns
will be fully integrated into the Council's efforts to foster
peace and security. Only thus can we hope to fully grasp
the humanitarian challenge and ensure that our assistance
will reach those most in need.

