Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): May I join others in thanking Belgium for convening today's important debate. I am very pleased that the High Commissioner for Human Rights was able to join us and brief the Security Council today. May there be many more occasions where that might happen. I also thank our other two briefers. I will make three short points. First, I would briefly like to state the reasons the United Kingdom considers accountability for conflict-related crimes so important for peace and security. Secondly, I would like to acknowledge some of the importantdevelopments in transitional justice policy and practice over the past two decades and their relevance beyond the traditionally understood transition cycle. Thirdly, I would like to propose that, for transitional justice to be more meaningful for sustaining peace, we need to find better ways and means of connecting it with social or socioeconomic justice. With regard to my first point, the United Kingdom believes that legal accountability for conflict-related crimes serves as a deterrent, punishment and a method for upholding victims' rights. Without it, there can be neither reconciliation of communities, faith in the functioning of rule-of-law institutions nor respect for the rules-based international system. Those are the principles for which my Government stands. There should be no impunity for international crimes and no amnesty for gross violations. As a spokesman for the Sudanese Government put it on Tuesday (see S/PV.8718), justice cannot be achieved if we do not heal the wounds. And I would like to welcome the decision of the Government of the Sudan to hold former President Omer Al-Bashir and others accountable, which will be a significant step towards a peace settlement in Darfur. The victims of human rights violations in Myanmar also deserve justice. It is difficult to see how Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh can return to Rakhine state if they are not confident that the perpetrators, the Burmese military in particular, will be held accountable. With respect to my second point, transitional justice began as an innovative way of enabling justice in post-conflict environments. Over the past 25 years, there have been significant developments in this field and many of the representatives round the table, in particular South Africa and Tunisia, have set out some of those developments in their countries, which was very interesting. Mechanisms and processes have been increasingly inclusive and nationally owned. The consultative, inclusive and independent manner in which the Gambia established its Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations Commission has shown the benefits of national ownership to secure public confidence. I would also like to welcome the recent verdict by the Bangui Court of Appeal in the Central African Republic, holding accountable 28 individuals for war crimes and crimes against humanity, related to the killing of 75 civilians and 10 United Nations peacekeepers in the Bangassou area. Transitional justice processes have assumed an increasingly victim-centred approach. More and more efforts have been situated in broader institutional reform, including security sector reform. Transitional justice initiatives in Afghanistan have demonstrated what can be achieved in terms of local-level reconciliation, even prior to the signing of a comprehensive peace agreement. That breadth of application across such a range of issues has taught us that transitional justice has relevance far beyond the transition cycle traditionally associated with countries emerging from conflict. It can make inroads even amid ongoing hostilities, and its toolkit can serve States and communities long after a conflict ends. Notwithstanding those developments, the time has come to have a critical conversation about what transitional justice has achieved in terms of building peace that is sustainable and what more can be done. The root causes of conflict are persistent; their manifestations are as adaptable as they are pernicious. That brings me to my final point. We now possess evidence that, unless there is a proper response for dealing with wider social and economic injustices, the root causes of conflict are highly capable of morphing into other forms of violence and discrimination further down the line. Not only does that risk the achievements of transitional justice being reduced to little more than lip-service in the eyes of those affected by conflict as they continue to experience a wide array of injustices in their daily lives, it presents a real risk of further cycles of conflict and insecurity. As transitional justice policy and practice continue to evolve, we should start to forge closer links with broader challenges to peace, justice and inclusion. Truth and reconciliation commissions in Kenya and Tunisia have shown impressive results in that space, while demonstrating that transitional justice mechanisms and mandates are well positioned to make an increasing contribution to addressing the root causes of conflict.
