Mrs. Kaba (C6te d'Ivoire) (interpretation from French): I apologize for the absence of Ambassador
Kacou Gervais; he is at present engaged in the work of
the Economic and Social Council.

Let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
diligent way in which you are guiding the work of the
Security Council this month. I also thank your
predecessor for his good work last month. My delegation
wishes the new members of the Security Council success
during their tenure, and thanks the outgoing members for
their valuable contribution to the work of the Council.

Liberia is a brother and neighbour of C6te d'Ivoire.
Our families are intertwined, and everything that affects
Liberia inevitably affects Cote d'Ivoire as well; hence the
fraternal hospitality my country has extended to Liberian
refugees. It is because of our warm, fraternal friendship
for the people of Liberia that the Government of
C6te d'Ivoire is making efforts towards the restoration of
peace in that country. Everyone is aware of my
Government's initiatives to bring to this afflicted fraternal
country the peace it so greatly needs; the various
Yamoussoukro Agreements have been an important
element in the Liberian peace process.

The excellent report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Liberia leads us to consider a number of
points, including the role of the United Nations in Liberia.
We consider that its role has been a positive one, and we
hope it will continue until Liberia has restored its full
internal balance. The United Nations should not withdraw
its support from Liberia at a time when stability is being
restored through efforts aimed at bolstering national
institutions, including through free, democratic elections
under the auspices of the Liberian National Transitional
Government.

Cote d'Ivoire is playing an active part in the
combined efforts of the United Nations, the Organization
of African Unity and the Economic Community of West
African States to bring about the implementation of the
Abuja Agreement. We hope that, at a time when there is
movement towards a final resolution, the international
community will not abandon Liberia in mid-stream. My

 

Government hopes that these efforts will continue. We
support the recommendation of the Secretary-General, set
out in his report, document S/1996/47 of 23 January 1996,
to renew the mandate of UN OMIL and provide ECOMOG
with the resources it needs to carry out its mission.

I wish in conclusion to offer the condolences of the
Government of C6te d'Ivoire to the families of the victims
of the T ubmanburg incident.

My delegation thanks all those who are contributing to
the restoration of peace in Liberia.

