Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): In my capacity
as Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), and on behalf of my
colleagues from Burkina Faso, Mauritania, the Niger
and Chad who are present here today, I am particularly
pleased to address our sincere gratitude to the President
of the Council for the generous invitation to participate

in this morning's meeting and to say how delighted we
are to see France presiding over this important meeting
to discuss the situation in the Sahel.

At the outset, I would like to thank France for
having made the Sahel the priority of its presidency of
the Security Council, and I would like particularly to
commend the French delegation, under the leadership
of Ambassador Francois Delattre, for the very able way
in which it has steered the work of the Security Council
throughout this month of October. I would also like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to the outstanding
work of Ambassador Tekeda Alemu of Ethiopia and
his delegation during their presidency of the Council
last month. We eagerly look forward to the Italian
presidency of the Council that will begin in the next
few days.

As I was leaving Bamako, the Secretary-General's
friend, President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, asked me to
convey to him his boundless gratitude, and to do so
also on behalf of his fellow Presidents of Burkina Faso,
Mauritania, the Niger and Chad, for both his personal
commitment and that of the United Nations in seeking
to advance stability and development in the countries
of the Sahel. The Secretary-General's presence at this
morning's meeting, along with the apposite report he
has submitted on the operationalization and activities
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(S/2017/869) reflect his unflagging dedication. The
States members of the G-5 Sahel welcome the analysis
and recommendations contained in the report before us.

There can be no doubt that this meeting is taking
place at the perfect time, given that the current
situation in the Sahel remains volatile, as the region is
sadly dominated by terrorist attacks and various forms
of organized crime that regularly plague our people as
well as foreign and national security forces, and, in so
doing, undermine all our development efforts. I would
like to thank all the members of the Security Council
for their visit to three of the five countries of the Sahel.
This visit was designed to allow them to assess with
us the situation on the ground and evaluate the ways
and means of supporting the decisions taken by our
Heads of State to ward off the multiple threats in our
common area.

The visit of the Security Council, as well as the visit
that took place in Niger and Chad previously - from 1 to
7 March - fulfilled our expectations, because through
the meetings it had with Heads of State, Governments,

military authorities and members of civil society of
our respective countries, the delegation of the Security
Council had an opportunity to better understand the
urgent need to support the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel
so as to alleviate the suffering of our populations and
to contribute to the stability and development in the
Sahel. Indeed, the security threat looming over our
States is a challenge that we share with the rest of
the world, given its causes, manifestations and direct
impact on international peace and security. As such,
it requires a collective response of the international
community, and we are pleased to note that the Security
Council and the Secretary-General share this sense of
collective responsibility.

As far as we are concerned, the establishment of
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel represents a collective
response by our countries to address the common
threats of terrorism, violent extremism and trafficking
in all its forms, including migrant smuggling. I recall
in this regard that the Joint Force has been endorsed by
the African Union and is fully compliant and aligned
with the African architecture of peace and security, and
that it also enjoys the support of the Security Council,
specifically through its resolution 2359 (2017).

At this stage, I would like to emphasize that the
actions of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel are intended
to and do complement those of other forces already
operating in the region, namely, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) and the French Operation
Barkhane. Force generation for the Joint Force of the
G-5 Sahel will create the conditions and an environment
favourable for MINUSMA's implementation of its
mandate. In addition, the Joint Force's strategic concept
of operations provides for coordination and articulation
mechanisms between the United Nations peacekeeping
mission and this African peacekeeping operation.

Today more than ever, we are determined to make
the Joint Force fully operational. Considerable progress
has already been made by the G-5 Sahel States in the
process of deploying the Joint Force, with the welcome
support of the African Union and our partners. And
we have made this progress, despite the challenges on
several fronts that remain to be met.

One step forward that has been taken in setting up
the Joint Force was the inauguration, on 9 September,
by His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita,
President-in-Office of the G-5 Sahel, of the Joint Force
headquarters in Sevare', Mali. The visit of the Security

Council delegation on 22 October gave Council
members an opportunity to witness first hand that the
Headquarters are fully functional. Headquarters for
the Joint Force's central sector are also up and running
in Niamey, and steps are being taken for establishing
headquarters for the eastern sector in Wour, Chad,
and for the western sector in Nbeiket el-Ahouach,
Mauritania. I would also draw attention to the fact
that the mobilization of troops needed for the battalion
strength we have set for ourselves and their equipment
has been carried out on the basis of funds provided
by Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger. The first joint
cross-border operations in the central sector will soon
be launched.

However, in order to achieve full operational
capability by March 2018, the Joint Force will need
substantial bilateral and multilateral support so as
to mobilize sustainable and predictable resources.
This is the purpose of our request for multilateral
support, including through the United Nations,
because this remains the only option that will ensure
the predictability and sustainability of resources and
the operational support needed for the Joint Force on
the ground.

I recall that the €423 million budget was arrived at
on the basis of a realistic and objective assessment of
the Force's needs. I take this opportunity to appeal to
all our bilateral and multilateral partners to participate
in the international conference on security and
development in the Sahel, scheduled for 14 December,
which is being organized jointly with the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union.
I thank the European institutions for agreeing to host
this important meeting. I welcome the contributions
that have already been pledged by the European Union,
France, Germany and Denmark, and I encourage other
countries to do the same.

In addition to the issue of financing, the Joint
Force will also require support in such areas as
infrastructure development, information and
communication technology, anti-improvised-
explosive-ordnance equipment, training, medical
training and medical-evacuation capacity as well as air
and land transport.

The G-5 Sahel countries welcome the options
proposed by the Secretary-General within the
framework of United Nations support for the Joint Force

because we believe that those options, in particular the
first option, provide a good basis for addressing the
current and pressing needs of the Force. I welcome
the commitment of the Secretary-General to helping
to provide the necessary resources and support for the
Joint Force, and I call on the Security Council to do the
same as soon as possible, in particular at the multilateral
level. We favour the establishment of a mechanism to
oversee the transparent management of resources used
by the Force. Similarly, we remain open to all proposals
aimed at strengthening the institutional architecture
and planning and coordination capacities of the Joint
Force, including the deployment of experts from the
United Nations and other partner organizations to the
permanent secretariat of the G-5 Sahel.

I also welcome the Secretary-General's support
for the establishment of a G-S Sahel support group to
promote the coordination of international support, in
line with the Force's strategic concept of operations.
The States members of the G-5 Sahel fully align
themselves with the Secretary-General's call on the
Security Council to adopt

"a robust mandate commensurate with the serious
threats that the Joint Force will need to address"
(S/2017/869, para. 83)

with a view to strengthening the latter's capacity so
that it can fully achieve its goals. In that regard, I would
like to give my assurance that that the Joint Force's
operations are being carried out in strict compliance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law. That is a matter of the utmost importance for our
Heads of State, our peoples and all ofus, as the success
of the Joint Force will require the full support of our
populace. We have therefore planned establishing a
civilian component within the Joint Force that will be
dedicated to human rights compliance, as the Security
Council mission was able to see for itself at the field
headquarters meeting. We remain open to all forms of
support in the area of human rights.

I would like to firmly stress that the G-5 Sahel is not
focused solely on the security dimension. In parallel
with the security aspect, which I have just mentioned,
the G-5 Sahel also accords a high level of importance
to development issues and good governance, as well as
the resilience of its people. The deployment of the Joint
Force is simply aimed at establishing the conditions
necessary for development, security and peace in our
region because we know that there can be no lasting
peace without development, and vice versa. We
therefore fully agree with the Secretary-General that the
security role of the Joint Force must be complemented
by initiatives in the area of development. That is the
raison d'etre of the Priority Investment Programme, as
well as that of Alliance for the Sahel, which is aimed at
promoting economic, social and cultural development,
as well as deradicalization.

In keeping with the Secretary-General's statement,
in my national capacity and on behalf of President
Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, I reiterate the commitment
of the Government of Mali to expediting the full
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process, and in that regard I welcome the adoption of
resolution 2374 (2017), which established a sanctions
regime in Mali.

In conclusion, I underscore once again that the
deteriorating security situation in the Sahel is of great
concern. Our people are undergoing severe hardships
in their daily lives because of increasing insecurity,
and the very foundations of our States are threatened.
The very survival of our States is at stake. The stability
of the region is in the balance, and international peace
and security are also threatened. The resolve of the
international community aimed at containing the
regional and international threat is urgently needed. Our
five Heads of State have played their part in providing
the Joint Force with the resources at their disposal in a
regional response to those transnational threats.

We must not allow this opportunity to elude us. We
hope that the Security Council will also carry out
its primary responsibility by following the relevant
recommendations of the Secretary-General's report
before it. I thank the members of the Security Council
for the urgent attention that they will give to this urgent
request from our leaders and people.

