Mr. Gallardo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Qazi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, for
his presentation. We also thank Ambassador John
Bolton, Permanent Representative of the United States,
for his report on the Multinational Force.

Security and instability problems continue to be
fundamental issues for the new Iraqi Government. The
Government's recent decisions and plans to expand
dialogue and encourage reconciliation are positive
steps. We hope that they will be effective in addressing
the current challenges in Iraq.

We support efforts conducive to the restoration of
trust among all groups in Iraq, whether domestic
initiatives or efforts by organizations such as the
League of Arab States, including those that may be
made by the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
All such initiatives can contribute to an inclusive
dialogue, help to reduce internal tensions in Iraq and
strengthen national reconciliation. Cooperation among
neighbouring countries to improve Iraq's stability is
also important.

With regard to the security situation, Peru rejects
all terrorist attacks carried out in Iraq. We also
condemn sectarian violence and acts of intolerance. We
are confident that the Government of Iraq can make
progress in implementing policies that will strengthen
the central control of the public authorities and provide
security and protection for all its citizens. In that
connection, we believe that those responsible for
security in Iraq must carry out their duties by
protecting civilians and respecting the rule of law and
human rights. We also hope to see the speedy
establishment of such institutions as a national human
rights commission, which will help to strengthen the
rule of law and the judicial system.

The task of rebuilding Iraq is another core
challenge for the Iraqi Government. The international
community must continue its support and efforts to
achieve substantial progress in Iraq's economic
recovery and reintegration into the global economy. In
that connection, there is no doubt that the Compact
with Iraq is the most solid initiative to that end.

Finally, my delegation would like to express its
support for the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). We believe that UNAMI must continue
to provide support - in accordance with its mandates
and as the situation on the ground permits - in all
areas that can contribute to strengthening political and
legal stability and institutional and economic recovery,
as well as to provide humanitarian assistance and
promote the observance of human rights in Iraq.

