The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council this year, I should
like to extend my very warm wishes for a fruitful new
year to all members of the Security Council, the United
Nations and the Secretariat. I wish them every success
in the New Year.

On behalf of the Council, I would like to extend a
warm welcome to the new members: Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and Nigeria. We
look forward with confidence to their participation in
the work of the Council. Their experience and wisdom
will be of invaluable assistance in the discharge of the
Council's enormous responsibilities.

I would like to take this opportunity to express the
Council's deep gratitude to the outgoing members -
Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Croatia, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Viet Nam - for their important
contributions to the Council's work during their term in
2008 and 2009.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President (spoke in Chinese): I should also
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to Mr. Michel Kafando, Permanent
Representative of Burkina Faso, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
December 2009. I am sure I speak for all members of
the Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Kafando for the great diplomatic skill
with which he conducted the Council's business last
month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Afghanistan

Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2009/674)


The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Canada, Australia,
New Zealand, Pakistan and Norway, in which they
2

request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
and to Mr. Peter Schwaiger, acting head of the
delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Eide to take a seat at the Council
table.

I invite Mr. Schwaiger to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/674, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.


