Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Madam
President, allow me at the outset to congratulate you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. I
would also like to thank the three Chairs of the
Committees established pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
for their painstaking efforts in steering the work of
their respective Committees. This periodic stocktaking
is timely and critical. We are happy to participate in
today's open debate.
Terrorism poses an extremely serious threat to all
States and all societies. It threatens democracy and
democratic values. It aims to destroy lives and reverse
development. The backdrop of the latest terrorism-
related incidents once again underscores the fact that
terrorism is a global threat and requires a coordinated
and concerted global response.

There are deep concerns about the potential nexus
between clandestine proliferation and terrorism and the
ever-present danger of such weapons or vulnerable
nuclear materials falling into the hands of non-State
actors. If the scourge of terrorism is to be effectively
combated, it must be resolutely opposed, resisted and
overcome through the undiluted commitment and effort
of the international community.

International solidarity and shared determination
are absolutely imperative to combat this scourge
effectively. It is important to bear in mind that the
successful implementation of counter-terrorism
measures not only requires the fullest collective effort
of the entire membership, but also its fullest
participation in processes that affect the collective
security of all nations equally.

India has an abiding interest in expeditiously
concluding the long-pending comprehensive convention
on international terrorism. The early adoption of the
convention is in the interests of all Member States and
would provide impetus to multilateral and collective
action to countering international terrorism efforts.
Nearly all the elements of the proposed convention
have passed muster by legal experts. What is required
now is the necessary political will to ensure the early
adoption of the convention.

We support the anti-terrorism mechanisms
established by the United Nations, including resolution
1267 (1999), related to sanctions against Al-Qaida and
the Taliban; resolution 1373 (2001), which led to the
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee;
and resolution 1540 (2004), which addressed the issue
of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We also support the subsequent resolutions
that renewed, strengthened or amended those three
original resolutions. India's regulatory and legislative
framework is fully geared towards implementing the
obligations under those resolutions.

We look forward to greater efforts to bring
together interrelated aspects of the operational
mechanism of the 1267 Committee, the 1540
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
their dovetailing with the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force. It is our earnest hope that
all such efforts within the United Nations will be
integrated more closely with the core tasks being taken
forward by specialized bodies, such as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Interpol, the
International Civil Aviation Organization, the
International Maritime Organization and others.

We strongly affirm the importance of collective
effort, focusing on technical assistance to help a State
implement the mandates of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the 1540 Committee and related
instruments. We are willing to extend assistance,
bilaterally as well as multilaterally, in the greater effort
to counter the threat of terrorism.

For the strengthening and effective
implementation of counter-terrorism measures, the
Security Council has focused on upgrading the existing
mandates to ensure effective compliance with its
resolutions. Such efforts need to be supplemented with
a more collaborative approach of extending assistance,
utilizing available regional expertise and appropriate
technologies.

The latest Security Council resolution, 1904
(2009), attempted to streamline the functioning of the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee. We
support measures to strengthen the review process of
the listings in the consolidated list through the office of
the ombudsperson, with a view to increasing the
fairness and transparency of the sanctions regime.

At the same time, we are concerned that the
process of listing and de-listing in the consolidated list
continues to be subject to political will and pressure -
a scenario that we can ill afford in our united fight
against terrorism. We would encourage the Committee
to continue to work towards improving both the
content and the functionality of its website.

We fully support the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate's efforts to play a more effective role in
countering terrorism. We welcome the Committee's
effort to organize thematic briefings, streamline its
working methods and give more focus to substantive
and analytical work.

We have taken note of the latest progress made by
the 1540 Committee towards a comprehensive review
of the status of implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). We support efforts to prepare guidelines for
handling assistance requests by countries and to find
the means to address the most commonly found gaps in
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). It is
important that such activities are performed at the
request of Member States, keeping in mind their
varying national capacities, procedures and systems.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that we will
continue to work closely with the counter-terrorism
mechanisms established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). We welcome
efforts to use open dialogue as a means to build closer
cooperation within the international system. What we
need is the necessary political will, accompanied by
concerted and resolute action to effectively combat the
scourge of terrorism.

