Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): First of
all, we welcome the fact that His Excellency
Mr. Anibal Antonio Cavaco Silva, President of the
Portuguese Republic, was able to preside over the

earlier portion of this meeting. His presence at today's
debate testifies to the importance that Portugal attaches
to the issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, and we are grateful for that. I would also like
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
leadership on this subject and for his important
statement. I also thank High Commissioner Pillay,
Assistant Secretary-General Bragg and Mr. Philip
Spoerri for their statements.

As the Secretary-General has reiterated in his
reports on the subject, the protection of civilians
against human rights violations is one of the five
fundamental pillars of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, whereby we strive to improve the
situation on the ground and to enforce international
law. The multidimensional task of protecting civilians
encompasses all of the Security Council's areas of
jurisdiction.

Gabon is party to the various treaties and
conventions on human rights law and humanitarian
law, and today I will reiterate my country's position on
the issue. We believe that responsibility for the
protection of civilians, both in peacetime and in armed
conflict, falls primarily to States themselves. Every
State must scrupulously train security personnel and
members of its judiciary institutions with regard to that
responsibility.

In times of armed conflict, all parties, including
non-State armed groups, have the obligation to protect
civilian populations. In our view, every indiscriminate
attack against civilians in the course of a conflict
constitutes a violation of human rights and
international humanitarian law. When all parties to an
armed conflict neglect to protect civilians, then it falls
to the Security Council and the international
community to fill the gap in a systematic way through
relevant dialogue and consultations.

We can be proud of the important normative
framework that the Council and the international
community have developed over the past decade
around the responsibility of States in protecting
civilians, especially through resolutions 1674 (2006),
1888 (2009), 1894 (2009), 1906 (2009), 1970 (2011)
and 1973 (2011). However it must be said that, despite
those efforts on the part of the Security Council and the
international community, civilian populations continue
to suffer attacks in armed conflict. Given that reality,
what is at stake for the Council is to use all means to
make our normative framework more effective at
preventing violence and to bring to justice those who
violate human rights.

In that context, we must also give equal focus
both to essential political action on the underlying
causes of conflict and to promoting and enforcing the
rule of law. We must just as diligently pursue efforts to
put an end to impunity for those guilty of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and the crime of genocide
against civilian populations. Doing everything possible
to ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes are
arrested and tried has more than a deterrent function. It
is also a matter of enacting justice for the victims.

The international community has at its disposal
various mechanisms by which to conduct independent,
reliable fact-finding investigations. The Council's
experience in Darfur, Guinea and Cote d'Ivoire has
been a rich learning experience and suggests new
means to fight impunity. In that context, States stand to
gain from taking greater advantage of the expertise of
the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission. We must also note the important work of
international criminal tribunals, mixed tribunals and
traditional justice mechanisms, the admirable work of
the Human Rights Council and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in facilitating fact-
finding in various crises, the significant contributions
of peacekeeping missions in gathering information on
grave violations, especially those against women and
children. I also underline the referrals on the part of
States to the International Criminal Court to investigate
and prosecute the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes and the Security Council's referral of cases to
the Court, under article 16 of the Rome Statute.

Still, for our work to achieve lasting results, it is
essential for States themselves take on the
responsibility of addressing human rights violations.
On that subject, I commend the solutions developed
locally by some States to foment both accountability
and reconciliation. Supporting such efforts to
strengthen national systems must therefore become a
fundamental element of the international cooperation
essential in this matter.

That common effort will benefit from greater
cooperation among the United Nations, regional
organizations such as the African Union and
humanitarian organizations such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross. That will surely lead to
greater effectiveness on the ground.

Lastly, we must listen to the concerns of
humanitarian organizations at work in the field, and
take in the information they provide. Their knowledge
can serve to alert us to and mitigate the threat to
civilian populations of developments such as the use of
blast weapons.

In conclusion, Gabon's position is based on the
importance of protecting civilians in conflict situations,
and we would like to reiterate the necessity of
establishing the responsibility of the perpetrators of the
most serious violations of international law as an
essential component of efforts to end impunity and
bring justice to the victims. Needless to say, we
support the Secretary-General's call to the Council to
continue to vigilantly monitor the situation of civilians
in armed conflict.

