Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We thank Special
Representative Fall and Ms. Ghelani for their briefings
today and for their tireless and very important efforts.
They can count on our support, both in the preventive
action of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and the humanitarian efforts
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

Advocating for an increased focus on preventive
diplomacy has been a priority for Sweden throughout
our tenure on the Council. One of the most effective
operational tools the United Nations has for preventing
conflict is precisely its regional offices, which
are uniquely positioned to engage in constructive
dialogue and provide political accompaniment, with
local knowledge, continuity and respect. They can
take a comprehensive approach to challenges and
support countries in addressing the root causes of
conflict, as well as effective and coordinated regional
responses, including to promote regional integration,
cross-border cooperation and development. The
work of these important regional offices and of our
regional envoys must therefore continue to be actively
supported, and we believe that their capacity should be
further strengthened.

My Foreign Minister, Ms. Margot Wallstrom,
witnessed first-hand the devastating effects of climate
change on local communities, especially women,
during herjoint visit to Chad this summer with Special
Representative Fall and Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed. Climate-related security risks
are among the challenges that require both a holistic
approach and a regional response. We welcome the
expanded analysis on climate and security in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/1065). We hope to
see that approach also replicated in other regions and in
all parts of the United Nations system.

The increase in conflicts between farmers and
herders, aggravated by the impact of climate change,
is a worrisome development. We welcome the regional
plan to reinforce conflict prevention and early-warning
mechanisms at the national and regional levels, with
the participation of women and youth. We appreciate
UNOCA'S efforts in that regard.

The situation in Central Africa has been dominated
by elections in a number of countries in the subregion,
as we have just heard. We must continue to ensure the
equal and unhindered participation of women in those
processes, including possibilities to run for office.
The situation room platform, set up by the Women's
International League for Peace and Freedom in
Cameroon, is a good example of how women can be
encouraged to take part in elections. Operationalizing
the regional action plan for the women and peace and
security agenda remains critical, and related initiatives
by UNOCA and regional organizations should
be supported.

In the spirit of preventive diplomacy, the
deteriorating situation in Cameroon must be addressed.
We are deeply concerned over the acute humanitarian
situation that I have described today and the massive
displacement caused by the crisis in the North-West
and South-West regions of the country. Continued
disturbing reports of grave violence, including
extrajudicial killings, abductions and restrictions of
movement, must be investigated, and accountability for
all human rights violations and abuses must be ensured.
A continued crisis risks having serious regional
implications, including on the fight against terrorism
in the Lake Chad basin and efforts to bring peace to
the Central African Republic. As we have heard today,
that is the fastest-growing displacement situation,
which represents a clear threat to international peace
and security.

To change that trajectory, the post-electoral period
should offer a window of opportunity. We therefore
urge all parties to immediately end the violence call
on the Government to urgently take concrete steps to
build genuine trust and confidence, as underlined by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall
this morning. That includes engaging in an inclusive,
mediated dialogue with communities in the English-
speaking region, as well as to release political detainees.
Safe and unhindered humanitarian access must
always be ensured, in accordance with humanitarian
principles. Access should also be provided to human
rights monitors and the media to help establish the facts.

United international engagement is needed to assist
Cameroon in managing the crisis, including building
trust and overcoming divisions. International support
is also needed to address the humanitarian situation.
We therefore encourage the Government to seek
support from the United Nations and regional actors.
If the crisis continues to deteriorate and steps are not
taken to address the situation, the Council should
consider options for more active engagement in a spirit
of prevention.

The security situation in the wider Lake Chad
basin remains one of deep concern. The number of
attacks carried out by Boko Haram has increased
in recent months and the humanitarian situation is
not improving, as we have heard. The international
community needs to do more to support national
and regional efforts in addressing the situation. We
welcome UNOCA's continued support to the Lake
Chad Basin Commission and the implementation
of the regional strategy for stabilization, recovery
and resilience of the areas affected by Boko Haram.
Sweden will continue to contribute, including with
substantial humanitarian assistance, as well as through
the European Union's development cooperation and
support, to the Multinational Joint Task Force in the
fight against Boko Haram.

In conclusion, United Nations regional offices,
including UNOCA, have an important role to play as
the United Nations moves towards a prevention-centred
approach in the spirit of sustaining peace. Many of
the security risks that we face today, such as climate
change and terrorism, are not bound by national borders
but will, by default, need regional and international
responses. Beyond our membership on the Council,
we will continue to advocate for effective conflict
prevention, including through supporting regional
responses by United Nations regional offices and
regional organizations. We expect to remain a major
humanitarian donor in response to the huge needs
outlined by Director Ghelani today. We urge others to
join us and respond to her appeal this morning.

