Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): As this
is my first statement in the Security Council, I should like
to extend my greetings to you, Mr. President, and to all
the members of the Council, the Secretary-General and
the staff of the Secretariat, who so efficiently contribute
to the work of the most important body responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

Argentina has for some time maintained that, with
the end of the cold war, it has become easier to recognize
the fact that threats to international peace and security are
not exclusively related to the threat or the use of force,
but that they instead encompass a broader criterion that
has been called human security. I acknowledge that this
concept is still evolving and that it is not yet clearly
defined.

We have also said that peace and development are
two sides of the same coin. There can be no lasting peace
where the basic conditions for subsistence, education and
health are not guaranteed for the inhabitants.

 

It is in this framework linking the concepts of human
security, peace and development that we believe the serious
issue of AIDS should be considered as a factor leading to
situations that have an effect on international security. In
this regard, we consider it appropriate to recall that His
Holiness Pope Paul VI, in his 1967 encyclical on the
development of peoples entitled Populorum Progressio,
stated that development was the new name of peace.

We have no doubt that AIDS erodes the potential for
human, social and economic development - elements that
are at the root of most current conflicts, both of
international conflicts and of domestic ones with
international repercussions.

The magnitude of the AIDS problem in Africa is
evidenced by the fact that the question is being taken up in
an open meeting of the Security Council, with the
participation of the Vice-President of the United States of
America, Mr. Al Gore, and of the President of the World
Bank, James Wolfensohn, for the first time in the history of
the Council, as well as by the high-level participation of
Members of the Organization in the debate.

The actions that are taken, or not taken, over the next
five years in combating AIDS will be decisive for the
future of the countries of sub-Saharan Africa and indeed
that of all humankind. In this connection, we would venture
to make the following suggestions as to measures that
should be taken.

In the View of the Republic of Argentina, the first step
should be to recognize that AIDS is not exclusively a health
problem but also affects development and, consequently,
security - a key issue in the elaboration of national and
regional policies. We believe that combating AIDS should
be a part of national development agendas along with issues
relating to combating illiteracy, hunger and infant
malnutrition.

The second step, we believe, should be increasing
financial assistance to this end. At the present time the
international community is allocating inadequate resources
to programmes to combat AIDS. The level of international
response must be commensurate with the spread of the
epidemic, which is increasing three times faster than the
resources allocated to control it. Likewise, an increase in
official development assistance, which has been declining
in recent years, is necessary. This is the principal
responsibility of those that have more resources - in other
words, the developed countries.

In this context, in the spirit of the G-8 summit held
in Cologne in June 1999, we should consider reducing the
debt of the African countries most seriously affected by
AIDS and least able to muster the resources to combat it.
We also believe that the private sector has an important
part to play in mobilizing resources.

The third step should be more active participation by
civil society, including non-governmental organizations.

Fourthly, we believe that insofar as is possible we
should increase cooperation among international
organizations. In this respect, the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank, inter alia, all do
important work in the area of prevention, dissemination
of information, education, and technical and financial
assistance. This work should continue, intensify and,
ultimately, be coordinated with the work of regional
organizations.

Fifthly, we believe it necessary to intensify the
coordination among international organizations, non-
governmental organizations and governmental authorities.

Lastly, we cannot fail to mention the situation of
AIDS orphans, which, as UNICEF has pointed out, is
indeed a unique tragedy in both its scope and nature. It
deserves priority attention and an emergency response.

We have just heard the situation described most
eloquently. We believe that the United Nations must
restate its commitment to tackle this epidemic, which is
particularly serious in Africa, where it affects one out of
four people, but which also exists throughout the world,
including Latin American and the Caribbean, as was
demonstrated by the data that was presented by the
United Nations Development Programme Administrator,
Mr. Malloch Brown.

I cannot conclude my statement without quoting the
Secretary-Generals words of 6 December 1999:

"We must make the struggle against AIDS a true
priority in our work throughout Africa, on an equal
footing with our work for peace and security."
(SG/SM/7247, p. 3)

 

The Republic of Argentina fully agrees with that
statement and undertakes to provide its fullest cooperation.

Lastly, I must thank, on behalf of our delegation, the
delegation of the United States of America for having
brought such an important issue to the Council for
discussion.

