Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom):
Madame President, I wish to express my thanks for
your kind words of welcome and for those which
colleagues have already addressed to me. I am very
conscious of the privilege and the responsibility of
joining this particular group, and I look forward to
working closely and cooperatively with colleagues in
the Council.

I should like to begin by associating the United
Kingdom fully with the statement to be delivered
shortly by the Italian presidency of the European
Union. I move on now to compliment Ambassador
Mufioz on both his chairmanship and on the very
succinct report which he has presented to us this
morning setting out an ambitious programme of work.

Today's meeting is important because it focuses
the Council once again on the fight against the scourge
of terrorism. It is vital, and the sombre words we have
heard from the Chairman should remind us all of the
political necessity to maintain this fight and in
particular to move on to the practical but technical
implementation of how one does that. Hence the
importance of the report of the Monitoring Group on
the implementation by States Members of the United
Nations - how they are fulfilling their responsibilities.

It is vital that Members submit their reports to
ensure that there can be some monitoring of
implementation and of the success achieved in this
fight. The addition of experts to the Monitoring Group
is very welcome. We hope that will enable the Group to
provide a substantive analysis of implementation by
Member States and also to offer guidance and advice
on how that implementation can be improved.

Focusing on case studies is important,
particularly in terms of charitable foundations, to
ensure that they are not abused by Al Qaeda. Stopping
the financing of terrorism, as we all have seen, is at the
heart of international efforts to disrupt, combat and
eventually defeat terrorism. The cooperation of
Members is actually vital in that fight. I think that it is
important in this respect to recognize the role which
regional organizations can fulfil - particularly, in my
case, recognizing what the European Union is doing to
combat the illegal financing.

Combating financing does not work unless there
is an effective, comprehensive network that covers all
possibilities, because otherwise financing simply seeks
out the weakest points, and then funds are diverted
through them - to places like Al Qaeda. Therefore a
comprehensive effort is absolutely crucial, and the
obligation on us all to play our part is one that the
United Kingdom recognizes totally.

Ambassador Munoz referred to the cooperation
between the Monitoring Group experts and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the need to
avoid both duplication and, perhaps, to clarify
respective roles. I think the work that is being done
there is quite important in that direction, as is the
continued development of links with relevant
international and regional organizations. Their support
and help can assist Member States with the necessary
implementation, and the work of the CTC has
demonstrated what can be achieved. I think the work
done by the Committee in expanding the list of
individuals and entities associated with Al Qaeda needs
to be emphasized, but it will be successful only if
Member State contribute by fully implementing
resolution 1455 (2003).

In conclusion, I would like to signal how
important it is that the Council today support,
encourage and endorse the work of the Committee and
the programme which has been set out for its future
activity. We rely on the committee to maintain the
momentum in the fight against Al Qaeda and the
Taliban. It is very much for the individual Members of
the United Nations to cooperate in the necessary
implementation and to play their essential part so that
we can all, collectively, carry on and defeat this threat.

