Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Slovenia supports the draft
resolution submitted to the Security Council for action
today. It is a timely and necessary draft resolution in this
period when decisive action is needed to normalize the
situation in the Central African Republic. We would like
to commend the delegation of Kenya for the excellent
work done in preparing the draft.

We welcome the progress made so far in the efforts
to achieve national reconciliation and sustainable stability
in the Central African Republic. In particular, we
welcome the commitment and the efforts of the Member
States participating in the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB). We also welcome the neutral and impartial
way in which they are supporting the improvement of the
security situation in the country.
On the other hand, we realize that the situation in
the Central African Republic remains fragile and that it
continues to constitute a threat to international peace and
security in the region and therefore calls for further
efforts on the part of the international community.

We believe that all the signatories to the Bangui
Agreements and the authorities of the Central African
Republic need an appropriate security environment in
order to take steps to implement political, economic,
social and security reforms, including the establishment of
an electoral code, preparation for the legislative elections
of this year and implementation of the National
Reconciliation Pact. The secure and stable environment

 

that is being created will remain essential, and the
assistance and support of the international community will
therefore continue to be necessary.

Therefore, Slovenia will vote in favour of the present
draft resolution, by which Security Council would decide to
authorize the extension of MISAB's mandate until 15 April
1998 and to establish a United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINURCA) with effect from 15
April 1998 for an initial period of three months.

Slovenia is encouraged by the ability of the Security
Council to act today. The members' grasp of the issues at
hand and the degree of unity among them will undoubtedly
aid in the success of MINURCA.

