Mr. Tenya Hasegawa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu and Mr. Joseph
Ballard for their informative briefings today.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Spain on behalf
of the Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004). We
would also like to add a few comments in our national
capacity.

My delegation is grateful for this opportunity
to engage in dialogue on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, as well as for the efforts
undertaken by the chairmanship of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), currently held by the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, with a view to strengthening international
cooperation on this very important issue.

Peru believes that the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems represents
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security. The situation has deteriorated in recent
years, with an increased likelihood of non-State actors,
in particular terrorist groups, developing, acquiring
or using such weapons and their means of delivery,
or trading in them. The threat is real, as we have seen
in recent instances, and has been facilitated by rapid
advances in science and technology as well as by the
expansion of international trade.

Spurred on by this realization, Peru co-sponsored
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016), which we deem
vital instruments for promoting the urgently needed
universalization and comprehensive implementation
of the multilateral treaties aimed at preventing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Moreover,
we consider it imperative to develop and implement
national legislation so as effectively to monitor the
illicit trade in such weapons and their components and
delivery systems.

In that connection, we would underscore that Peru
has made considerable efforts to meet its obligations
under the resolutions I mentioned - in terms of nuclear
safety, radiological security and the physical protection
of nuclear material. As set out in the reports we have
submitted, we have adapted our legislation and taken
various criminal and administrative measures to ensure
effective migration and customs control in the aerial
and maritime areas.
Peru believes, moreover, that efforts to address
the threat of such weapons falling into the hands of
non-State actors must go hand in hand with greater
cooperation at the subregional and regional levels, with
the goal of prevention and of the transfer of technology
for peaceful purposes. That was the stance taken
recently by Peru at the United Nations Security Council
Resolution 1540 (2004) Regional Industry Outreach
Conference for the Pacific Alliance States and Brazil,
organized recently by the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs in Mexico City last June.

By the same token, we believe it vital to ensure
accurate, predictable and coherent action by those
bodies charged with implementing the non-proliferation
regime, in particular the Security Council. Another key
challenge facing the international legal regime on that
issue is the imperative need to eliminate the weapons
of mass destruction currently held by various States.
That is a long-standing aspiration of the international
community whose realization will require greater
involvement on the part of civil society and the
scientific community, including non-governmental
organizations, in our efforts to foster understanding of
and outreach on the obligations borne by States under
resolution 1540 (2004) and other related instruments.

To conclude, Peru reaffirms its unstinting
commitment to complying with international norms
aimed at ensuring the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, as well as its concomitant
international cooperation and coordination efforts,
with the ultimate goal of setting the world free from the
daunting threat of such weapons.

