The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.

"The Security Council welcomes
President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour's
announcement of the launch of the National Dialogue
Conference on 18 March and commends those that
have engaged constructively in the preparatory
stages of the process. The Security Council also
welcomes the issuance of a decree regarding the
formation of the Executive Bureau for the Mutual
Accountability Framework.

"The Security Council reiterates the need for
the transitional period to be a Yemeni-led process,
underpinned by a commitment to democracy, good
governance, rule of law, national reconciliation
and respect for the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all people in Yemen.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
need for the National Dialogue Conference to
be conducted in an inclusive manner involving
the full participation of all segments of Yemeni
society, including representatives from the South
and other regions, and the full and effective
participation of youth and women, as stipulated
in the final report of the Preparatory Committee.
The Security Council calls upon all parties to
honour the timetable and benchmarks set out in
the transition agreement and for all sides to act in
good faith, in a peaceful, transparent, constructive
and reconciliatory manner. The Security Council
maintains its expectation that the National Dialogue
Conference will lead to a constitutional referendum
and elections by February 2014.

"The Security Council urges all the parties
in Yemen to adhere to resolving their differences
through dialogue and consultation, reject acts of
violence to achieve political goals, refrain from
provocations, and fully abide by resolutions 2014
(2011) and 2051 (2012). The Security Council
expresses concern over reports of interference in
the transition by individuals in Yemen representing
the former regime, the former opposition, and
others who do not adhere to the guiding principles
of the Implementation Mechanism Agreement for
the transition process, including former President
A1i Abdullah Saleh and former Vice President Ali
Salim Al-Beidh. The Security Council reiterates its
readiness to consider further measures, including
under Article 41 of the United Nations Charter, if
actions aimed at undermining the Government of
National Unity and the political transition continue.

"The Security Council expresses concern over
reports of money and weapons being brought into
Yemen from outside for the purpose of undermining
the transition.

"The security Councilreaffirms its commitment
to the unity, sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Yemen.

"The Security Council urges the Yemeni
Government to pass legislation on transitional
justice to support reconciliation without further
delay. The Council further urges the need to
respect the rule of law and protect human rights,
in accordance with Yemen's international legal
obligations, particularly those of women and
people belonging to vulnerable groups, such as
children. The Security Council welcomes in this
regard the commitment by the Government to
end the recruitment and use of children by the
Yemeni security forces through the adoption and
implementation of an action plan in line with
resolution 1612 (2005).

"The Security Council remains closely engaged
on the situation in Yemen and will continue to
closely follow the next steps towards a peaceful
political transition. In this regard, it welcomes
the continued and coordinated efforts of the Gulf
Cooperation Council Group of Ten Ambassadors,
the Secretary General's good offices, including
through Special Adviser Jamal Benomar, the wider
diplomatic community, and the next Friends of
Yemen meeting that will take place on 7 March This statement will be issued as a document of the
in London. The Security Council underscores Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2013/3.

the need for continued international support for
Yemen's political transition, including through
the fulfilment of commitments made by donors to
support Yemen." The meeting rose at 3 pm,

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage ofits consideration of the item on its agenda.
