Mr. Cooney (Ireland): Let me first welcome you,
Sir, to the chair and wish the United Kingdom well for
its presidency of the Security Council. I would also
like to endorse your decision to bring this kind of
briefing into open session.

I would like now to thank Mr. Annabi for his
most informative briefing today, which was enlivened
by his reflections on his own recent visit to East Timor.
Given that we had the opportunity in January to put our
position on the record 4 and, as has been mentioned,
we will be having substantial debates on East Timor
next month and probably in July - I will limit myself
to a few matters of particular importance.

First, we welcome the recent progress towards the
eventual preparation of a constitution and the holding
of democratic elections. We have taken careful note of
the information provided recently about the financial
and personnel needs for the elections and are
examining the specific requests closely in the context
of our ongoing bilateral assistance programme for East
Timor.

Secondly, we welcome the development of the
judicial system in East Timor and the first measures
taken against those accused of serious crimes
committed in 1999, as well as the establishment of a
Truth, Reception and Reconciliation Commission. The
initial steps taken by the Government of Indonesia to
investigate violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law are welcome and should be
continued.

Thirdly, Ireland remains concerned about the
refugee situation in West Timor. While the recent
operations organized by the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Organization for
Migration are positive, the approximately 100,000
refugees remaining in camps must be able to return to
East Timor before 20 June 2001, in time to register for
the elections there. We would echo the views expressed
by Jamaica and Colombia in this regard. Action must
also be taken to address the situation of East Timorese
women who were abducted during the conflict, some of
whom are allegedly still being held and subjected to
abuse in West Timor. We would be grateful for further
information regarding this issue.

Fourthly, the overall security situation continues
to give cause for concern. The recent incidents in Dili
and Viqueque, and attacks against UNTAET personnel
along the borders - as detailed by Mr. Annabi -
reinforce the need for strong security measures. As
well as enabling refugees to return home safely, the
security environment should enable the resumption of
humanitarian efforts and ensure that elections can be
prepared and carried out in a calm and safe manner. I
was pleased to hear from Mr. Annabi that lessons are
being drawn from the recent incidents with a View to
further action.

Finally, like others, I would have raised the tax
issue and I am grateful to Mr. Annabi for his response,
but I would echo your own remarks, Sir, concerning
that issue.

