Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank all participants in today's meeting
who briefed the Council, in particular the Prime
Minister of the Federal Republic of Somalia, His
Excellency Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke.

We commend the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and share the
assessments of the Secretary-General with regard to the
activities of UNSOM. contained in the strategic review
(S/2015/702). We note that the United Nations Support
Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia
has to operate against the backdrop of an unfolding
humanitarian crisis and unabated terrorist attacks by
Al-Shabaab. At the same time, it is actively involved

in the political process and is addressing a growing
number of tasks.

We believe that the tense military and political
situation in Somalia calls for the armed fight against
Al-Shabaab to be intensified through capacity-
building for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Somali national security forces,
which will require, first and foremost, a scaling up
of United Nations-provided material and technical
support. We are concerned about the increase in
Al-Shabaab's activity, both inside and outside Somalia;
the coordination of actions between Somali extremists
and other terrorist organizations in Africa - Boko
Haram, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and Ansar
Eddine; and increasing Al-Shabaab attacks against
neighbouring States, including Kenya, and hostilities
against Ethiopia and Djibouti. We believe it is necessary
to maintain military pressure on Somali extremists. We
urge the international community to continue to take
measures to strengthen the capacity of the Somali army
and AMISOM. We highly value the efforts of UNSOM
in supporting AMISOM. to implement Security Council
decisions in this area.

The growing task-load and problems for
UNSOM. - chiefly, its underfunding and
understaffing - must be addressed immediately.
We have no objections to proposals to increase
financing to the Mission, in due compliance with
standards of transparency and accountability for
specialized programmes, as well as the involvement
of other United Nations agencies in implementing
such projects. Through targeted contributions to the
relevant United Nations funds and programmes, the
Russian Federation regularly provides humanitarian
assistance to the Federal Government of Somalia and
for Somali refugees in neighbouring countries. From
2011 to 2014, our assistance exceeded $12 million. This
year, through the World Food Programme, Russia has
provided $1 million for Somalia and $2 million for the
approximately 1 million Somali refugees in Kenya.

