Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join other colleagues here in welcoming the High
Representative and to thank him for his extensive
briefing. We have also gone through his reports and
would like to express support for his efforts in the
work that he is doing.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a novel experiment in
building a new nation from the rubble of civil war that
the people of the former Yugoslavia had to endure
during the 19905. It is never easy to build a multi-
ethnic, multilingual, multicultural and multireligious
country. The problems that the High Representative has
reported to us today are bound to be encountered on
the path of building a nation inhabited by people of
different faiths, ethnicities and languages. Representing
a country of more than 1.2 billion with arguably the
largest diversity, I commend the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for their determination to form a nation
based on unity and diversity, and wish them success in
their endeavours. Our experience has convinced us
that, although the path is long and arduous, the fruits
are well worth the efforts.

The resolution of the problems facing the
Bosnian people call for patience, determination and
mutual accommodation. Unilateral actions, mutual
suspicion and violation of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace will only vitiate the political and
social atmosphere and delay the achievement of their

goals. We would like to congratulate Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the successful and smooth conduct of
elections in October 2010 to elect the members of the
Presidency in the three Parliaments at the national level
and one each for the two entities. The Parliament at the
entity level has begun to function. We hope that the
stalemate in the formation of the Federation House of
Peoples will also be resolved and that the
Parliamentary Assembly will be able to convene soon.
The display of flexibility on the part of the parties and
the avoidance of divisive rhetoric would contribute
towards that goal.

In that context, we welcome the High
Representative's assessment that the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is operational and that
cooperation among the three members has improved in
comparison to the previous mandate. We are glad to
note that the European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been able to maintain a safe and
secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we
support the view of the High Representative that its
executive mandate should be extended.

India's relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina are
cordial and friendly, dating back to the decades of
friendship that we enjoyed with all the constituents of
the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In
India, there is enormous goodwill for the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, who share common values of
respect for plurality, diversity and democracy. In the
early 1990s, we extended assistance as part of the
United Nations mission to observe law and order,
including the dispatch of police observers. Recently,
we have been cooperating in the establishment of an
information technology centre. We stand ready to help
in any other way that we can in the process of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's nation-building.

