The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Bangladesh.

The ll-year-long comprehensive sanctions
imposed on Iraq have been at the centre of an intense
debate in the United Nations and also in the
international community. The strict control on Iraq's
imports and exports has resulted in a steady decline in
the living conditions of the Iraqi people. It is doubtful
whether the objective of alleviating the distress of the
people of Iraq through the oil-for-food programme has
been fully achieved. It is therefore incumbent on the
United Nations, as well as on the world community, to
seriously examine the situation in Iraq, taking a
comprehensive approach and focusing particularly on
the humanitarian condition of the people of Iraq.

In March 2000, during its first presidency of the
Council, Bangladesh took the initiative of holding an
open debate on Iraq. This finally, after many years,
afforded the wider membership of the United Nations
an opportunity to focus on the plight of the Iraqi
people, as well as on other relevant issues, particularly
that of Kuwaiti missing persons. For the second time
during a Bangladesh presidency, we believe, a welcome
opportunity is being provided to address the situation
in Iraq, in particular the devastating effect of the
sanctions on the life of the people of Iraq.

The oil-for-food programme was designed to
alleviate the humanitarian situation in Iraq. Although
Iraq accepted the programme, it has serious
reservations on provisions that it thinks impinge on its
sovereignty and national independence. Multiple
problems relating to the implementation of the
programme are perhaps rooted in this perception. It is
for this reason that many, including some Council
members, have been underscoring the need for a
comprehensive approach in addressing this issue.

The most comprehensive framework so far for the
United Nations policy on Iraq is provided in Security
Council resolution 1284 (1999). Yet it is deficient in
not indicating clearly a pathway towards the
suspension and final lifting of the sanctions.

We believe that sanctions regimes should clearly
define the modalities for the lifting of sanctions. That
only makes them credible. As a number of speakers
have said, the current deadlock in the situation must
not be allowed to continue. Council members must
make a serious effort to address these issues - issues
that have been giving rise to problems in the
implementation of the Council's resolutions.

To make the current exercise on negotiating the
draft truly comprehensive, all issues of concern,
including Kuwaiti missing persons and the return of
Kuwaiti property, should be addressed. In doing so, the
Council should be mindful of the fact that Iraq has
rejected resolution 1352 (2001), which provides for the
broad principles guiding new arrangements. Making
the adoption and implementation of these new
arrangements contingent on the usual rollover of the
oil-for-food programme risks jeopardizing it.

Clearly, the cooperation of the Government of
Iraq, as well as the cooperation of the States sharing
borders with Iraq, is a key factor in the implementation
of these arrangements. Questions of their sovereignty,
economic interests, additional burden and so on,
enmeshed in legal issues, have critical significance. It
is, in our View, vital to closely consult with those States
in order to arrive at suitable arrangements.

The Council cannot be oblivious to the regional
political context that surrounds the issue. That calls for
a vision beyond the sanctions, a vision to salvage
future generations in Iraq. If the Council fails to get the
political perspective right, no procedural simplification
is likely to bring the desired result. Iraq's involvement
in the process is crucial. The international community
has the obligation to help Iraq as much as Iraq has the
obligation to help itself by cooperating with the United
Nations.

That is why we welcomed the dialogue between
the Secretary-General and the Iraqi delegation in
February this year. It would make sense for the
Council, in its current endeavour, to encourage that
process.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Kuwait. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

