I thank you, Madam President, for convening this important annual meeting on the evolving role of United Nations policing in peace operations, post-conflict and other crisis situations. I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three African States members of the Security Council - namely, the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia - as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix; Ms. Unaisi Vuniwaqa, Police Commissioner of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan; Mr. Pascal Champion, Police Commissioner of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic; Mr. Issoufou Yacouba, Police Commissioner of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali; and Mr. Serge Therriault, Police Commissioner of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, for their informative presentations on the evolving role of the United Nations police (UNPOL), especially against the backdrop of the major challenges faced by peacekeeping operations in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. As 2020 marks the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations police, the A3+1 reaffirms its support for UNPOL and values their role in promoting international peace and security. We commend the contribution of formed police units, individual police officers and specialized police teams in peacekeeping operations in the discharge of their respective mandates, as determined by the Security Council. The police component in peacekeeping is vital. It plays a key role in restoring stability in conflict areas and contributes significantly to peaceful and long-standing solutions. While we pay tribute to fallen peacekeepers and praise their sacrifice, we call on all Member States to collectively commit to enhancing the safety and security of all peacekeepers - police and military, as well as civilian - in the field, in particular through the full implementation of resolution 2518 (2020). UNPOL continues to be deployed in accordance with the principles of peacekeeping, such as the consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force. Nevertheless, their contribution to peace and security has undergone a significant evolution to meet the new challenges. Currently, UNPOL plays a substantial role in helping national authorities to protect civilians and participates actively in building the capacity of national law enforcement bodies. UNPOL continues to cooperate with the host countries to improve their ability to combat transnational organized crime and international terrorism. In that context, we stress the importance of providing UNPOL with appropriate resources to promote the effectiveness and the success of United Nations missions. It is of paramount importance to provide police officers with adequate and targeted training and the necessary equipment. Moreover, we call for strategic, clear, realistic and achievable mandates, supported by the requisite resources. The A3+1 welcomes the continued efforts of the United Nations to strengthen its capabilities by developing very specific training groups and programmes to deal with the new challenges, in accordance with the Strategic Guidance Framework for International Police Peacekeeping. In the same vein, we reiterate our support for the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which remains a road map for better United Nations policing in peacekeeping missions through the promotion of inclusive and participatory approaches. Such collaborative approaches, championed by the United Nations police, pave the way for the delivery of comprehensive, nationally led political solutions that facilitate suitable conditions for mission transitions and successful exit strategies. The COVID-19 pandemic has a major impact on UNPOL's actions and enterprise. We commend the United Nations efforts to successfully mitigate the effects of the pandemic, drawing on its experience in health crises. Accordingly, the United Nations immediately paused all troop and police rotations and provided guidance to ensure the safety of the United Nations police and the local populations. The United Nations police appropriately suspended training for local partners that involved physical contact and proximity. We commend our Police Commissioners and the Police Division in that regard. At this stage, the A3+1 believes that it is important for the United Nations to remain vigilant and well prepared to meet the challenges of a likely second wave of the pandemic. We acknowledge the increasing importance of the United Nations police in mission transition and, following the withdrawal of peacekeeping missions, in the stabilization and recovery efforts of post-conflict countries. However, it is imperative that the national authorities take the lead in deciding on the assistance that is required Women's contribution to peace and security remains at the heart of the concerns of the international community. We should continue to mobilize political will and resources to promote gender parity and the full and equal participation and leadership of female police officers. In this context, we welcome the contribution of the United Nations Police to implementing the women and peace and security agenda. The A3+1 supports the United Nations Police gender initiative to further increase the number of women in all peacekeeping missions. In this respect, we believe that female police officers are a key element in the process of reaching peace solutions. While women police officers have made significant contributions to gender equality advocacy, gender-based violence awareness, trust and confidence- building among local populations, and have provided an important sense of security to women and children, they should not be limited in their ability to contribute to the full range of United Nations policing. Equally, all aspects of United Nations policing normally associated with women have to be prioritized as critical actions to be undertaken by all police officers, regardless of gender. Currently, in peacekeeping operations 15.1 per cent of police are women, compared to 10.2 per cent in 2015. We urge the full implementation of the recently adopted resolution 2538 (2020) on women in peacekeeping. In this connection, the A3+1 reaffirms its support for the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and emphasizes that all police officers have a role to play in eradicating this scourge. The A3+1 recognizes the critical role of United Nations policing in operational support, the protection of civilians, as well in capacity-building of host State police. As a lasting impact in sustaining peace, we foresee an increased role of the United Nations police, including in COVID-19, in the future under the mandate given by the Security Council. The A3+1 attaches great importance to the reinforcement of regional partnerships between the United Nations and relevant international, regional and subregional organizations, particularly with the African Union. In this regard, we welcome the continued support and collaboration for mutual enrichment, particularly in these difficult circumstances, to alleviate the impact of COVID-19. The rehatting of African Union-led peace operations, transitions and eventual drawdowns require close liaisons to ensure the coherence and harmonization of peace efforts. In this regard, we are pleased that the Strategic Guidance Framework for International Police Peacekeeping was developed in consultation with several organizations, including the African Union. Finally, the A3+1 requests for the Secretary-General to submit to the Security Council a report on developments regarding United Nations policing in 2021. We make this proposal, as the last report on United Nations policing was issued in 2018. In conclusion, we would like to take advantage of the presence of the Police Commissioners to ask the following questions. What are their expectations of the Security Council to help them to fulfil their mandate in better way? What progress is being made in the further development of the police sector in Haiti, including the use of technology, given the current situation in the country and the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic? How is their mission striking a balance in equally deploying the individual police officers, formed police units and specialized police teams? We are asking in order to ascertain the importance of each within operations, noting that the specialized police team approach has been praised as an effective and efficient tool for providing required policing expertise for the implementation of United Nations police mandates in field missions.
