The present debate is both critical and timely, and for that Brazil thanks and congratulates Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia and the Russian Federation on this initiative. The celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) is a milestone and an achievement of which this body should be proud. As a testament to its ground-breaking nature, suffice it to say that since then, as many as 10 follow-up resolutions have been adopted by the Security Council, the most recent of which was endorsed by the current composition of the Council under the Indonesian presidency, whom we also congratulate. Resolution 2538 (2020), the first resolution devoted exclusively to women peacekeepers, is definitely an important step. The women and peace and security agenda is primarily driven by the mission of maintaining international peace and security. Women peacekeepers and mediators are valuable actors in peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It is a well-established fact that the greater the number of women negotiators, mediators, peacekeepers and police officers, the better the chance that peace deals will be struck and last longer and that peacekeeping missions will be successful. Women Blue Helmets are also able to reach out to more segments of the local population. The element of added diversity is conducive to more efficiency in mandate implementation, and their presence on the ground encourages reporting of cases of sexual violence. The Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative recognizes the significance of the women and peace and security agenda as one of its constitutive pillars. It remains incumbent on all stakeholders involved in peacekeeping, not least troop-contributing countries, to implement its commitments. One area where progress must be expanded is meeting the targets of the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028. Brazil's National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security commits to increasing the proportion of women military and police officers in peacekeeping from the current levels in order to achieve the Strategy's targets, in which we are glad to report to have succeeded in several cases this year. The service of two of Brazil's women peacekeepers also makes their country especially proud. Commanders Marcia Braga and Carla Araujo were both distinguished with the United Nations Military Gender Advocate of the Year Award for their innovative work promoting mixed teams and striving to reduce sexual violence in the Central African Republic. Such recognition stands as a testament to the competence of those two officers, as well as to Brazil's commitment to ensuring a broader participation of women in peacekeeping. With regard to sexual exploitation and abuse, Brazil adheres entirely to the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy, which we envisage as a starting point and as a coherent conceptual framework to tackle this lingering scourge in the context of peacekeeping. Brazil is proud of the overall track record of our peacekeepers in their performance over more than 70 years under the United Nations flag. President Jair Bolsonaro has recently joined the Secretary-General's circle of leadership on the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations operations, in continuation of our unwavering commitment to this issue. The international community celebrates the anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) at an especially challenging juncture. We must strengthen our determination in perfecting the mechanisms of preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. International efforts to fight the pandemic must steel our collective resolve in tackling threats to international peace and security, for which we congratulate the Council on its adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), calling for a global ceasefire to allow for humanitarian aid during the pandemic. Moreover, we must consider that, among its various impacts on international peace and security, the coronavirus disease pandemic creates an ever-more challenging environment for survivors of sexual violence. The Council must remain ever vigilant regarding the fight against sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict situations, especially in these troubled times. As we continue the celebrations for the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), Brazil would like to commend its neighbours in the Americas for the past year's efforts to develop a regional perspective on women and peace and security. In that regard, we congratulate the efforts of the Women and Peace and Security Focal Points Network under the Canadian and Uruguayan presidency and highlight our determination to continue working with our regional partners to advance the agenda in the Americas. This occasion is also auspicious for the international community, and the Security Council in particular, to reflect on the accomplishments attained over the past two decades and on the obstacles that the women and peace and security agenda still faces as we plough ahead. Member States can count on Brazil as one the staunchest advocates of that agenda.
