I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his sobering account of how much remains to be done at the international level to help bring peace and stability to Libya. I also thank the German presidency of the Security Council for organizing today's meeting, which will allow us to hear from all the participants of the Berlin process and the States neighbouring Libya. Lasting peace in Libya can come only through a Libyan-owned and Libyan- led political process. While we welcome the renewed engagement of both parties to the conflict in the third round of talks of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, more progress is clearly needed. The fighting needs to stop. We welcome the initiatives proposed here today that aim to defuse tensions and create space for a negotiated solution. The Berlin Conference in January was an important milestone in bringing together the international community around efforts aimed at finding a solution to the Libyan conflict. It is truly commendable that the process has continued despite the restrictions and that currently all the working groups are actively conducting their discussions. The international process led and facilitated by the United Nations must remain at the centre of international efforts. However, despite the advances made in the operationalization of the Berlin process, the reality in Libya remains grim. The active conflict has continued, and foreign intervention will only exacerbate it. Such foreign interference in Libya is a blatant violation of the sanctions regime set up by the Security Council. The continuous flow of arms, private military operatives, fighter jets, drones and other assets must stop. In this regard, we note with satisfaction that the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI has already been able to demonstrate its effectiveness. The true price of the Libyan conflict is starting to reveal itself only now, and it will continue in the years to come. We were shocked and appalled to hear about the recent discoveries of the mass graves in Tarhouna, and we call for a thorough investigation to be undertaken. It is critical to address all violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law and to hold the perpetrators of such crimes accountable. We remain extremely concerned about the humanitarian situation in Libya. In addition to the increasing spread of the coronavirus disease, deliberately planted landmines and other explosive devices remain a huge concern. We welcome international efforts aimed at clearing mines the contaminated areas. Finally, we hope that the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya will be appointed very soon. It is important to have the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and the United Nations-facilitated political process working at full capacity so as to ensure the best chances for success.
