My delegation aligns itself with the statements presented by the European Union (see annex 25) and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see annex 20) and would like to complement them with the following points. As we all know, conflict-related sexual violence disproportionally affects women and children and is, unfortunately, used as a tactic of war, torture and terrorism in order to fulfil military, economic and ideological objectives. In this sense, we would like to recall that conflict-related sexual violence is not a mere consequence of war. Victims of conflict-related sexual violence can be subject to discrimination, sexual assault, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, human trafficking and forced marriages. These crimes represent serious violations and abuses of human rights and violations of humanitarian international law. Therefore, we must ensure accountability and fight against impunity, maintaining a zero- tolerance approach towards aggressors, whoever they might be. In this regard, Portugal would like to commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Pramila Patten, for her work and efforts in strengthening the United Nations mechanisms to tackle conflict- related sexual violence as a peace and security issue. Resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, recognized the impact of armed conflicts on women, highlighting the importance of promoting the active participation of women peacekeepers and of including women in negotiations, decisions and policymaking, as well as ceasefire processes. The women and peace and security agenda has since become an important component of peace processes. This year we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), an opportunity to increase our efforts to address structural gender inequalities, the role of women in peace processes and the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence. It is urgent to implement specific strategies against acts of violence, namely, through cooperation with civil society, youth and women's organizations, access to information and the use of new technologies. This commitment also includes the protection and promotion of sexual and reproductive health and rights and providing victims with access to mental health care and to legal services. Portugal has a holistic approach to the women and peace and security agenda, based on the promotion of gender equality, the inclusion of women in conflict prevention, the training of armed forces and the fight against gender and sexual violence. My country has adopted its third national action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2019-2020. This national action plan complies with the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence. In addition, Portugal is committed to greater legal and judicial cooperation on this matter, but also to expanding the presence and participation of women in military and security forces contingents. Every branch of the Portuguese Armed Forces has gender advisers. To conclude, Portugal looks forward to the outcomes of this open debate, which represents an opportunity to strengthen our commitment to fight against the impunity enjoyed by perpetrators.
