Mr. J agne (Gambia): Let me begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with a
view to finding a way forward in that seemingly intractable
conflict. Let us hope that at the end of the day the voice of
reason will prevail over the logic of war. We also
acknowledge the presence of the Secretary-General amongst
us this morning, and we thank him for coming. In the same
vein, we salute the presence of the Minister for Human
Rights of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The tragic situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been a cause for serious concern to my
Government. Quite apart from the real threat that a
combination of factors poses to the country's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence, the entire Great Lakes
region itself has virtually been transformed into a powder-
keg. In the process, there have been serious allegations of
massacres and other forms of gross violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Consequently, the
security situation remains precarious; and, as it continues to
deteriorate, the number of refugees and internally displaced
persons also increases. Let us seize this opportunity to
remind the parties of their obligations to respect and protect
human rights and also to respect international humanitarian
law, including the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols of 1977. We also urge them to allow
access of humanitarian assistance to those in need, and to
ensure the safety of all humanitarian personnel.

It is against this background that we are meeting
today to see what we can do, through a concerted
international effort, to find a peaceful solution to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and, by
extension, in the Great Lakes region. It appears that
history is about to repeat itself, but it should be our
common resolve to make sure that the mistakes of the
past are not committed again. It will be recalled that the
process of the Congo's decolonization was like a painful
childbirth, followed by callous cold-war calculations; and
what ensued is an open secret. A whole generation was
thus wasted! Barely emerging from that unfortunate state
of affairs, coupled with the vicissitudes of a country in
transition, the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
suddenly plunged into a series of internal and external
problems. This war has so far produced no benefit for any
of the parties. At best, the net result is massive
displacements of civilian populations, an untold amount
of suffering and loss of life, food shortages, the spread of
diseases and economic misfortunes.

Since the problem has regional implications, my
delegation has always expressed support for the regional
diplomatic initiatives geared towards the peaceful
resolution of the conflict. In this connection, my
delegation would again like to commend the efforts of the
Southern African Development Community, which
mandates President Chiluba to undertake these efforts. It
is our firm belief that through the Lusaka process, the
collective security of all the countries in the region could
be adequately addressed. It is the fervent wish of the
Government and the people of the Gambia that the parties
hear the voice of reason and cease hostilities immediately,
accept a ceasefire framework, as already agreed to in
principle as part of the Lusaka process, and enter into
negotiations on implementation and monitoring
arrangements. The proximity talks commenced with the
rebels is a step in the right direction and should therefore
be pursued.

We believe that in this difficult and complex
conflict, negotiation is the way forward. A military
solution is certainly not the best option. The parties to the
conflict should therefore take the Lusaka process
seriously. It is our fervent hope that today's meeting will
serve as a catalyst to reactivate that process. The
belligerents should not miss this golden opportunity to
transform the troops' present standstill into a formal
ceasefire. This, in turn, would pave the way for the
United Nations to step in and play a more active role by
deploying a peacekeeping force. It is the long-awaited
rendezvous with history that we have been calling for, but

 

for this to happen the parties to the conflict must first and
foremost agree on a ceasefire, without which there is very
little that the rest of the international community can do to
help them. They must understand that the security of their
countries is inextricably linked, and therefore it is in their
interest to work together for the collective security of all of
them. An international peace conference could then be
envisaged to address all other issues.

