Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I will start by thanking
the French presidency for convening this important
debate on an issue that should be at the very core of our
efforts in the Organization.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union. I will now make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

A quarter of a century ago, the United Nations and
the international community were unable to protect
civilians in my own country in an effective manner and
failed to stop genocide in Srebrenica and in Rwanda.
The reasons for those tragic failures, which brought
so much suffering and which will keep haunting
many people for years to come, were not only due to
the insufficient presence of the Blue Helmets on the
ground, but also because the United Nations troops
lacked a clear, precise mandate for what would seem
their foremost duty - the protection of civilians from
military and paramilitary attacks.

A point that was valid then is equally valid today. We
are faced with the frightening reality of unprecedented
suffering caused by conflicts in many parts ofthe world,
and the credibility of United Nations peacekeeping
operations depends largely on their ability to act when
civilians are threatened. In peacekeeping operations,
there can be no higher duty than that.

Although significant progress, in particular at the
normative level, has been made in the past two decades
since this Council recognized the protection of civilians
as central to its mandate, it has not yet been sufficiently
translated into a systematic and consistent protection
of civilians on the ground. Protection of civilians is
currently mandated in the majority of peacekeeping
missions, which represents a step forward, but what
really matters is the final action on the ground. For
us, strengthening the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts should be centred in the following points.

First, all parties should comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law
and, when atrocities do occur, accountability must
be ensured. The International Criminal Court plays a
particularly important role in this regard.

Secondly, the Human Rights Up Front initiative
and the responsibility to protect are pivotal prevention
tools at hand, and we must use them to the best of our
ability in order to strengthen national capacities to
detect and respond to early signs of violations and risks
of atrocious crimes.

Thirdly, the concept of sustaining peace must lie at
the core of our efforts to ensure protection of civilians.
This involves the effective elimination of the root causes
of conflict, starting with the lack of development,
justice and respect for human rights. The Sustainable
Development Goals and all the related achievements in
2015 provide us with the tools required; there can be no
excuse for not using them.

Fourthly, the peacekeeping and peacebuilding
reviews under way are bringing prevention to the
centre of international peace and security discussions.
We need to ensure that it remains there and that it is
transformed into concrete action.

We have stated on multiple occasions that the
protection of civilians is first and foremost the
responsibility of national authorities. However, the
international community has to assume its part of the
responsibility for protection and take collective action
through the Security Council if and when national
authorities manifestly fail to protect their populations.

Croatia fully supports the code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, as well as
the French-Mexican initiative on the suspension of the
veto power in cases of mass atrocities. We believe that
efforts must be undertaken with a view to improving the
performance of all actors that share a stake in protecting
innocent civilians from violence. It is therefore crucial
to develop comprehensive protection strategies in close
consultation with host Governments, local authorities,
contributing countries and other relevant actors.

Additionally, Member States must ensure that their
military and police personnel uphold the highest values
of human rights and receive predeployment training
in line with United Nations standards. In that vein, we
should strengthen our responses to sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations missions and demand full
accountability at all levels. It is absolutely impossible
for us to tolerate that some who come to protect become
perpetrators themselves.

Adequate representation of female personnel
is another crucial element in our efforts to combat
sexual violence, promote gender awareness among the
host nations' populations, and improve relationships
between peacekeepers and local citizens. To contribute
to this goal, Croatia has organized two United Nations
training courses - in May 2015 and another in April
2016 - for female police officers from several countries
of Asia and Africa as predeployment preparation for
peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, we must translate our normative
and policy progress into concrete action to protect
human life, reaffirm the principle of humanity, and
save millions of people in far too many conflicts and
crisis areas around the world. And we must learn from
our previous failures; unfortunately, we cannot correct
some of the tragic mistakes, but at least we can avoid
repeating them.

