Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to express my
delegation's thanks to Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA); Mr. Bedializoun Moussa
Nebie, Special Representative of the African Union
to the Central African Republic; Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
Managing Director of the European External Action
Service for Africa, as well as Ambassador Kacou
Houadja Leon Adom, in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013), concerning the Central African Republic, for
their comprehensive briefings on the current situation
in the Central African Republic.

The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea remains concerned about the sporadic
resurgence of violence and the virulence with which
the ex-Seleka and anti-balaka armed groups have taken
control of part of the country and are attacking civilian
and military targets. We strongly condemn the incidents
that took place on 4 October in the town of Sosso-
Nakombo, in the south-west of the country, where three
Chinese citizens were killed by residents of the area and
another three were injured. We equally condemn the
attacks against civilians in the town of Bria and on the
Bria-Irabanda route, in the south of the country, where
at least 30 people died and four were injured. We recall
that such attacks are unacceptable and can constitute
war crimes and crimes against humanity. The Republic
of Equatorial Guinea expresses its deepest condolences
to the Governments of the People's Republic of China
and the Central African Republic for those irreparable
losses in human life, while expressing our solidarity
with the families of the victims of the attacks. We wish
those who have been injured a swift recovery.

As we commend the excellent work being carried
out by MINUSCA in the Central African Republic,
the Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
encourages it to persist and to spare no effort to support
the Central African authorities in order to ensure that
the perpetrators of such criminal acts are prosecuted
and brought to justice. We call on the ex-Se'le'ka
coalition and the anti-balaka groups operating in those
regions to put an immediate end to all attacks against
the civilian population and to respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law. We stress that
only a comprehensive and inclusive political solution
that supports the development of effective and inclusive
public institutions and guarantees accountability for
such acts will help to put an end to the attacks against
the rule of law and civilians.

The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is optimistic about the high-level meeting held
on the sidelines of the current session of the General
Assembly, co-chaired by the President of the Central
African Republic, His Excellency Mr. Faustin Touadera;
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres; Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission; and Mr. Ahmad Allam-Mi, Secretary-
General ofthe Economic Community ofCentral African
States. The meeting undoubtedly made it possible to
reaffirm the importance of an inclusive political process
in the Central African Republic, as well as reforms in
the security sector, through the African Initiative for
Peace and Reconciliation. Moreover, political efforts
and dialogue are the only alternatives likely to bring
about long-awaited peace dividends and national and
regional stability. They are also the most likely means
to incite armed groups to sign a peace agreement with
the Government, hand over their weapons and engage
in the country's development efforts.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea firmly believes
in supporting the African Initiative in strengthening
the general framework for dialogue between the armed
groups and the Central African Government. We
recognize and appreciate the efforts of MINUSCA in
playing a more important role in the Initiative process.
In that context, it is necessary to welcome the continued
progress made by MINUSCA in the implementation
of its political strategy in support of Government
reform efforts and the national peace process through
agreements at the national level, adapted to specific
local contexts and prevailing armed groups. Those
efforts have had a significant impact on the decrease in
attacks against civilians in recent months. In Bangui,
for example, intercommunal dialogue in the third
district facilitated the gradual return of displaced
persons following Operation Sukula. Local peace and
reconciliation processes in Markounda and Zemio
helped to reduce violence and increase the freedom
of movement, as well as facilitating the return of
State authorities.

Our delegation also welcomes the valuable
contribution of the Sudan and the Russian Federation
to efforts aimed at achieving peace by organizing and
supporting a meeting with the three main ex-Seleka
factions and an anti-balaka faction in Khartoum on
28 August. In their statements, the armed factions
committed themselves to support peace and dialogue
within the framework of the African Initiative.

We also want to highlight the role of the
Central African Government in the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
programme, which is supported by MINUSCA and
was successfully launched in the western part of the
country with seven armed groups. As we speak, the
Government continues to work with other armed groups
to reach new agreements and extend disarmament and
demobilization to other parts of the country. It should
be emphasized that the programme constitutes a
precondition for the establishment and strengthening of
State authority, and therefore for the full training and
rearmament of the Forces armees centrafricaines.

Despite all those efforts in the reconciliation process
of this brotherly country and the achievements made, the
Central African Republic remains an extremely fragile
State, threatened by a risk of reversion. The Central
African Republic is on the verge of a humanitarian
crisis in the absence of opportunities for development
and recovery due to continuing insecurity and a lack
of purchasing power for its better development. In that
regard, we reaffirm the notion that the multifaceted
problems faced by the Central African Republic cannot
be solved by focusing on security-based solutions alone.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
believes in a comprehensive and sustainable solution to
respond to instability in Central Africa. The absence
of peace and stability in the country requires us to go
beyond simply containing violence. We must build a
resilient society and institutions that guarantee human
security in Central Africa.

On the other hand, we remain concerned about
widespread rape and sexual assaults on women
committed by ex-Sele'ka and anti-balaka armed groups
and the Lord's Resistance Army, who maintain a
strong presence in various areas. The vast majority
of identified cases of sexual violence of an ethnic
and sectarian nature impede the mobility necessary
for women in the Central African Republic to carry
out vital economic and livelihood activities, such as
gaining access to crop fields, markets and adequate
education. Consequently, we urge Government and
non-State actors to agree on and implement a structured
commitment within a set time frame to prevent and
respond to those violations, including the development
of a comprehensive national strategy on sexual and
gender-based violence. In accordance with the Protocol
on the Provision of Assistance to Victims of Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse, the alleged victims must be
assisted by the United Nations system through medical
and psychosocial support.

Looking to the future, we must continue to strive to

transform the political and security context and support
national efforts to bring the country from war to peace.
The need for all countries in the subregion to continue
to participate constructively and for all mediation
efforts to be closely coordinated within the framework
of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic to strengthen the peace
process is also of fundamental importance. Likewise,
we must achieve an inclusive and transparent electoral
process that will lead to the presidential and legislative
elections of 2020 and 2021, respectively, as an integral
part of the political process.

We align ourselves with the press release on
19 September by the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union, which underscores the need for
political actors in the Central African Republic to
fully and in good faith take ownership of the peace and
reconciliation process in their country, in the knowledge
that the countries of the region and partners cannot
substitute the Central Africans themselves in seeking
a sustainable solution. In that regard, the words of
Mr. Nebie concerning the meeting held by Mr. Mahamat
with former Presidents Francois Bozize' and Michel
Djotodia fill us with optimism and hope, the result of
which we hope will lead the way to reconciliation and
peace in Central Africa.

I would like to reiterate our congratulations to
the Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga for his
considerable efforts and leadership in successfully
completing the process of peace and political
development, in spite of the extremely difficult context,
as well as to His Excellency President Touadera and the
Central African Republic Government for the efforts
being made in favour of peace and reconciliation. I
would also like to express the support of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea for the recommendations made by
the Secretary-General in his latest report of 15 October
(S/2018/922) on the extension of MINUSCA's mandate
for one more year until 15 November 2019, which
is why we have already expressed the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea's support for the draft resolution
that is soon to be presented by France in that regard.
Finally, we suggest that the Council visit this suffering
brotherly country in the course of this year to bring a
message of encouragement, support and solidarity to its
Government and the population, just as the Holy Father,
Pope Francis, did a few years ago.

