The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1995/76, which contains the text
of a letter dated 25 January 1995 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Burundi
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, which has been following
closely developments in Burundi, has learned with
concern that the situation in the country has
deteriorated considerably over the last few days.

"In this context, the Security Council deeply
deplores the pronouncements made by the leadership
of one political party which calls for the withdrawal
of the Prime Minister and the overthrow of his
Government by all means available.

"The Security Council denounces such attempts
to threaten by way of intimidation the coalition
Government which was established in line with the
Convention of Government of 10 September 1994.
It further condemns the extremist groups that
continue to undermine the national reconciliation
process.

"The Security Council calls upon all parties and
others concerned, in particular the national security
forces, to refrain from committing acts of violence
and to give support to the Government institutions
established in line with the above-mentioned
Convention.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to continue to keep it fully informed of
developments in Burundi. The Council will remain
actively seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l995/5.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.
