Ms. Cousin: I thank you for drawing the world's
attention back to the victims of Syria's ongoing conflict.

Since the beginning of this crisis, the World Food
Programme (WFP) has worked to address the daily
food and nutrition needs of four million people inside
Syria and of 1.9 million people outside Syria. In 2012,
I made my first visit to Jordan's Zaatari refugee camp.
The WFP was working there with our partners at that
time to provide hot meals to the newly arrived and
monthly food rations to the then 17,000 Syrians who
called the camp home. As I was walking through the
camp, I met women who had walked for miles carrying
small children in search of shelter, food and safety. I
met children who had already been out of school for
weeks or for months - and that was in 2012. I met
husbands who were angry because conflict had forced
them to leave their farms, their livestock and their
small businesses; angry because they could now feed
their families only by standing in lines for food, water
and bread.

Because we recognized the importance of bread
in the diets of Syrian families, we also began baking
and distributing 130,000 pieces ofpita bread per day, in
addition to our usual rations. As I walked through the
camp, a man began following me and shouting at me in
Arabic. I asked the translator to find out what the man
was shouting. He began shouting louder and crumbling
a piece of bread in his hand. The translator said, "He is
angry about the bread. He asks if you would feed this
terrible bread to your own children". I said, "Ask him
what is wrong with the bread". The man shouted back
to me and the crowd that was now growing, "This is
Jordanian bread, not Syrian bread". He shouted "This
is not our bread. This is bad bread". I said, "Ask this
man what his business was in Syria". He said, "I am a
Syrian baker".

The WFP Syrian response team is working across
the region to appropriately meet the food and nutrition
needs of the most vulnerable victims of the Syrian
crisis. In the five host countries, we are working outside
Syria to serve refugees in camps like Zaatari, as well
as refugees hosted by community neighborhoods, and
we are working inside Syria to serve the displaced in
opposition, as well as in regime-held areas - the whole
of Syria.

As Council members well know, the longer this
crisis continues the more vulnerable its victims
become. People suffer and die from starvation and
malnutrition or from stunted child development; those
deprived of nutrition suffer the long-term consequences
of deteriorating health and broad despair. Those inside
Syria's highest-priority districts, with the highest
concentration of displaced people, live without
livelihoods, without an income and unable to meet their
basic needs.

Before the conflict began, Syria was a net food
exporter, but drought and conflict have put food
increasingly out of reach. Food is harder to produce
and harder to import. Inside Syria, wheat is twice as
expensive as it was before the crisis; rice is four times
as expensive; bread prices are up 55 per cent. As a
result, any food available is too often, for too many,
inaccessible. Some 6.8 million people require critical
food assistance - more than half a million more than
at this time last year.

The decline in food security and the destruction and
weakening of water and health services have created a
serious nutritional crisis. Four million Syrian women
and children require preventative and curative nutrition
services. Families face and make impossible decisions
to find and access food. Parents pull their children
out of school to search for work.Food becomes part of
negotiations to marry off young daughters or to release
children to fight in armed groups. Gandhi said "to the
mother ofa hungry child, a piece of bread is the face of
God". Gandhi was right. We must not let that piece of
bread be delivered by an armed extremist.

We regularly monitor to ensure the appropriate
distribution of WFP food. Despite our diligence, we
did have one widely reported incident where a small
amount of WFP food was stolen by the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Sham and distributed with much publicity
on social media. Inside Syria, negotiating humanitarian
access for distribution and monitoring within besieged
areas can involve up to 50 parties. Determining which
routes to take, what times to go, the quantities to be
delivered and even the land mines to avoid can take
anything from 10 days to 10 months. Where we reach
today, we too often cannot reach tomorrow. Parts of
Idlib and Ar-Raqqa, once regularly accessible, are now
unreachable. We have not reached Moadamiya in over
a year.

The Council enabled us to make regular cross-line
and cross-border deliveries. In fact, last month alone, we
were able to reach an additional 528,000 people using
the border crossings provided through resolution 2165
(2014). Expanding cross-border activities depends not
only on our ability to safely cross but also on adequate
financial resources. Our 2015 plan is to reach 4 million
people inside Syria and 2.1 million more outside, but
funding shortfalls are putting this already limited
assistance in jeopardy. Current funding commitments
do not reflect the humanitarian needs of this prolonged
conflict. Because of funding shortfalls, as noted by the
High Commissioner, we have been forced to cut the
family food basket inside Syria by 30 per cent. Those
cuts have a significant potential nutritional impact and
can lead to protein energy malnutrition.

Funding shortfalls also limit plans such as those
with UNICEF to reach pregnant and lactating women
and to provide an integrated school feeding programme.
Ifwe fail to provide the school meals that bring children
back to school and keep them in school, we will miss
the opportunity to teach them different lessons from
those this conflict teaches, detrimentally impacting
their futures and the future of the region.

As the Council knows and as the High Commissioner
highlighted, the Syrian refugee crisis threatens stability
across the region. In the five neighbouring countries,
particularly in Jordan and Lebanon, refugees now
compete with their hosts for homes, employment, water
and food. I must warn the Council that when we reduce
food access operations, we reduce stability. We shift
the burden from the international community to host
communities and host Governments - communities
like those in Jordan, where participation in the
regional voucher programme, which provides choice
to beneficiaries and cash to businesses in host
communities, has been severely limited. Some 190,000
Syrian refugees living in extreme poverty received food
assistance worth $28 per person per month. Because of
funding shortfalls, we were forced to cut assistance by
half for almost a quarter of a million more refugees
living in absolute poverty. Now, they must try to feed
their families on $14 per person per month, limiting
their ability to purchase nutritious food.

We also made cuts in Lebanon, where the refugee
crisis has increased unemployment and overstretched
national health, education and infrastructure services.
A decrease in targeted donor funding forced us to reduce
not only the number of people served but also the level
of assistance we provide to those we serve. We will also
reduce the number of people we serve in Egypt, Iraq
and Turkey. Over the coming months, 400,000 refugees
across the entire region will be completely cut from
receiving food assistance. When we announced the
reductions in Jordan, our hotlines were overwhelmed.

Thousands of appeal calls come in each day - calls
from families that have exhausted their resources and
feel abandoned by all of us. One woman said, "I cannot
stay ifI cannot feed my children". Families like hers
consider once unthinkable options, such as returning
to Syria or illegally trying to make the dangerous
voyage across the Mediterranean into Europe. Without
reliable access to food, people become easy targets for
traffickers and extremists. Without reliable access to
food, the region and its children are in danger.

The conflict rages on without a political solution.
Inside Syria, we ask all parties - the Government and
the opposition groups, as well as the armed actors f to
provide the necessary humanitarian access. And we ask
for the Council's support because, despite important
improvements in access facilitated by the Council
and Member States, we must do more. We must
maintain essential life-saving food access and nutrition
programmes, and we must ensure that we meet the
nutritional and educational needs of Syria's children.
To prevent the lack of access to food from becoming a
political issue, the length and complexity of the crisis
mean that we must increase - not reduce - financial
investments in food and nutritional assistance.

Until we deliver the political solutions that will
create peace, we must fully implement the humanitarian
solutions that will create hope and stability across the
region. Failure to do so will haunt all of us for decades

to come. We cannot ask parents to raise their children
in a region without food - a region without peace.
We cannot leave parents to pull their children out of
school in order to search for food, work or protection
from armed groups. We cannot expect parents to raise
children in a region where picking up a gun is easier
than picking up a book. Without the support of the
Council, there will be no food security and without
food security there is no security. We can do better; we
must do better.

