Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Permit me to take this opportunity to share
with the Council some observations relating to the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1521 (2003) on Liberia and the relevant
sanctions regime. Libya has had the honour to chair the
Committee over the past two years.

We are all aware of the sensitive situation in
Liberia following a period of instability, war,
confrontation and destruction. In May, we visited the
United Nations forces in Liberia and witnessed first-
hand the difficulties, changes and challenges they are
facing. The Group of Experts entrusted to follow up on
the sanctions on Liberia specified a number of tracks to
assess and monitor: the diamond trade, the arms
embargo, forestry, trade and investment, frozen assets
and the movement of persons.

The Group created an accurate position and
framework of reference for all those tracks. With
regard to forestry, for example, there has been progress
in the bidding on thousands of hectares of lumber and
rubber for investment. There is some discrepancy in the
numbers, but it does not represent a significant problem.

We are all aware of the situation in the region.
The neighbouring States C6te d'Ivoire and Guinea
remain unstable and subject to the movement of illicit
arms initiated not by Governments but by individuals.

With regard to certain frozen assets, I can say that
they are generally under control, while the Committee
has effectively followed up and monitored the
movement of persons. I can also say that the team of
experts has gathered accurate information in that regard.

The Committee's report notes that while the
Government is trying to achieve a considerable level of
transparency in exports, imports and taxation, it is
facing logistical difficulties that it cannot fully overcome.
09-64650

The report of the Group of Experts contains
recommendations that I consider to be practical, and we
call on the members of the Council and the Committee
to voice their opinions on these recommendations. I
believe the report's recommendations to be objective
and operable.

The report is comprehensive, long and detailed,
and we have transmitted it to the President for
distribution. I wish to thank him and all the members
of the Council for the confidence they have shown in
my country by inviting it to chair the 1521 Committee.
I also wish to thank the Secretariat for its assistance to
us. I wish our successors on the Committee great
success. In conclusion, I reiterate my thanks to you,
Sir, and the other members of the Council.

