Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, we
believe that peacekeeping and peacebuilding are truly
at the crux of the United Nations today. All members
know how deeply my country is committed to these
tasks. We have been active in several missions during
the past 30 years. We therefore thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this very timely debate. It
is extremely useful to have this opportunity to interact
with Force Commanders and to hear their points of
view directly, so I thank the Generals for their very
comprehensive presentations, which were extremely
useful, as were the answers that they gave to some of
the questions raised.

However, let me pay tribute and commend all the
women and men who are in missions, the Force
Commanders and the Police Commissioners for the
way in which they carry out their tasks, often - as we
have already heard today - in very difficult
conditions. They deserve our constant support.

I have a couple of comments on what has been
said, and I endorse much, if not everything, that has
already been said, so I will be brief.

The conditionality policy can be used as a tool
but, as was underlined by Lieutenant General Prakash,
some caution is needed in its application. The issue for
us - as he himself said - is that there is scope for
development and refinement in the conditionality
dimension and the positive and negative elements it
entails. I fully agree with him that there is a problem if
the application of the conditionality starts to have a
negative impact on mission operational activities. I
also thank Lieutenant General Prakash for his reference
to the threat of the Lord's Resistance Army. We
ourselves suggested the useful debate that we had on
that last week (see S/PV.6588).

Moving on to the protection of civilians, to which
we all attach the utmost importance, there has been
significant improvement over the years on that very
important dimension. We commend the efforts of the
Secretariat and the positive progress made by missions
in that area. To Lieutenant General Nyamvumba, I
would say that the issue is to what extent a mission, if
not mandated in that sense, should use force to protect
civilians in a non-permissive environment.

My third comment is addressed to Major General
Asarta Cuevas. Again like others, we condemn the
attacks on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) yesterday and in May, which
unfortunately took lives. We consider the situation
unacceptable, and the parties should abide by United
Nations resolutions and by their responsibilities. Our
French colleague raised the important issue of how we
can best ensure the protection of the soldiers in a very
difficult situation. As the General mentioned the other
day, last week we had a very useful debate on the
situation in Lebanon and it is very clear that the
presence of UNIFIL has had a very important and
positive impact on creating a stable and calm situation,
albeit still very fragile. I think that that there was broad
consensus that UNIFIL's presence in the area is still an
extremely important element.

As I stated during that debate - and we are very
happy about it - we will shortly reinforce the
Portuguese contingent within UNIFIL with 12 officers
from Timor-Leste. I think that that also has a very
symbolic dimension to it because Timor-Leste, being a
country where there is still a United Nations mission,
for its part it is already participating in other United
Nations missions.

I thank Major General Khalid for his statement
and his answers. I think that the issue of strong inter-
mission cooperation is extremely important and can be
decisive in some areas. Of course, I share his view of
the role in early peacebuilding efforts in keeping law
and order, allowing for people to return to their normal
livelihoods and, obviously, getting a political process
under way. We often say that peacekeepers are the first
peacebuilders as long as there is a peace to keep and
build. But I think that that is a useful way of looking at
it.
Here, I conclude that - and this has been stated
before - missions need the means, tools, adequate
training and leadership, but, as our South African
colleague stressed, there is a need for an overall
political and coherent strategy in order for missions to
do their job properly.

