Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I regret that our
Minister for Foreign Affairs had to leave unexpectedly
last night and could not be here today. In any case,
Bolivia congratulates the Ethiopian presidency for
having organized this debate. Bolivia not only voted in
favour of resolution 2378 (2017), adopted today, but we
co-sponsored it as well.

Also, as you have expressed, Mr. President, the
Government and the people of Bolivia convey their deep
sorrow and offer condolences to the Government and
the people of Mexico for the dead and injured as a result
of yesterday's earthquake. We extend that sentiment as
well to our brothers and sisters in the Caribbean and in
the United States who have suffered the consequences
of terrible hurricanes in recent days.

Bolivia appreciates the statement by the Secretary-
General, in addition to the reports of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the Chair of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations.

Two years ago, the United Nations receivedthe report
and recommendations of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446). Generally,
it examines the different environments and tasks that
such operations are currently facing, and its approach
enables the identification of different priorities and
measures to strengthen them in order to create a
coherent and adaptable system to deal with the new
conflict and post-conflict situations.

We also received the recommendations of the
former Secretary-General, who, in his report of
2 September 2015 (S/2015/682) urges the consolidation
of a coherent and viable reform in peace operations so
as to make them more effective, more nimble and more
accountable to the countries and people they help. The
report states that reform must focus on three pillars:
prevention and mediation, closer regional and global
partnerships, and new ways of planning and carrying
out peace operations.

Bolivia champions dialogue, negotiation and
peaceful conflict-settlement mechanisms. Bolivia
affirms that a preventive approach, in the framework of
a case-by-case study of the context of each conflict, is
essential for an adequate design of mandates, whatever
their nature, in strict respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States, while
promoting their national ownership and without using
such operations as tools for intervention.

On the other hand, in order to prevent conflicts,
it is crucial to strengthen dialogue, negotiation and
collaboration with regional and subregional partners.
This is reflected, for example, in the concerted efforts
of the African Union, through its Peace and Security
Council, and subregional organizations such as the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Economic Community of Central African States, among
others. Those efforts have led to significant progress in
conflict prevention. Such efforts become more viable
when subregional and regional organizations and the
United Nations share a common understanding of a
crisis and a unified approach for its resolution.

In that regard, we must take into account all
possible support modalities for the financing of peace
operations in a sustained, predictable and flexible
manner, in accordance with resolution 2320 (2016).
Those modalities should also be evaluated and revised
in a way that would grant greater autonomy to the
United Nations vis-a-vis those countries making higher
contributions, since that factor could potentially be
used to undermine the very goals and purposes of the
missions. In that sense, mandates must be clear and must
match the reality on the ground. They must be planned
according to the objectives they aim to achieve, and
there must be adequate staffing that is properly trained
and equipped.

It is not possible to achieve the objectives solely
through budgetary adjustments that do not necessarily
match the reality on the ground, and without consulting
with the host country. In many cases, the countries
that can make greater contributions also have a greater
historical debt to the countries in which the missions are
deployed. We believe that a joint strategic assessment
at the time of authorizing peace missions between the
African Union and the United Nations should include,
among other considerations, the financial consequences

of the deployment of such missions, and should be
respected and implemented.

Likewise, in the context of peacebuilding, it is
imperative to comply with the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, in line with
resolution 1325 (2000). The participation of women
in peace processes must be underscored, ensured
and promoted through an active role in prevention,
mediation, negotiation and dialogue, in order to reach
solutions on an equal footing, including in post-conflict
reconstruction, through women's economic, social and
cultural reintegration. Equally, priority must be given
to the inclusion of an equitable number of women in the
field of peace operations.

With regard to sexual violence in conflict, we see
with great concern that this scourge leaves victims at all
levels of society. In war and armed conflict, it has always
resulted in devastating consequences for humankind.
Bolivia reiterates its support for and commitment to
the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy. We also
commend and support his comprehensive initiatives
and his programme of action against sexual exploitation
and abuse.

Bolivia reaffirms its support for and commitment
to peace operations and appreciates the work of United
Nations personnel, as well as personnel from troop- and
police contributing countries - men and women who
risk their lives every day in order to consolidate a lasting
and sustainable peace, in keeping with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

It is not our intention to shift the General Assembly's
general debate to the Security Council, but the United
States delegation has brought up some themes to which
my delegation believes it must respond. It spoke of the
current composition of the Human Rights Council. It
is no coincidence that the United States is challenging
the composition of the Human Rights Council, as it is
unable to control it. I would like to call for a sincere
debate on the same terms for the reform the Security
Council - to reform it and to ensure that there is
the full and active participation of many regions that
are unfortunately excluded from the Council by its
current composition.

Similarly, we believe that one of the primary threats
to multilateralism and to the agreements reached by
the United Nations is unilateralism. This morning, the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries - which is made
up of 120 Members of the Organization, that is, almost

two thirds of membership of the United Nations, which
has called for the reform ofthe Council - approved the
New York political declaration. Allow me to read out
two paragraphs from the declaration that touch upon
the statement made by the United States delegation.

The Ministers for Foreign Relations of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries

(spoke in English)

"reaffirm their opposition to unilateralism and
unilateral coercive measures imposed by certain
States, including those of an economic, financial or
trade nature not in accordance with international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms and the principles governing peaceful
relations among States, which can lead to the
erosion and violation of the United Nations Charter,
international law and human rights, the use and
threat of use of force" - let me repeat that - "the
use threat of use of force and pressure and coercive
measures as a means to achieving their national
policy objectives, including those measures used
as tools for political, economic and financial
pressure against any country, in particular against
developing countries".

They further express their

"concern at the continued imposition of such
measures, which hindered the well-being of
populations of the affected countries and that
create obstacles to the full realization of their
human rights".

I would like to read out another paragraph:

"the Ministers declare to reaffirm their
determination to refrain from recognizing,
adopting or implementing extraterritorial or
unilateral coercive measures or laws, including
unilateral economic sanctions, other intimidating
measures and arbitrary travel restrictions,
that seek to exert pressure on non-aligned
countries - threatening their sovereignty and
independence, and their freedom of trade and
investment - and to prevent them from exercising
their right to decide, by their own free will, their
own political, economic and social systems, where
such measures or laws constitute flagrant violations
of the Charter, international law, particularly the
principles of non-intervention, self-determination,
and independence of the States subject to such
practices, and the multilateral trading system as
well as the norms and principles governing friendly
relations among States, and in this regard oppose
and condemn these measures or laws and their
continued application, persevere with efforts to
effectively reverse them and urge other States to do
likewise, as called for by the General Assembly and
other United Nations organs, and request States
applying these measures or laws to revoke them
fully and immediately".

(spoke in Spanish)

Mention has been made of the Republic of Cuba,
which has been the victim in recent days of a hurricane
that unfortunately caused very heavy material damage
and regrettably brought the loss of life. Despite this
situation, however, Cuba has been sending doctors to
other sister islands of the Caribbean in order to meet
their needs resulting from this natural disaster.

Without a doubt, Cuba is an example of solidarity;
in exchange for this daily solidarity, it has not
asked for anything from anyone - no oil or mining
concession - nor has it placed any conditions on
its contributions. Cuba is also a concrete example of
human rights. I would like many of our countries to
attain the level of education and health that the Cubans
have attained. But most importantly, Cuba is an example
of dignity. For more than 60 years, Cuba has suffered
under a unilateral and unfair blockade, which is why
the General Assembly has met on several occasions to
seek an end to such blockade.

Bolivia therefore demands that the United States
unilaterally and unconditionally end this unfair
blockade, which for more than 60 years has caused so
much suffering for the Cuban people. This failed policy
is unfair and it should come to an end. The new actions
announced by President Trump represent a resurgence
of the financial, commercial and economic blockade
against Cuba and reverses the advances made in the
bilateral relations between Cuba and United States.
Accordingly, the United Nations must abide by its
decisions, and the United States should not only lift its
criminal blockade but also pay reparative compensation
for the damages that it has caused. It should also return
Guantanamo to Cuban sovereignty.

Mention has also been made of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, which is now facing precisely
what 120 Members of the Organization have rejected,
namely, unilateral sanctions and threats of invasion
by the Government of the United States, which of
course is seeking to boycott the dialogue process that
is being pursued. Bolivia naturally and categorically
rejects these unilateral sanctions. We reject these
threats of invasion and the use of force, in accordance
with the United Nations Charter. Furthermore, we
wish to express support and solidarity for President
Nicolas Maduro Moros and the people of Venezuela.
Bolivia supports the initiatives for dialogue so that
the democratic means proposed by the Government of
Venezuela may resolve the situation in the country.

Mention has also been made ofrelations with Israel.
The Non-Aligned Movement, the Group of 77 and
China and the vast majority of members of the General
Assembly have clearly expressed their opposition to the
criminal occupation by Israel of Palestinian territory.
Bolivia condemns the building of new settlements as
well as the military aggressions against Palestinian
people. We demand that the two-State solution be
implemented, creating a Palestinian State and an Israeli
State within pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

