Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like, first of all, to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, International Cooperation and la Francophonie
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Morocco welcomes the adoption of resolution
2098 (2013), with the hope that it can open up genuine
prospects for the restoration of peace and emergence
of a prosperous and stable future in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the entire Great Lakes
region.
The Council wished, through this resolution, to
streamline and strengthen the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), in
order to enable it to remain current and to support the
recent positive developments in the region, including
the signing of the Framework for Peace, Security
and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region thanks to the good offices
of the Secretary-General and the political will and
commitment of the countries of the region. The
resolution also seeks to adapt MONUSCO's mandate to
the political, military and humanitarian realities on the
ground in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

By adopting this resolution, the Council has also
favourably responded to the call launched jointly and in
a spirit of solidarity by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region for the establishment of an Intervention
Brigade operating within MONUSCO. Morocco
welcomes this decision, which responds to a specific
and exceptional request aimed at addressing the
alarming security, military and humanitarian situation
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

We believe that that approach, which was requested
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is the
appropriate one to take while awaiting the strengthening
of the Congolese security forces, in particular through
the establishment of a rapid-reaction force, as stipulated
in the resolution. We hope that that force will be able to
quickly take up the tasks ofthe United Nations Brigade.

By voting in favour of resolution 2098 (2013), the
Kingdom of Morocco, as a troop-contributing country
to MONUSCO, wishes to reiterate its commitment
to the founding principles that govern peacekeeping
operations. In the coming stages, and as the United
Nations undertakes the implementation of this resolution,
we call for the troop- and police-contributing countries
to be consulted on a regular basis so as to achieve
optimal synergy between all the component elements
of MONUSCO, especially between the regular forces
and the Intervention Brigade. Similarly, the selection
of the forces that will make up the Intervention Brigade
and its command structure seems to us of determining
importance to ensure efficient and consistent action by
the United Nations on the ground.

