Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): Let me first of all
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. You can count on the support of the Nigerian
delegation in the discharge of the onerous tasks ahead
of you. Let me also congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani of Singapore, for the
effective manner in which he guided the affairs of the
Council last month. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his very important statement to
the Council this morning. It was very instructive.

The whole question of peacekeeping operations in
with all its ramifications is an issue that is very dear to
my delegation, first because of Nigeria's involvement
in United Nations peacekeeping operations and
secondly because of our membership in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, of which I am
honoured to be the Chairman.

Last year, a lot of energy was devoted during the
Millennium Summit and the Millennium Assembly to
the issue of peacekeeping operations. The report of the
Panel on United Nations Peace Operations, otherwise
known as the Brahimi report, generated a lot of interest
among Member States and renewed the momentum
towards strengthening the capacity of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Both the Security Council
and the General Assembly have respectively endorsed
various recommendations of the Security Council
Working Group and the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations in the Panel's report. The
importance of the recommendations contained in the
Brahimi report and the report of the Special Committee
cannot be over-emphasized, particularly now that, in
spite ofthe best efforts of the United Nations and other
regional organizations, the theatre of conflict appears
to be growing rather than diminishing.

Although sustaining peace and security for all
countries and peoples has remained the central
objective of the United Nations in the new millennium,
as it was when the Organization was founded over half
a century ago, we must recognize that there has been a
shift in the nature of the threats to peace and security
since the end of the cold war. Conflicts have moved
from inter-State wars to intra-State wars. Where
conflicts were once a result of ideological divisions of
a bipolar world, they are now fuelled by ethnic and
religious intolerance, political ambition and greed,
which are often exacerbated by illegal trafficking in
arms, gems and drugs.

In view ofthe complexities of the new challenges
now facing our Organization, there is a need to adopt a
holistic and multidisciplinary framework to tackle
these challenges. Our conflict-management strategy
must include a pre-conflict, intra-conflict and post-
conflict framework. Our tendency to act before
comprehending the dynamics of a conflict often
exacerbates it. Our intervention strategy must be
multilevel and multidimensional and must include
proactive measures such as the establishment of early
warning systems at the community, national and
international levels. Also, it must include peacekeeping
and post-conflict peace-building strategies such as
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).
While a universal or a global system of early
warning is unlikely to emerge - as we have seen by
the controversy that followed the Brahimi
recommendation on the matter - there is nevertheless
a need to cast our nets as wide as possible to attract all
levels of input into the early warning system.

The multidimensional and multilateral character
of conflicts requires the involvement of the various
sectors of society, such as international organizations,
State actors and non-governmental organizations. This
is because there is no hegemonic power or universal
institution with the autonomy, resources and motivation
adequate to meet all the demands that are often faced
by the managers ofinternational peace and security.

In order for peacekeeping and peace-building to
achieve their main objectives, negotiations must
include a comprehensive effort to support structures
that will sustain peace and create a sense of confidence
in post-conflict situations. Our focus should be on
addressing the socio-economic and political roots of a
conflict to achieve a practical reconstruction of the
State and the revitalization of the institutions of
government. We should integrate economic, social and
development tools into a coherent political agenda.
This strategy is particularly important in countries with
problems of ethnic marginalization, such as Liberia -
where the United Nations opened its first post-conflict
peace-building office in 1997 - Guinea-Bissau and
Central Africa.

We are all aware of the vital role effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatants could play in the promotion of peace-
building efforts. Consequently, to achieve this
objective, sufficient resources must be made available
to ensure the implementation of the DDR programmes.
In addition, the former combatants must be given
occupational training and engage in income- and
employment-generating projects, which would
facilitate their smooth integration into civilian life.
These projects could be financed through the efforts of
the United Nations and its specialized agencies,
international financial institutions, multilateral
agencies and other partners.

Closely related to this subject is the need to
ensure efficient disarmament and to combat the issue of
illicit traffic in arms because of the risk this poses to
any peace-building effort. We would recall that the
Bamako Declaration of 30 November 2000 on
trafficking in small arms and light weapons specifically
recommended that Member States should put in place
national coordination agencies and appropriate
institutional infrastructure to help in the monitoring of
the proliferation, control, circulation and trafficking in
small arms and light weapons. This initiative should be
supported and sustained.

Another important area requiring our attention is
the need to assist countries emerging from conflict to
embark on projects with a special focus on poverty
eradication, rebuilding infrastructure and sustainable
development. This strategy is consistent with Security
Council resolution 1318 (2000), which strongly
encourages the development within the United Nations
system of a comprehensive and integrated strategy to
address the root causes of conflict, including their
economic and social dimensions.

The main consequence of any conflict situation is
the generation of refugees and internally displaced
persons, the majority of whom are often women and
children. Given such gloomy and agonizing
circumstances, our delegation believes that the
resettlement of refugees will be more meaningful if it
is carried out within the context of efforts to revive
economic activity and repair the social fabric. This is
likely to permanently resolve the problems of
insecurity and social tension that are often associated
with post-conflict situations.

Furthermore, States must ensure good governance
and respect for human rights and the rule of law. The
Nigerian delegation believes that the international
community should assist countries emerging from
conflict in the establishment of democratic institutions
and the rule of law. Assistance should be provided to
rebuild such institutions as the judiciary, police and the
civil service.

We are happy to note that recently the Security
Council has included peace-building components in its
mandates for peacekeeping operations such as the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINURCA), the United Nations Transitional
Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) and the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), just to mention a few. We are also
delighted to note that peace-building programmes are
being implemented in Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Guinea-Bissau, among others.

As mentioned earlier, the Nigerian delegation is
of the view that a peace-building strategy requires a
comprehensive and integrated approach involving all
international partners and local and regional actors. We
are of the opinion that as soon as preparations for
peacekeeping operations are undertaken, consultations
should be held by the Secretariat and the Security
Council with all partners with a view to devising
appropriate peace-building strategies and mobilizing of
necessary resources. The Security Council should hold
consultations with such partners as international
financial institutions and regional and subregional
organizations, so as to enable it to identify the role of
each participant. This will facilitate close coordination
among all actors.

Finally, let me conclude by saying that even
though the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, present day reality makes other
State and non-State actors essential to the effective
achievement of international peace and security. We
therefore hope that the present level of cooperation
among stakeholders will be sustained.

