Ms. Tetteh (Ghana): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the honour and opportunity to address the Security
Council on behalf of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). Let me also thank you for
the leadership that you have provided to the Security
Council since Australia assumed its presidency, and
assure you of the appreciation of ECOWAS for the work
of this organ.

I would also like to thank the Security Council
for its efforts to promote peace, security, progress
and development in West Africa, particularly, in
Guinea-Bissau, as well as its commitment to fighting
and eliminating the Ebola virus disease, an epidemic
considered to be a threat to international peace and
security, from our region. I also note with keen interest
that during Australia's presidency of the Council, the
situations in Liberia, Mali and Guinea-Bissau, as well
as the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau,
among others, which are of interest to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), will,
we hope, be favourably considered by the Council.

This morning, at the tenth meeting of the
International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau, held
across the hall from this Chamber, we explored effective
ways of coordinating and harmonizing international
interventions for optimal gains in our collective efforts
to help to consolidate the political stability and economic
recovery of Guinea-Bissau. Our deliberations were not
oblivious to the scarcity of resources and the urgent and
competing global needs, yet the need for us to strive
hard to sustain the support and assistance provided so
far and to improve our support and contributions to help
Guinea-Bissau make further progress, kept us resilient,

believing that, with international support and goodwill
and by working together, we will be able to give hope
for the future to the people of Guinea-Bissau.

I therefore would like to closely associate myself
with the sentiments ably expressed by the Prime
Minister of Guinea-Bissau, my colleague the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste, and Ambassador
Patriota on the Security Council's support to Guinea-
Bissau. Allow me to highlight the need for the Council
to recognize and support the work of the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) and to maintain
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau so as to shore up the progress that has
been made so far been in the country, and to further
emphasize the need for support for the defence and
security sector reforms currently being undertaken by
the Government of Guinea-Bissau.
The next meeting of the Authority of Heads of
State and Government of ECOWAS will take place
in December. It will be an opportunity to extend the
mandate of ECOMIB to support the work of the new
Government of Guinea-Bissau - of course, at its
request - in its plans and initiatives. But I would like
to put on record that this year has been a difficult one
for the West African region, especially with the Ebola
epidemic and its economic impact on the region. In
these circumstances, support for the operations of
ECOMIB by the Council and development partners
would be greatly appreciated.

ECOWAS welcomes the reactivation of the
International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau and will
continue to do its best to help sustain peace, security
and development in our member State. With the fragile
socioeconomic situation in Guinea-Bissau, we consider
the Ebola virus disease to be a serious potential threat
that may rapidly reverse the modest progress made in
the country. We know that preparation to prevent Ebola
is extremely expensive. We know that it also involves
the deployment of a significant amount of logistics
and people - the right people - to help to prevent
something like this from happening. For a country like
Ghana, it has been an expensive exercise, even though
we have not recorded an incidence. For a country like
Guinea-Bissau, we think that it definitely needs all the
support it can get to prevent the epidemic from being
able to take root, even if it were to occur, within the
member States.
We urge the United Nations to assist Guinea-
Bissau to prepare against the outbreak of the disease
in the short and long terms, and to support the
strengthening of its public health systems to be able to
deal with other outbreaks and epidemics. We believe
that, with the needed support, Guinea-Bissau can be
part of the new narrative of Africa rising and become
a model of democracy and good governance. But if
that is to happen, it is imperative that the Council and
United Nations Member States continue to support
its rebuilding efforts, and we would like to encourage
the Council's support to deal with the possible threats
that may derail the process of nation-building that has
begun with so much promise. We would also like to
emphasize that work done by non-governmental and
civil society organizations funded by international
development partners should support the priorities of
the Government of Guinea-Bissau.

In conclusion, I would like to urge the Council and
our international partners in development to continue
to support Guinea-Bissau in its efforts to build on the
gains that have been made, sustain them, consolidate
peace, establish a credible democracy and ensure
economic development by effectively participating
in the donors pledging conference scheduled to take
place in 2015. And by "effectively", I mean I hope
that attendees will come with deep pockets and with
deep wallets. On that note, I would once again like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address
the Council and wish the Council all the best in its
deliberations.

