Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.

Like other members of the Security Council, the
Russian Federation views with great concern the
increasing tension and manifestations of confrontation
in Syria, which are claiming victims and causing
suffering among the demonstrators, law enforcement
personnel and the army. We expect the Syrian
authorities to conduct a transparent and effective
investigation of all such cases and the guilty to be
brought to justice.

The dangerous deterioration of the situation
requires a careful, tried and tested approach. What can
be done to help resolve the situation rather than cause
further harm?

Clearly, the process of democratic reforms
proclaimed and being earnestly implemented by the
leadership of Syria is worthy of support. A great many
significant steps have been taken in a very short period
of time. A presidential decree has been signed, lifting
the state of emergency in the country. The issue of
granting citizenship to a large section of the population
has been resolved. Preparations are under way for the
upcoming special parliamentary session to adopt laws
on demonstrations, political parties, local Government
and the media. Measures are being elaborated to step
up the fight against corruption, unemployment and the
development of rural areas of the country.

The search for fair solutions to persistent
problems must be carried out by the Government
alongside all social, political and religious forces in a
constitutional manner, and the sooner the better.
Violence, regardless of what side the perpetrators are
from, must be avoided. It is only through constructive
dialogue on the implementation of announced political
reforms and socio-economic change that stability and
democratic development in Syria in the interests of all
its citizens will occur.

The main thing, in our view, is that the current
situation in Syria, despite increasing tension and
confrontations, does not present a threat to
international peace and security. One cannot disregard
the fact that the violence does not originate entirely
from one side. Inter alia, an army column was fired
upon on the Latakia-Tartus road, and there have been
armed attacks on military facilities and posts and the
killing of police personnel followed by the abuse and
desecration of their bodies.

A real threat to regional security, in our view,
could arise from outside interference in Syria's
domestic situation, including attempts to promote
ready-made solutions or to take sides. It is increasingly
clear that some demonstrators, both in Syria and other
countries, hope that the deteriorating situation could
force the international community to help them and to
take sides. Such approaches lead to an endless cycle of
violence and represent an invitation to civil war. It is
extremely important to focus all efforts on avoiding
such a dangerous turn of events, especially as Syria is
the cornerstone of the Middle East security
architecture. Destabilizing that significant link in the
chain will lead to complications throughout the region.

