Mr. Guehenno: I am very pleased indeed to
participate in this workshop and I should like to
commend the President of the Council for this
important initiative. But before turning to the lessons
learned from the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), let me first say in the presence of
the Foreign Minister of Sierra Leone that Sierra Leone
is today moving away from war and towards peace
because the largest share of the achievement belongs to
the Sierra Leone Government and people, whose
efforts are the foundation of any success that the
United Nations may claim there.
The Secretary-General has already given a broad
overview of the recent experience in Sierra Leone. I
hope to provide some further detail in this meeting,
particularly regarding the United Nations response to
the grave challenge that UNAMSIL faced in May 2000.
While all the lessons of such a complex operation
cannot be captured in my short briefing today, I believe
that the key ones can be found if one looks closely at
three aspects of the experience: the adjustment of the
UNAMSIL mandate; the provision of the means to
achieve the new mandate; and the management of the
Mission to implement the mandate and consolidate the
gains made.

(Spoke in French)

When the Revolutionary United Front (RUF)
precipitated the crisis of May 2000, many observers
thought at that time that UNAMSIL had suffered grave
setbacks from which it could not recover. It is all the
more remarkable, therefore, that today, the fundamental
lesson we can draw from that experience is that, with
the necessary resolve, the Council, the troop-
contributing countries, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the United
Nations were able to work together to turn the situation
around. The Council recognized that the credibility of
the United Nations was at stake and that UNAMSIL
could not be allowed to fail, or Sierra Leone be
abandoned to the crisis. Of course, the challenges we
have still to meet are formidable, but Sierra Leone is
now on the path towards peace and stability.

How did this turnaround of the situation occur?
The resolve of the Security Council to strengthen
UNAMSIL's mandate, to build up troop levels and the
Mission's structures, was a central factor. The new
mandate provided the basis necessary for a robust
peacekeeping force. The necessary resources were then
put in place to carry out the mandate, and we are
grateful to those Member States which heeded the
United Nations call. This allowed the Mission to follow
a two-track strategy: political engagement of the RUF,
on one hand, while denying any military option, on the
other.

It should be noted that that strategy was possible
because the Council, the United Nations Secretariat
and the troop-contributing countries demonstrated their
unity and thus established absolute clarity concerning
the implications of the new mandate and rules of
engagement. If I may be frank, I believe in the previous
period there had been some hesitation about the
meaning and interpretation of UNAMSIL'S mandate
and rules of engagement, some hesitation among actors
in the field, in New York, and even among States
concerned. But sustained efforts were made at that time
to ensure that all key players had the same
understanding of the mandate. I believe that this bore
fruit and that there is here a basic lesson for
peacekeeping operations. Unity among the key actors is
a sine qua non for the success of any complex
operation. This in fact translates into clarity of
objectives, and clarity of objectives means also the
clarity and efficiency in the operational activity of a
mission.

As a final note on the question of the mandate, I
believe that we should learn from the UNAMSIL
experience that peacekeeping operations should always
take into account the possibility of the worst-case
scenario happening. Certainly, peacekeeping often
requires that we take calculated risks, but planning and
adequate resources take into account these risks.

(Spoke in English)

The early gaps in UNAMSIL's strength and
capacity deserve close attention. Initially, UNASMIL
was particularly short on troops with significant
capacity for self-sustainment and had to rely on troops
with some relative limitations in training and
equipment. For example, at one point, the Mission was
joined by four battalions having only one truck and
four jeeps per 800 soldiers. Also, UNASMIL faced
command and control difficulties, which stemmed in
part from the "re-hatting" of forces originally deployed
through regional arrangements. Lines of command
from UNASMIL headquarters to the field were not
always strong enough, and some UNASMIL
contingents continued to rely primarily on instructions
from their national headquarters. However, the
experience of "re-hatting" the troops demonstrated the
importance of early and close coordination between the
United Nations and the regional organization engaged
in the areas of crisis.

The operational and logistic capabilities of
various contingents were enhanced through innovative
measures. Their equipment was supplemented directly
from United Nations resources, as well as arrangements
made with third parties. The United Kingdom played a
decisive role in that respect; its valuable assistance
must be acknowledged. Training provided under
various bilateral arrangements also contributed to
building a truly capable and credible force, and this
will continue to be needed through the final phases of
the Mission. This experience underlines the fact that
we must think of the means available to a mission as
more than simply the numbers of personnel. Their
training, the support provided to them and the political
guidance behind the mission will all determine whether
a mission has the means to implement the mandate.

The May 2000 crisis was also characterized by
the willingness, at all levels, to painstakingly review
UNAMSIL's performance and its structure and
operations. The Council, the troop-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and UNAMSIL each played a
role in reassessing the Mission in light of the changed
circumstances on the ground. An assessment mission,
led by General Eisele, a former senior official of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, was
dispatched at the end of May 2000 and made broad
recommendations to the Secretary-General on
strengthening the Mission. In addition, a review of the
force command structure led to a more integrated field
command. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General ensured that the Mission's leadership
understood and adhered to its two-track strategy of
peace and strength. Deploying the limited number of
troops thinly, or waging war on the RUF without the
requisite mandates or equipment, might have had
disastrous consequences.

UNAMSIL implemented a well-conceived
strategy of negotiation and the progressive
demonstration of deterrence, gradually deploying
throughout the country, including in the economically
vital diamond areas. UNAMSIL deployed in strength,
and by so doing it gave concrete meaning to the
concept of robust peacekeeping. The peacekeeping
force was not deployed to wage war, but to close the
option of war. A clear message was thus sent that the
use of force was no longer a viable strategy for those
tempted to destabilize the process. And thus,
deterrence was achieved.

Non-military elements of the Mission were also
restructured. A key element was the integration of
various United Nations elements operating in the
country through one Deputy Special Representative,
who at the same time served as the United Nations
Resident Coordinator. Another Deputy Special
Representative focused on operational and management
issues. Integration of all United Nations elements with
a peace effort is now a general aim sought in all
complex missions. UNAMSIL also took steps to
strengthen its public information capacity. The use of
the Trust Fund for quick impact projects also
underlined the importance of confidence-building
measures for the population.
More broadly, I would like to emphasize that the
success that has so far been achieved is, in large part,
the result of the integrated nature of the Mission.
Peacekeepers could not have been successful if they
had not been working side by side with human rights
specialists, with development experts and with the
humanitarian community. And we are proud to be part
of that joint and integrated effort.

In this regard, I should like to emphasize another
crucial point. The role played by your country, Madam
President, must be seen as a key element of the
international community's response to May 2000. The
rapid assistance of your country's troops in critical
locations on the ground, and later, the "Over the
Horizon" presence, reinforced the message sent by
UNAMSIL's strengthened, robust force in a decisive
way.

There are important lessons to be drawn from this
experience. Undoubtedly, in specific circumstances, the
need for a lead nation, with the capacity to project
forces quickly and convincingly, will arise again.
However, I would also submit to the Council that the
approach taken for UNAMSIL will not necessarily be
applicable in all future situations. It is equally
important to recognize that, while the United Kingdom
so ably and so generously filled an urgent need for
credible force projection, that need might not have
arisen if UNAMSIL itself had had the requisite
resources from the outset.

While the handover of peacekeeping duties from
ECOMOG to UNAMSIL forces was done quickly,
continuity of ECOWAS's political engagement also
proved absolutely vital. This subregional organization
worked closely with UNAMSIL and brought critical
influence to bear on the RUF in support of UNAMSIL
goals.

There are important lessons to be learned about
how peacekeeping missions must often be supported by
a regional strategy. The pressure applied by the Council
through sanctions and the ban on illegal diamond
exports was also precedent-setting and contributed to
the progress made in Sierra Leone. However, with a
measure of self-criticism, I think it would be fair to say
that greater and earlier attention could have been paid
to developing a coherent international strategy to
address the regional aspects. The conflict in Liberia,
which the previous speakers have discussed, remains a
serious threat to the Sierra Leone and the region, and
will require a comprehensive strategy to avert regional
destabilization.
I believe the Council is well aware of the
advances that UNAMSIL was able to make in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process, which was formally completed last January.
Forty-seven thousand combatants were disarmed and
demobilized, and some 22,000 are now engaged in
programmes to reintegrate into civilian life. But this
leaves some 25,000 who need to be reintegrated if they
are to make a living without a gun, in a normal
economy. However, the reintegration programme
currently faces a funding shortfall of $13.5 million.
This weakness in the DDR process may in turn weaken
the other gains made in Sierra Leone. The lesson here
is that longer-term commitment, beyond the life of a
peacekeeping mission, is necessary to consolidate the
fragile peace gained and build upon it.

In the next stages of the Mission, a strategy must
be developed to allow the Government and other
partners to progressively take on UNAMSIL's
responsibilities in a sustainable manner, while
consolidating the gains we have made. A progressive,
staged drawdown of United Nations forces must be
accompanied by a build-up of Sierra Leonean capacity.
Here, also, the major contribution of the United
Kingdom in building capacities in Sierra Leone must
be acknowledged. While the United Kingdom-led
International Military Assistance Training Team
(IMATT) project has made considerable advances in
training the national army, it is, however, not yet ready
to fully take over from UNAMSIL. Therefore, a
security-sector strategy must be developed with
benchmarks linking UNAMSIL's drawdown to the
capacity of the national army and the police.

UNAMSIL is discussing options for developing
the police with the Government, the police command
and the Commonwealth. If the police are to be brought
to a level capable of ensuring internal security,
assistance will be needed to recruit an additional 2,500
personnel and train, equip and pay the force in a
programme that the Government can sustain.
UNAMSIL is discussing two options with the
Government. One would have United Nations Civilian
Police lead the project, and the other would involve a
bilateral, IMATT-type arrangement, with a lead country
pulling together the training team and resources.
Further details on these proposals will be submitted in
the report of the Secretary-General in September.

The question of how salaries are to be paid is also
critical. Even the best-trained police cannot be
expected to perform without pay. Also, we have
learned from other operations that, ultimately, the
police cannot provide for internal security unless their
efforts are linked to judicial and penal institutions that
can ensure that the rule of law is upheld.

In conclusion, let me say that with the national
elections and the installation of President Kabbah,
Sierra Leone has entered a new phase. It is only right
that the Government now take on a progressively
bigger share of the responsibility for peace, stability
and development in Sierra Leone. Clearly, an
extraordinary, unified effort has created a solid
foundation where once the peacekeeping mission was
in crisis. The exit strategy for UNAMSIL lies in
ensuring that the Government can carry out the
functions that peacekeepers and the international
community have fulfilled.

We must now turn our attention towards
supporting the Government's efforts to achieve goals
such as long-term development and the creation of a
viable economy, effective and transparent control and
administration of national resources, capacity-building,
national reconciliation, security-sector development
and the full reintegration of ex-combatants. Close
coordination between the Government, international
agencies and bilateral assistance will be vital.

Much, indeed, remains to be done. But the
strength of resolve and spirit of partnership that the
international community brought to bear on the crisis
of May 2000 must be maintained. It will now have to
be turned towards consolidating the gains made and
securing regional stability. I am confident that if this is
done, a peaceful Sierra Leone can finally fully emerge.

