Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Haysom for his briefing on the
situation in Afghanistan and Mr. Tanin for delivering,
as usual, his highly comprehensive statement. We share
extreme concern over the description that the Council
heard today. The Russian Federation is troubled by the
deterioration of the situation in the country, further
proof of which is today's attack against the Afghan
Parliament.

Of particular worry to the Russian Federation and
our neighbours in the Commonwealth of Independent
States in Central Asia are the very significant terrorist
threat and the fact that insurgents have recently
consolidated control in the northern regions of the
country, especially in Kunduz province. We cannot
allow the situation to collapse and thus destabilize the
entire region.

That is precisely the manner in which the matter was
discussed in the meeting of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
of the Council of the Commonwealth of Independent
States and of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
We have more than once expressed our concern that
the insurgents will attempt to take advantage of the
withdrawal of foreign military forces from Afghanistan
to alter the balance of forces to their benefit.

Expectations in terms of the resumption of the
offensive in the spring and summer have, unfortunately,
been fully confirmed. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/422) contains worrisome statistics
in that regard. The number of attacks by the armed
opposition throughout the entire country, particularly
in the northern regions, has increased. We hope that
the Afghan forces will prove themselves worthy in
assuming that task and thus be capable of countering
the threat on their own.

It is our opinion that the threat generated by Islamic
State in Afghanistan is continuing to grow. We are
grateful to Mr. Haysom for clearly mentioning that in
his briefing. We call on the Secretary-General to devote
priority attention to the topic in his next report.

My country is extremely dispirited about the
situation regarding the illegal production and trafficking
in narcotics in the country. Today, the volume of drug
production, according to the Secretary-General's
report, equals 13 per cent of the country's gross
domestic product. It is well known that a significant
share of those resources is used to finance extremist
and terrorist organizations. In order to neutralize the
Afghan drug threat, collective efforts are necessary,
using all of the means available in our arsenals.

The remaining foreign military forces in the
country continue to pretend that the problem does
not exist. At the same time, the flow of heroin from
Afghanistan now affects not only bordering States, but
Western European States as well.

The Russian Federation has been working hard,
jointly with our partners in the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, to combat drug trafficking through
bilateral cooperation arrangements with Afghanistan.
I should note that for Afghanistan itself, the problem is
no less acute than it is for the international community.

In the framework of our bilateral cooperation with
Afghanistan, we continue to train Afghan narcotics
police in the training institutes of Russia's Ministry
of Interior and the Federal Drug Control Service. We
cannot let our attention to be distracted from that
problem.

We commend the efforts of President Ghani
Ahmadzai to establish a dialogue with the armed
opposition with a view to advancing the national
reconciliation process. We welcome the position of
President Ghani Ahmadzai, who seeks to comply with
the principles of national reconciliation enshrined in
resolution 1988 (2011). Those principles are quite clear,
requiring the renunciation of violence, recognition of
the Afghan Constitution and the severing of links to
Al-Qaida - which, for some reason, was not mentioned
in the Secretary-General's report - and links with
other terrorist organizations. It also clearly requires a
genuine willingness to pursue peace.

At the same time, we support the effective
participation of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan in coordinating the efforts of the
international community to assist the Afghan people.
It is important to continue maintaining the Council's
effective sanctions regime, which remains an important
instrument in the fight against terrorism, aimed at
Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations.

In particular, we wish to note that the path leading
towards the country's stabilization requires a single
consolidated position among the key external players.
It also requires a single-minded focus on combating the
terrorist threat that is tearing the country apart.

Resolving the security situation will depend on the
creation of economic opportunities for the country. It is
in the interest of all parties to achieve stabilization in
Afghanistan as quickly as possible, so as to shift efforts
and investments towards economic development and
towards establishing broad cooperation.

The Russian Federation will continue developing
cooperation efforts with friendly Afghanistan, both
in a bilateral format and through regional integration
organizations, including the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, where Afghanistan enjoys observer
status. Russia is committed to building an independent,
thriving, free and stable Afghanistan.

