Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank the briefers for their detailed accounts of
the current situation in Yemen. Allow me to reiterate
our full support for the efforts of Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and to express our appreciation for the tireless
work of all United Nations personnel in Yemen.

I would like to begin by expressing Poland's full
support for the progress made to date with regard
to the political situation in Yemen. We welcome in
particular the signing of the Riyadh agreement by the
Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional
Council and commend the diplomatic efforts of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which were instrumental
in reaching an understanding between the parties.
The return of the Prime Minister of Yemen to Aden
marks an essential first step in the implementation of
the agreement. We urge all stakeholders to show good
faith, abide by the terms ofthe agreement and ensure its
timely implementation.

The Riyadh agreement is an important step
towards reaching a political settlement in the conflict
in Yemen. It opens a window of opportunity for the
resumption of an inclusive political process that would
resolve differences and address the legitimate concerns
of all Yemenis. We therefore urge all parties to step
up their engagement with the Special Envoy in good
faith and without preconditions with a View to reviving
comprehensive negotiations, with the participation of all
groups in Yemeni society, including women and youth.

Apart from inclusivity, other key factors to
restore stability and create conditions conducive
to the resumption of the political process include
renouncing Violence, de-escalating tensions and
advancing confidence-building measures. It is therefore
paramount that the parties uphold their obligations
under the Al-Hudaydah Agreement; ensuring the full
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement is also of
critical importance.

With regard to the humanitarian situation,
notwithstanding the positive developments outlined
by Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller, the
overall living conditions of the Yemeni people remain
extremely dire. In that connection, we call upon
the parties to allow and facilitate the safe, rapid and
unhindered flow of humanitarian aid and personnel
to all parts of the country and to immediately lift all
restrictions on humanitarian access and commercial
imports. We also urge them to prioritize the protection
of civilians, including the most vulnerable groups,
namely, women and children, and to fully comply with
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
perpetrators of violations must be held accountable.

Lastly, I would like to touch upon the very
concerning issue ofthe decaying FSO SAFER oil tanker
in Al-Hudaydah, whose rupture and a subsequent oil
spill would lead to an unprecedented environmental
and humanitarian catastrophe in the Red Sea. We call
on all actors, especially the Houthis, to allow the United
Nations assessment team to access the tanker without
further delay.

