Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): May I start by
conveying our appreciation for your efficient and
productive presidency of the Security Council during
the month of January. I wish to commend you, Sir, for
your poise in presiding over our work.

In 2015, we continue to face significant challenges,
with persistent conflicts provoking untold human
suffering and an ever-growing number of victims.
Death, refugees, displaced persons, new and more
divers terrorist threats are contributing to a world where
our remarkable scientific and technological progress
contrast sharply with the most heinous behaviour of
some human beings.

It is it is this dual reality that we have been facing in
the Security Council while trying to find solutions to the
grim realities of our contemporary world. Quite often,
it appears that those who foster war and disintegration
might have the upper hand, but we must not fall into
despair because the international community has
entrusted to us the inalienable task of upholding the
principles of peace and the rule of law. I would like
to share my views on some areas for the Council has
not performed how it should, given its inability to unite
and, in other instances, to find common ground to
address what are very complex issues indeed, related to
war and the search for peace.

The continuing crisis in Syria, the rising tensions
of the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
the deteriorating situation in Yemen, the growing
threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, and
the mounting threats relating to the situations in Mali,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic constitute heavy burdens for which
we must remain as steadfast and effective as possible,
with a View to reducing the growing threats of conflict
and the humanitarian disasters associated with them.
We remain current deeply concerned by the lack
of unity within the Council to foster an effective
political solution to the conflict in Syria. Even though
there has been significant progress in the destruction
of the Syrian chemical weapons programme, no real
progress has been made to find a political solution,
which remains the best way forward. We continue to
urge members of the Council to unite and promote a
diplomatic and peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis
through dialogue and negotiations.

We are also concerned at the lack of significant
progress towards the resumption of peace talks between
Israel and Palestine, which is also due to the lack of a
consensus position within the Council and the Council's
inability to move forward in supporting the two-State
solution for Israel and Palestine.

Yemen, which was on the right path towards
democratic reform, is slowly spiralling out of control.
Here, again, the Security Council should be more
assertive due to the risk ofAl-Qaida terrorists advancing
into the Arabian peninsula.

Fortunately, the Security Council has been able
to keep its unity in the fight against terrorism. The
proliferation of terrorist groups, such as ISIS, Al-Qaida
and Boko Haram, among others, and the alarming
growth and reach of their operations, post a grave threat
to the world. We must preserve our essential unity in
this fight, which concerns us all.

Even though there has been some significant
progress in the peacekeeping missions in Africa, we
are concerned by the fragile nature of many situations.
In the Democratic Republic of the Cong, the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, despite being
under an ultimatum to disarm and surrender, continues
to defy the Security Council. We should not allow this
to continue.

Another case where the international community
and the Security Council are striving to broker a peace
agreement, the Central African Republic, has obtained
meagre results to date.

Burundi also continues to experience political
turmoil, ahead of legislative and presidential elections
currently scheduled for May and August 2015,
respectively, requiring the commitment of the Security
Council to assist in the electoral process.
Regarding Mali, we are witnessing a grim situation,
with terrorist acts, attacks on peacekeepers and great
difficulties in engaging in a meaningful political
process. We applaud the role of Algeria in leading
efforts to bring about a peaceful solution.

The threat of Boko Haram has finally met with a
response from the Security Council. We must now step
up our efforts to assist the countries of the region to
face that terrorist group, which has provoked so much
suffering and destruction.

In Central and West Africa, the near future is full
of uncertainty, with a number of countries expected
to hold elections, requiring the strong support and
commitment from the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and political missions in those
regions with good offices missions to prevent potential
conflicts associated with those electoral processes.

Before concluding, I would like to mention the
important debates on inclusive development for the
maintenance of international peace and security
and on post-conflict peacebuilding. We agree that
inclusive developments is key for preventing conflict
and enabling long-term stability and peace. With
regard to post-conflict peacebuilding, the successful
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes for ex-combatants, the
incorporation of gender issues and the promotion of
dialogue and pluralism are essential elements for the
consolidation of peace.

In conclusion, we are fully dedicated to the work
of the Security Council, to promoting its unity as a
prerequisite effectively to resolve fundamental issue
related to international peace and security. We will
continue to cooperate with our partners in the Council
in dealing with ongoing and emerging situations alike
in the most effective way.

