Miss Durrant (Jamaica): The Jamaican
delegation is grateful for the opportunity provided by
the presence here today of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), Mr. Hans Haekkerup, to exchange views on
the situation in Kosovo. We welcome Mr. Haekkerup to
the Council and thank him for his briefing. We wish
him every success at the helm of UNMIK.

This meeting is timely in light of the recent tragic
events affecting the region. Our discussions today take
place against the backdrop of a changing political
climate in the region, and we must bear in mind how
these changes, positive or negative, impact on the
activities of the United Nations Mission and the people
of Kosovo. Members of the Council have recently had
the opportunity to hear from most of the parties
concerned, including the Prime Minister of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Foreign Minister of the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and to meet
with the Secretary-General of NATO. We therefore
welcome Mr. Haekkerup's assessment of the situation
and his views on the progress in the implementation of
Security Council resolution l244 (1999).

While progress has been made in the economic
and political spheres, progress in the area of
reconciliation continues to be elusive. Nevertheless, the
establishment of a multi-ethnic and multicultural
Kosovo must remain paramount. It is important that we
move ahead with the full implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), ensuring that the activities of extremists
do not jeopardize our goals.

The Secretary-General's latest report, contained
in document S/200l/218, provides us with an overview
of the direction and new focus of UNMIK. My
delegation supports the priorities identified by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General: the
establishment of a legal framework for provisional
self-government in Kosovo as a precondition for the
holding of Kosovo-wide elections, the further
development of an effective law enforcement and
judicial system, and economic reconstruction. We hope
that the establishment of regular dialogue with the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the opening of an UNMIK office in Belgrade will
contribute to the implementation of these priorities and
will provide a basis for addressing other challenges,
including the situation of missing and detained persons
and the issue of the internally displaced and returnees,
as well as organized crime and the trafficking in
persons.

My delegation wishes to reiterate its belief that
the process of defining substantial autonomy and
developing institutions of self-governance must be
actively pursued within the framework of resolution
1244 (1999). We are pleased that the joint Working
Group on the legal framework has started to discuss
UNMIK's working paper and has provided additional
input. We therefore regret the withdrawal of the
Kosovo Serb representative from the process, because
we believe that the representation of all ethnic groups
is essential. We therefore urge the Special
Representative, in his dialogue with the officials of the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, to
stress the importance attached to the participation of
the Serb community in this exercise. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the cooperation of Kosovo
Serbs is essential for their integration into Kosovo
society, the success of future elections and stability in
the province.

Recent reports indicate an upsurge of violence in
Mitrovica, and we are of the view that additional
security measures need to be put in place to contain
these outbreaks. We are aware that Mr. Haekkerup has
met with the Serb and Albanian communities in order
to ease the tensions in this area. It is also important that
UNMIK police enjoy the full confidence of both
communities as they seek to promote law and order.

On previous occasions, the Jamaican delegation
called for increased surveillance by the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) of the administrative border in order to put an
end to extremist activities and to stop the traffic in
illegal weapons. We have since seen reports that
indicate the existence and use of large amounts of
illegal weapons in the territory. We understand that
only last week a house search disclosed an anti-aircraft
cannon and a fire-thrower. We wish to know whether
UNMIK police have conducted investigations to
determine the origin of these weapons. Are we to
assume that all these illegal weapons have been in
Kosovo since prior to the establishment of the arms
embargo? It is our view that continued vigilance to
ensure adherence to Security Council resolution 1160
(1998), which remains in effect and which assumes
greater relevance in the light of the violence that
threatens the region, is imperative.

The developments in southern Serbia and on the
Kosovo border with the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia have complicated the security situation in
Kosovo and make it clear that we must have a regional
perspective in addressing the situation. We agree that
the continuing violence remains the single most
important threat to the attainment of the international
community's goals. We welcome the cooperation
between UNMIK, KFOR and the Governments of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. In particular, we
welcome the signing of the recent agreement on the
Presevo Valley and the agreement with the Government
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia regarding
changes in the ground safety zone. We note that NATO
and the Yugoslav authorities have agreed to allow
Yugoslav troops to return to a small section of the
buffer zone on the border between Kosovo and
Macedonia.

We would like to urge consideration of the
reopening of the border crossings. We appreciate the
need to contain the violence but note that closing the
border has had negative economic consequences for the
people of Kosovo. We urge the Special Representative
to continue his dialogue with the neighbouring
Governments to determine how this can be addressed.

The conflict on Kosovo's borders has resulted in
the influx of a large number of refugees into Kosovo.
We understand that nearly 1,000 persons have entered
Kosovo in the last few weeks. We commend UNMIK's
efforts to cooperate with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
humanitarian agencies in the provision of temporary

shelters and basic humanitarian needs for these
persons.

At the same time, we are pleased that the
framework on the return of Kosovo Serbs was adopted
in January. We must continue to work towards the
creation of an environment conducive to the safe return
of the Kosovo Serbs. At the same time, a number of
Kosovo Albanians have been released from Serbian
prisons under the new amnesty law. We expect that
adequate measures will be taken to ensure the
absorption of these and all returnees into the society.

On another matter, my delegation notes that the
report of the United Nations Environment Programme
on the environmental impact of depleted uranium
ammunition used in Kosovo is now complete and has
been released. We are heartened by the news that there
is no widespread ground contamination, although
precautionary measures still need to be taken.

In conclusion, I wish to assure Mr. Haekkerup
and the men and women of UNMIK and KFOR of
Jamaica's continued support for their work. We
encourage them to remain steadfast in spite of the
many challenges they face in assisting the people of
Kosovo in achieving reconciliation and coexistence
among the different ethnic groups and in providing the
basis for their economic and social development.

