Mr. Niyonzima (Burundi) (spoke in French):
As my term is coming to an end and this is the last
time that I will address the Security Council as the
Permanent Representative of my country, I would
like to express my heartfelt gratitude for all that the
Security Council has done for my country and for its
representatives. Things have not always been easy, but
the Security Council had to understand that, in a post-
conflict situation, the Government faced a situation
where it had to make certain choices from of a host of
options that all had their drawbacks. I very much thank
the Council for its understanding.

My term of my dear friend Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga is also ending very soon. He, as well as his
many other counterparts along the way, has proven to
be a true friend of Burundi, in addition to being the
best Special Representative of the Secretary-General
that the country has ever known. Although he has at
times been misunderstood, he has never neglected his
duty. His patience, his perseverance and, above all, his
integrity have allowed him to establish dialogue among
the different national stakeholders and to ameliorate
a political climate that was not always conducive to
the funcitoning of the country's institutions. That
achievement required the professionalism and wisdom
that those here and elsewhere are aware of. On behalf
of the Government of Burundi, I would like to express
to him my sincere thanks.

In his report (S/2014/550) to the Security
Council, the Secretary-General rightly commends the
Government of Burundi for its many accomplishments.
He also refers to significant challenges as well as
shortcomings, which he attributes to the Government
of Burundi but primarily to the Imbonerakure and the
hindering of people's freedoms.

With regard to the Imbonerakure, I would like
first to welcome the formal denial as to the existence
of military training offered to the Imbonerakure in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Domestically,
we also must end the political inclination to associate
offences with the political parties from which offenders
come. All criminals are punished individually. There
is no crime perpetrated by the Imbonerakure as an
organized group. That does not exist; those charges are
simply unacceptable fabrications.

Where I do agree with the report is when it comes
to statistics and figures. More than 85 per cent of
voters in Burundi are from the Conseil national pour
la defense de la democratie-Forces pour la defense de
la democratie (CNDD-FDD), the party in power. As a
result, it is perfectly natural and entirely predictable
that this party includes a higher number of both
criminals and honest people, both more intelligent and
mediocre people, both more believers and non-believers
and both more credible and dishonest people, as well
as disabled persons, prisoners and so forth. There is
therefore no point to be made in that regard. Making
the Imbonerakure a political and security problem by
blacklisting the party in power runs the risk of raising
a question about intellectual honesty. I therefore call on
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
be wary of such reports from his Office.

Turning to the issue of hindering freedoms, in
the context of a country in a post-conflict situation,
leadership that fails in its firmness to uphold the law
and institutions would undermine its own legitimacy.
Democratic elections confer constitutional legitimacy,
but political legitimacy - when it comes to exercising
power - is acquired through the exercise of authority.
Authority that is not exercised is no longer legitimate.
One does not obey authority because it is legitimate, it
is legitimate because it is obeyed. That is how African
societies function. The Government ofBurundi believes
that if one becomes too accustomed to deviations, you
end up no longer knowing where the limits lie. Freedoms
have their constraints. When it comes to freedom of
expression, for example, as in France - a longstanding
Western democracy - anti-Semitism, racism, slander
and invasion of privacy are not matters of opinion.
Anxious to ensure law and order, France has made
those police and judicial matters.

Therefore, what the report of the Secretary-General

calls obstruction of public freedoms - and perhaps the
person who wrote it is correct, but he would certainly
be wrong ifhe did not admit this - the vast majority of
Burundians views such obstruction as an issue of crime
prevention and preserving public order. Who is wrong,
who is right? I think that this binary way of looking at
Burundi and its institutions is, from my point ofview, of
no interest to the Security Council. However, a factual
truth exists, one resistant to different interpretations:
in Burundi peace and security reigns throughout the
national territory.

In the Council's aspiration to establish peace and
security around the world, when it comes to Burundi
and the Great Lakes region, I can affirm that the
Security Council has a strong partner in His Excellency
Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, President of the Republic of
Burundi. The socio-political and security resilience
of Burundi, to which the international community has
substantially contributed, for which the Government
of Burundi is deeply grateful, is primarily due to the
benevolent firmness of President Nkurunziza. And
Burundians are not the only ones to enjoy its dividends,
because the Somalis, the Central Africans, the Haitians,
the Darfurians, the Ivorians and many others have
benefited equally.

In conclusion, I would like once again to sincerely
thank the Council for all it has taught me, for the
excellent cooperation and for the friendship that some
members have shown me. During my tenure, things
have not always been easy for my country, but I am
grateful to the Council for always treating us with kid
gloves.

