Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): My delegation would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the high office
of President. I would also like to convey our profound
appreciation to the German delegation for providing us an
opportunity to address an extremely important aspect of
United Nations peace-keeping operations. As one of the
largest troop-contributing countries to United Nations
peace-keeping operations, and the largest today, Pakistan
has consistently contributed to demining activities in such
operations.

The problems posed by the indiscriminate laying of
the alarming number of over 110 million land-mines in
more than 60 countries across various regions of the world
are of grave concern. Since the current rate of mine laying
far exceeds the rate of mine clearance, the problem simply
continues to get worse. More than 800 people, mostly
innocent civilians, are killed every month by land-mines.
The number of victims who are maimed and mutilated is
even higher. Land-mines have thus become a problem
which has achieved the dimensions of a world-wide plague.

The magnitude and complexity of the international
land-mine problem, in the context of United Nations peace-
keeping operations in particular, is immense. The
deployment of peace-keepers in a mine-strewn country is
replete with grave threats to their safety and security. These
perils seriously undermine their performance. Along with
the civilian population, the peace-keepers also fall victims
to randomly scattered mines. The severity of the hazards is
further substantiated by the fact that land-mines are the
second leading cause of operational deaths of United
Nations troops serving in certain parts of the former
Yugoslavia. Similarly, in Angola, the United Nations
military observers are not able to effectively monitor
cease-fire agreements because their mobility has been
restricted by the threat of undiscovered mines.

Unfortunately, Pakistani peace-keepers have also
suffered as a consequence of the indiscriminate use of
land-mines. Just last June, one of our site supervisors
serving with the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission was seriously injured while undertaking a
demining operation.

United Nations peace-keeping forces carry out
demining for two primary purposes: first, to ensure a
secure environment to engage in peace-keeping, and
secondly, to carry out other parts of their mandates. For
example, in Cambodia the United Nations peace-keeping
mandate included the conduct of elections, so polling sites
were demined. In Angola, part of the United Nations
peace-keeping mandate is to restore the free movement of
people and to create an indigenous demining capacity.

While these two objectives are of primary concern,
would it not be prudent to plan mine clearance beyond
peace-keeping operations, while staying within the
context? As we all know, the removal of land-mines is
one of the prerequisites for the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of a country. Demining operations could be
designed to rid the civilian populations of mine-infested
countries from this menace.

Therefore, the linkage between a peace-keeping
operation and a humanitarian programme is of critical
importance. That is why it could be advantageous for
future peace-keeping operations to continue to include
resources for the early establishment of an integrated
demining programme. In order to ensure a coordinated
approach to the land-mine problem, it is also important to
link the peace-keeping mine-clearance activities closely to
the humanitarian activities from the very beginning. This
would also ensure the continuance of mine-related
activities following the expiry of a peace-keeping
mandate.

We are cognizant of the fact that mine clearance
operations are slow, painstaking, expensive and
dangerous. The Secretary-General has also acknowledged
that the start-up costs of mine-clearance are often very
high because a demining programme may need to create
almost all of its own infrastructure. Yet the human cost of
not destroying these mines is proving to be even higher.

 

Thousands of lives are lost to explosions; entire regions are
denied basic services because repairs to an infrastructure
are impeded; humanitarian aid shipments are disrupted; and
organized societies are thrown into chaos.

The international community should make grants and
contributions in order to provide adequate financing for
demining activities undertaken in various operations. The
demining standby capacity of the United Nations should
also be strengthened by placing trained personnel,
equipment, modern technology and other facilities at the
disposal of the United Nations.
Pakistan believes that the sharing of the costs of
demining must be based on the principle that those who lay
land-mines must bear the primary responsibility for their
clearance. Parties that have wreaked havoc by
indiscriminately deploying mines must not be allowed to
walk away from the scene of the carnage. In the context of
peace-keeping operations, wherever the abusers can be
identified, they should be made to pay for the devastating
suffering that they have caused.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that while
Pakistan will continue its consistent policy of actively
participating in all efforts to strengthen the role of the
United Nations in preserving international peace and
security, the safety of our troops is a matter of priority.
Pakistan therefore urges the international community to
contribute to strengthening the demining capability of
United Nations, particularly in peace-keeping operations.

