Mr. Ping (Gabon) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to associate myself with the statement that
was made by His Excellency Mr. Rodolphe Adada,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of the
Congo, on behalf of the member countries of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS). I also wish to commend the excellent
initiative taken by Cameroon, a Central African
country, in convening, under that country's presidency,
a meeting of the Security Council devoted to the
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations system and Central Africa in the maintenance
of peace and security. This initiative bears witness to
the Security Council's commitment to seeking
solutions to the different conflicts that thwart peace,
stability and development in the subregion.

This meeting is a fresh opportunity to examine
the progress that we have made together in the
maintenance of peace and security and to reach
agreement on ways of strengthening our cooperation at
a time when we see glimmers of light in the Central
African subregion, which has been clouded for many
years now by the persistence of many crises and armed
conflicts.

Central Africa is evolving at the pace of a two-
fold destiny. First of all, the destiny of abundance,
characterized by a sort of divine providence that has
bestowed upon our immense subregion vast natural
resources - diamonds, leather, manganese, oil, and
rich forests - necessary not only for its own
development but also for that of the rest of the world.
Thus, the Congo basin, characterized by rich and
abundant biodiversity, is a major asset to the
development of the countries of the subregion and also
an ecological preserve for the world - a real set of
lungs for the planet.

This fortunate side of life contrasts with an ever-
present aspect - that of numerous crises, armed
conflicts and scourges, such as tuberculosis and
HIV/AIDS, as well as steadily rising poverty. It goes
without saying that, in such a context, the assets of the
subregion can be seriously jeopardized if nothing is
done to support the efforts our States are making to
find proper answers to the many ills they are
confronting.

If present conflicts were to persist, they could
also have grave negative effects - first of all, on other
bordering regions; then, on the entire African
continent; and, lastly, on the rest of the world.
Therefore, it is urgent that the international community,
represented by the United Nations, focus all of its
action on the subregion in order to help restore peace
and security. This is why it is necessary to consolidate
cooperation between the United Nations system and the
States of our subregion. This particular cooperation has
developed since the United Nations General Assembly
adopted resolution 46/37 B on 6 December 1991,
which created the Standing Advisory Committee on
Questions of Peace and Security in Central Africa. In
fact, with the assistance of this Committee, we have
established several mechanisms in the ECCAS for the
prevention, management and settlement of conflicts,
mechanisms that deserve the support of the
international community. Among the most important of
these, we have the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa (COPAX), the Central African
Multinational Force, the Defence and Security
Commission and the Central African Early Warning
System. In addition, and along the same framework of
the aforementioned Committee, we have adopted many
recommendations and decisions that are aimed at
promoting and strengthening peace in Central Africa.
Together we have undertaken multifaceted actions in
areas as varied as respect for and strengthening of
human rights, of democracy, the rule of law, the
development of legal and collective security
instruments, the strengthening of subregional
cooperation in the field of security through the
organization of several joint military exercises,
manoeuvres and patrols in our different States. All of
these initiatives clearly show that the Standing
Advisory Committee is the priority framework for our
shared action in the field of peace, security and the
development of the subregion.
Since this Committee stems from the United
Nations, we believe that its budget should not be left to
the sole responsibility of the States of the region,
which are already confronting heavy debt and
enormous economic and financial difficulties. In these
conditions, would it not be wise to place the financing
of this Committee's programmes within the regular
United Nations budget? This would enable the
Advisory Committee to have consistent material and
financial resources, and thus to become the pivotal
instrument for more effective and more concrete
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Central African States. It could thus be not only a
framework for reflection and for development of
proposals, but also, and above all, a means of action
and of coordination of our shared initiatives in the field
of the maintenance of peace and security.

Over recent years, the international community
has observed the mediation efforts made by the Central
African countries themselves, in cooperation with other
African countries, in order to alleviate tension in the
subregion, particularly in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, in the Republic of the Congo, in Angola,
Rwanda, Burundi, Chad and the Central African
Republic. Above and beyond these mediation efforts,
we have also speeded up the process of subregional
economic and social integration by developing trans-
border cooperation, with the implementation of shared
development programmes as the foundation. This
integration policy has led to the creation of two
concentric international organizations pertaining to the
subregion - namely, the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Economic and Monetary
Community of Central Africa (CEMAC).

Under the leadership of its President, Gabon has
been at the very heart of these diplomatic efforts. As
everyone knows, His Excellency El Hadj Omar Bongo,
has conducted many peace negotiations in the
subregion. At present he is working side by side with
Vice President Zuma of South Africa for the
consolidation of the national reconciliation process that
is under way in Burundi. It is also at his initiative that
the CEMAC heads of State just met on 2 October 2002
in Libreville in order to examine the prevailing
situation between the Central African Republic and
Chad.

It was decided on that occasion to send a
contingent of 300 to 350 troops from Gabon,
Cameroon, the Congo, Equatorial Guinea and Mali.
That contingent will be charged principally with
monitoring the border between the two countries and
making it secure. An important meeting of the military
authorities of the countries concerned is now being
held at the Gabonese military headquarters in
Libreville. But we are expecting a swift response to the
requests for logistical assistance that we have
addressed to the international community as a whole.

President Bongo's efforts have been joined by
those of other African heads of State, inspired by the
will to establish an atmosphere of confidence and to
strengthen the spirit of dialogue, cooperation, fraternity
and solidarity that characterizes our identity. The
establishment in the Central African Republic in
January 1997 of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor
the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements, and in
March 1998 of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic, whose forces were under the
command of a Gabonese general, illustrate the new
willingness of our subregion's leaders to settle disputes
by peaceful means.

Along the same lines, we welcome the positive
evolution of the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, thanks in large part to the signing of the
Luanda and Pretoria Agreements, which made possible
the withdrawal of foreign troops. The same applies to
the situation in Angola, marked by the end of the
longest war in Africa and by the signing, in April 2002,
of a Memorandum of Understanding addendum to the
Lusaka Protocol between Government forces and those
of UNITA.

We should like to note, however, that the efforts
being made by our States will remain dead letters if
they do not receive from the international
community - and more particularly from the United
Nations - substantial material, human and financial
support. That is why it is more necessary than ever that
the United Nations strengthen the peacekeeping
capacity of our States. In order to do that, strategies
should be developed that emphasize training, the
organization of joint peacekeeping exercises and,
above all, the creation of partnerships between donors
and troop-contributing countries.

In the process of post-conflict peace-building,
there is an aspect that we wish to stress: the financing
of the reconstruction of countries destabilized by
conflicts. The international financial institutions - the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank -
have a decisive role to play. They must soften and
adapt their conditionalities for countries, such as the
Central African Republic, that are involved in a
process of national reconstruction and reconciliation,
giving priority to structural adjustment and financing
programmes that are in accord with the objectives of
peace.

We welcome the presence here of Mr. Mbi,
representative of the World Bank. His participation in
this debate shows that problems related to international
peace and security affect development. There can be no
development without peace.

Thus, in addition to financing the reconstruction
of countries emerging from conflict, we must together
find comprehensive responses to questions of security
in Central Africa. To that end, it is important to lay the
economic and social foundations of lasting peace in the
entire subregion: the peace dividends to which Mr. Mbi
referred earlier.

I should like to add that, in the case of a country
such as the Central African Republic, it is somewhat
hypocritical to demand, before concluding a
programme with that country, that it resolve its
debts - something of which it is incapable. The efforts
of the international community, and more particularly
of donors, must offer to the Central African countries
the means they need in order to eradicate poverty and
to ensure sustainable development for all. Peace is
possible in Central Africa. The political will to achieve
it exists.

Beyond the tragedy unfolding in the Central
African subregion, the signs of hope and of reassurance
are many. Our leaders and our peoples have sensed the
wind of peace blowing through Africa. They have only
one message - the peace and development of a
continent as the launching of the New Partnership
for Africa's Development attests. Progress towards the
realization of those two objectives - peace and
development - must be propelled jointly by the States
of Central Africa and by the United Nations system.

 

Therefore, let us make our cooperation dynamic
by taking concrete decisions together, by joining our
efforts and, above all, by coordinating our actions for
lasting peace in Africa in general and in the Central
African region in particular. Only thus will the
international community enable Africa to rise to the
many challenges that it confronts today.

