Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Haiti, which is made up of Argentina, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala, Peru, the United
States and my own country, Uruguay.

I would like to thank the President for organizing
this debate to discuss the latest report (S/2015/157) ofthe
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The Group of Friends welcomes the presence of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, and wants to thank her for
her comprehensive briefing and for the hard work she
is doing.

The strengthening of the rule of law and democratic
institutions and the establishment of a political culture
conducive to democratic stability and the improvement
of socioeconomic conditions are key elements needed to
achieve greater security, stability and prosperity in Haiti.
In that regard, the Group of Friends expresses its
concern about the political situation in Haiti, the
continued postponement of the legislative, municipal
and local elections and the fact that on 12 January the
Parliament stopped functioning. The Group strongly
encourages all political actors in Haiti to expand their
dialogue and increase their cooperation with a view to
strengthening the country's democracy. We reiterate
the importance of the holding of free and transparent
presidential, legislative, municipal and local elections
in 2015.

The Group of Friends believes it is of the utmost
importance to adhere strictly to the electoral calendar,
to continue to take decisive steps towards adequately
preparing for the various rounds of elections, to allocate
adequate and sufficient resources for the holding of the
elections, and to ensure the integrity, inclusiveness and
transparency of the electoral process. In that regard,
the Group of Friends calls on MINUSTAH to fully
support, in accordance with Haiti's national priorities,
the Haitian authorities in carrying out the electoral
process until its successful completion, which will be
an important step towards consolidating democracy in
the country.

The Group of Friends calls on all Haitian
stakeholders to engage constructively, while exercising
maximum restraint and working together peacefully
to maintain confidence in the electoral process. The
Group of Friends welcomes the efforts carried out by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
that regard.

The Group also welcomes the efforts of the Special
Representative to promote the continuation of dialogue
among all the national actors in order to strengthen
the ongoing political process and mitigate risk for
Haiti's democratic institutions, as well as her efforts in
calling on the diplomatic and international community
to continue contributing in a coordinated manner to
promote political dialogue.

The Group of Friends welcomes the recent Security
Council mission to Haiti, which was carried out in
accordance with the terms of reference set out in tghe
annex to document S/2015/40, whose primary purpose
was to reaffirm the continued support of the Council
for the Government and the people of Haiti and to
highlight the importance of achieving an inclusive
and constructive atmosphere for political stability,
democratic governance and development. The mission
also called on all political actors to work together.

The Group of Friends recognizes that the security
situation is stable, but complex. The Group notes
the increase in the capacity of the Haitian National
Police, but believes that the presence of MINUSTAH,
including its military component, remains necessary
to ensure security in Haiti. In the light of Haiti's
ongoing security challenges, including those related
to the upcoming elections, the Secretary-General
should closely monitor the situation on the ground and
recommend to the Security Council any changes with
regard to MINUSTAH's mandate and force levels he
deems necessary.

The Group of Friends reiterates the importance
of the Haitian Government's commitment to
strengthening the rule of law and to making further
progress in the judiciary and the security sectors. The
Group would like to acknowledge the progress made
in this area during the reporting period and the efforts
aimed at strengthening key institutions and improving
the capacity and increasing the professionalism of
the Haitian National Police, in accordance with the
2012-2016 development plan.

The Group of Friends acknowledges the progress
in the judicial sector. However, it is urgently necessary
to reduce prolonged pretrial detention and to eliminate
inhumane detention conditions, to ensure accountability
and put an end to impunity, including for past human
rights violations. The Group of Friends also urges the
Ministry of Justice to continue its efforts to address the
issue of prolonged pretrial detention.

In spite of the commitment shown by the Haitian
authorities in engaging with international human
rights mechanisms, the limited national capacity for
protecting human rights remains a concern, as does
the fact that the new Government no longer includes
a minister-delegate on human rights and on extreme
poverty. The Group of Friends welcomes the launching
of by the Haitian Government of the national policy on
equality between women and men.

The Group of Friends notes the continuing work
by the Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH and others
to protect vulnerable groups and urges all actors to
give priority attention to preventing and reducing
violent crime, particularly against women and children,
including rape and other forms of sexual violence. The
Group notes with concern the increase in the number
of reported rapes in comparison with the previous
reporting period, and encourages Haitian citizens to
continue reporting those crimes so that the perpetrators
may be brought to trial. In that regard, the Group also
supports continued efforts to reduce violence and
promote the well-being of at-risk youth and vulnerable
communities. The Group of Friends continues to
support the attention being paid to gender issues and
child protection.

The Group of Friends also expresses its concern
about persistent humanitarian challenges in Haiti,
including the living conditions in the remaining camps
for internally displaced persons. The Group of Friends
welcomes the significant progress made in 2014 in the
resettlement of those displaced by the 2010 earthquake.

The ongoing efforts to eradicate the cholera
epidemic remind us of the importance of sustained
cooperation between the international community and
the Government of Haiti in order to meet the needs of
the Haitian people. In that regard, the Group recalls the
United Nations' two-year plan of short-term actions
launched in support of the lO-year national plan for the
elimination of cholera in Haiti. And it also supports
the efforts of the Senior Coordinator for the Cholera
Response in Haiti. Likewise, the Group of Friends
acknowledges the efforts of the donor community, and
calls on all donors to fulfil without delay the pledges
they have made. The Group of Friends hopes that the
interministerial task force will define an emergency
plan to address the increase in the number of cholera
cases in the last quarter of 2014. We look forward to a
coordinated response to solve the problem successfully.

The Group of Friends reiterates its commitment
to the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. In that regard, it reiterates its
expectation that all United Nations personnel will adhere
to the highest standards of conduct. The Group calls on
all actors involved to assume their responsibilities in
order to prevent such cases, to investigate allegations
and to hold those responsible accountable.

The Group notes with concern that the International
Monetary Fund has reported that a reduction in
international cooperation could significantly jeopardize
growth in Haiti. The Group is also concerned about
the alarming levels and persistence of food insecurity
in the country. It is also concerned about the limited
capacity of the State to generate revenue, which has
greatly affected the public budget.

The Group stresses that there can be no genuine
stability or sustainable development in Haiti without
strengthening democratic institutions and ensuring that
democratic processes are credible. In that regard, the
Group emphasizes the importance of promoting the rule
of law by strengthening Haitian institutions, and further
reaffirms MINUSTAH's responsibility to support
the Haitian State by working towards improving the
structures of governance, extending State authority and
promoting and protecting human rights in accordance
with its mandate.

Finally, the Group ofFriends reaffirms its solidarity
with and commitment to the people and Government
of Haiti as they pursue stability, reconstruction,
recovery, socioeconomic development and democratic
consolidation. The Group of Friends of Haiti
acknowledges the important role of MINUSTAH in
ensuring stability and security in Haiti, and expresses
its support for and gratitude to, the women and men of
MINUSTAH for their dedication and tireless efforts to
support recovery and stability in the country.

