Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
briefing today on the situation in Sierra Leone. I also
wish to thank the Secretary-General for his first report on
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
and Under-Secretary-General Bernard Miyet for
introducing the report and for his oral update of the
situation.

While noting some positive developments in the
situation on the ground thus far, my delegation continues
to be seriously concerned about the reports of recent
violations of the ceasefire Agreement and rebel attacks on
civilians, involving rape, abduction and harassment, in
addition to looting and destruction of property. All these
acts should be strongly deplored.

We call on the parties not to allow the peace
momentum to slide. Sierra Leone cannot afford a return
to the anarchic situation of the past. We strongly call on
both the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and the
Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC) to honour
commitments entered into under the Peace Agreement.
We also call on them to release all abductees without
delay - adults and, especially, children. We also strongly
deplore the detention or abduction of two doctors working
for Medecins sans Frontieres, and call on the RUF to
effect their immediate release.

You may wish, Mr. President, to include this in any
statement that you may wish to make to the press
following the adjournment of this meeting.

My delegation welcomes the arrival of the first
contingents of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) in the country in support of the peace
process. We further welcome the appointment of Major-
General Vijay Kumar Jetley of India as Force
Commander of UNAMSIL. We also believe that
UNAMSIL's early deployment is crucial in order to help
restore calm and order in the country. We urge both
UNAMSIL and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) to ensure peace and security on the basis of
their respective mandates.

My delegation attaches the highest importance to the
successful implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme. We
note that the programme had kicked off to a relatively
slow start, but has now improved somewhat. However,
the process has been too slow, and therefore

 

disappointing. The number of ex-combatants turning up at
the sites is well below the 45,000 estimated total in the
country.

We note with concern that recent disturbances in the
Lungi and Port Loko areas were due to a misunderstanding
over the issue of financial assistance to the ex-combatants.
We hope there will be no recurrence of this kind of
incident, which can only undermine the DDR programme.

We call on the rebel leaders to rein in their supporters
and ensure that the ex-combatants surrender their weapons
and participate fully in the DDR programme. The DDR
programme is the most critical element in this process,
during this still early and very fragile peace that we have in
Sierra Leone.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to take this
opportunity to welcome the Secretary-General's recent
appointment of Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji of Nigeria to replace
his outgoing Special Representative, Mr. Francis Okelo. We
wish him every success. We also join others in paying
special tribute to Mr. Okelo for his leadership, commitment
and tireless efforts to secure peace in Sierra Leone, which
culminated in the signing of the Lome Peace Agreement
last July.

