Mr. Costa Filho: I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to address the Security Council in my new capacity as Chair of the Guinea- Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I take this opportunity to recognize my predecessor and former Chair of the configuration, Ambassador Mauro Vieira, for his dedication and commitment to Guinea-Bissau. I also wish to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, for her comprehensive briefing today and her work at the helm of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea- Bissau (UNIOGBIS). The PBC congratulates Guinea-Bissau on the successful conduct of legislative and _ presidential elections in 2019 and thanks regional and international partners for providing the necessary financial and logistical support for the polls. However, the holding of elections was only the first step towards political stability. The country's institutions are now dealing with the legal challenge of the electoral results pending before the Supreme Court of the Justice. We expect that any issues will be addressed in accordance with the Constitution, in a peaceful and transparent manner. A peaceful transition of power will allow all of us to build on the positive momentum of the elections to consolidate democracy and focus on the implementation of the country's peacebuilding priorities. For Guinea-Bissau, 2020 will be a landmark year. Once the legal proceedings on the electoral results are settled, the country will witness, for the first time in its history, an elected President handing over office to another democratically elected President. UNIOGBIS will continue its drawdown and transfer of tasks to an empowered Resident Coordinator's Office and to the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, as mandated by the Security Council. Let us recall, however, that this transition should not be a United Nations-centred process. Instead, the role of the United Nations will be to ensure a coherent and coordinated approach in support of nationally led efforts to take forward policies and programmes that address the root causes of instability and promote peace and development. The Commission remains committed to supporting UNIOGBIS central role in contributing to those efforts. It will be important for the international community to continue to help the Government to strengthen democratic and inclusive institutions to assist in internal reforms, support the engagement of women and youth in peacebuilding and promote and protect human rights. In addition, in the light of the current political situation, it will be essential that UNIOGBIS continue to exercise good offices and facilitate inclusive political dialogue. As the situation in Guinea-Bissau is still volatile, it is of the utmost importance that we ensure an appropriate political monitoring of developments in the country. I recently met with Special Representative Sori- Coulibaly to discuss how the PBC's convening, bridging and advisory role could serve to enhance coherence among stakeholders during this critical year and ensure sustained international attention to Guinea-Bissau's long-term needs. The Peacebuilding Commission is prepared to assist UNIOGBIS and the Government of Guinea-Bissau by providing a platform for coherence and coordination among stakeholders, as well as for the promotion of shared analysis and understanding of the multidimensional peacebuilding challenges in the country. Our efforts, of course, will be anchored in the dialogue with the Government. We will try our best to work with them to identify peacebuilding priorities and promote the internal reforms that the country needs to accomplish long-term stability. The Commission is also committed to addressing the challenge of the financial cliff often experienced by transitioning countries. In that case, we must work to mobilize international and regional support for the country's peacebuilding priorities, particularly for national development plans and for the future United Nations Sustainable Development Framework, which will guide United Nations development activities at country level. Lastly, the PBC will continue to champion the effective participation and representation of women and youth in political processes and peacebuilding. For those and other activities to happen, the role of the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) will continue to be pivotal. The PBF projects have been instrumental in furthering political inclusion in Guinea-Bissau, and we hope that they will continue to play that role during and after the transition. The Peacebuilding Commission has been engaged in Guinea-Bissau since it entered the formal agenda in 2007. Since then, the Commission has witnessed both progress in, and challenges to, the PBC's support to the country's peacebuilding priorities. I believe that the 2020 United Nations peacebuilding architecture review will offer us a valuable opportunity to take stock and reflect on the remaining challenges. I reiterate the readiness of the PBC to support the reconfiguration exercise and to provide timely and specific advice to the Security Council in that regard. We must work together to ensure that Guinea-Bissau will continue to receive adequate cooperation from its international partners, ensuring that the peacebuilding priorities supported by UNIOGBIS will not be left unattended. Once again, I thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity to brief the Security Council. I look forward to our cooperation in support of peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.
