Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of France, Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, which reflects the
importance that his country attaches to this subject.
We also welcome His Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadera, President of the Central African Republic,
and thank him for his statement. It is an honour to have
him and Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, here today.

Venezuela aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the delegation of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

In many contemporary armed conflicts, civilian
populations have become the main victims of the
conflict situations that impact different parts of the
planet, where the loss of lives and the suffering of
civilians far exceed those of the combatants. Punitive
military action is taken deliberately against civilians,
who have become military targets. That tragic reality
is evident in the conflicts that are rocking the Middle
East and Africa, where women, children and the elderly
have become targets of attacks perpetrated by the actors
involved in those bloody wars, particularly terrorist
groups, in violation of international humanitarian
law. In that respect, Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Libya, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic, the Sudan, South Sudan and Palestine, among
others, are scenarios in which the civilian population
has suffered the ravages of indiscriminate violence.

The recourse to violence and terrorism to
undermine societies, civilizations, religions and
beliefs is assuming terrible manifestations, such as the
recruitment of children, abductions, the destruction
of the cultural heritage of humankind, slavery and
sexual violence as weapons of war, as well as the use
of chemical weapons. Nevertheless, at the very heart
of all this is the terrible tragedy that has impacted the
civilian population as a result of practices in response
to intolerance, violent extremism and sectarianism.
Those actions paint a very clear picture of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide, the perpetrators
of which must be brought to justice.

Those armed conflicts have caused the displacement
of civilian populations fleeing war to protect their
lives. By late 2015, more than 60 million people hade
been displaced by conflict, violence and persecution.
The number of persons internally displaced by conflict
and violence increased by more than 2.8 million
people in 2015, and reached an unprecedented total of
40.8 million. In addition, the number of refugees has
exceeded 20 million for the first time in 20 years.

Despite the gravity of those challenges, we wish
to highlight the important review processes undertaken
by the Organization in 2015. All of those processes
underscored the need to prevent crises instead of
responding to them once they occur, which exacts
great human and financial costs, and to work beyond
institutional divisions to address complex problems.
Those messages are crucial to strengthening the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts.

Civilians who find themselves in the midst of
armed conflict require protection. United Nations
peacekeeping operations should play a more active and
central role in that regard. They must always conduct
themselves impartially, in defence of their own security
and their mandate, and with the consent of the host
State. In that context, non-armed strategies should be at
the forefront of United Nations efforts in the protection
of civilians. Peacekeeping operations, as inherently
political instruments, can protect civilians more
effectively by helping to build trust among the parties,
ending conflicts and facilitating peace agreements.
The quest for a political solution must guide the
design, deployment and withdrawal of United Nations
peacekeeping operations on the ground.

Humanitarian organizations, such as the Red
Cross, play a crucial role to that end. The success of
non-armed United Nations strategies for the protection
of civilians depends to a certain degree on their
ability to forge strong alliances among those players
and to work closely with local communities. The
United Nations must make due use of those important
resources, highlighting the capabilities and practices
of local communities and humanitarian organizations
on the ground in order to create an environment that is
conducive to the protection of civilians. In that respect,
it is very important to guarantee humanitarian access so
that civilians can receive the assistance and protection
necessary to their survival. In that regard, we condemn
the siege practices used by actors involved in armed
conflicts that prevent the delivery of food and medicine
for civilians in humanitarian need.

However, in situations where the civilian
population finds itself under imminent threat of attack,
peacekeeping troops must always be ready to act
assertively. To that end, forces should always have the
equipment and training necessary to successfully deal
with those situations. At the same time, we reaffirm
emphatically that the protection of civilians cannot in
any circumstances be used as an excuse to undermine
the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of States.

Taking into account the provisions of international
humanitarian law and the need to protect civilians in
the midst of such bloody conflicts as those in Syria,
Yemen and Iraq, we cannot fail to stress the my
Government's focus on the situation of Violence that
continues in the Palestinian territories as a result of the
Israeli illegal occupation, and that affects in particular
the human rights of Palestinians, who are the Victims of
the repressive policies of the occupying Power, whose
actions inflict indescribable human suffering and
represent a protection crisis for the Palestinian people.

Given this very clear picture of systematic Violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law,
the international community must raise its voice in
defence of the Palestinian people and take the measures
necessary to guarantee their human rights. We therefore
reiterate our appeal for a response to the request made
by the President of the Palestinian National Authority,
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, for the establishment of a
system of international protection for the Palestinian
population in the occupied territories, in accordance
with the Fourth Geneva Convention and resolution 904
(1994). That is one instance of concrete action that the
Council could take to protect civilians.

