Mr. Gbeho (Ghana): I am happy and privileged to
participate in this crucial Security Council debate on the
situation in Africa, and I wish to begin by joining in the
warm sentiments expressed to you, Sir, and to other
members of the Council by previous speakers.

I must also highly commend the Secretary-General for
the comprehensive progress report (S/1999/ 1008) on the
implementation of the recommendations contained in his
earlier report (S/1998/318). The progress report highlights
key issues that need to be addressed in dealing with the
problems confronting Africa.

The case for proving Africa's readiness to pull itself
up by its bootstraps when it comes to challenges to peace
and security there has been well established by all who
spoke before me. The statement made in the Council
yesterday by the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) regarding the two OAU summit
meetings held in Algiers and Sirte, and the statement by
the Permanent Representative of Algeria, also portray
Africa's resolve to take its destiny into its own hands and
make the next millennium one of peace and stability on
the continent.

As was noted by an earlier speaker, there can be no
peace without development, nor can there be development
without peace. My contribution, therefore, is calculated to
underscore some of the points already made and to
suggest how the Security Council may help Africa. In so
doing I will go straight to the point and try to avoid
repeating the many important points that my colleagues
have already made with greater force than I can muster.

The Charter gives ultimate responsibility for
international peace and security to this body, and yet the
continent of Africa is desperately in the throes of conflict.
By holding this debate, the Security Council itself
acknowledges the critical role that it has to play in
improving the environment for development in that region
of the world. The Security Council therefore has to
assume its full responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in Africa. Regional
peacekeeping missions and other efforts by Africa can
therefore be no excuse for the Security Council to shirk
its responsibilities to African countries.

We have had to bear such a responsibility in West
Africa, for instance, not only because we feel a sense of
ownership for confronting and managing conflict, but also
because the response by the international community has
recently been either muted or lukewarm, and in a few
instances too little, too late. It is the conviction of my
Government that the Council's duty to maintain peace
without any prevarication or ambivalence must be upheld
and emphasized.

In this regard, I wish to reiterate the point I made to
the General Assembly last week: that the time has come
for the international community to do in Africa as much
as it has done in other areas in guaranteeing peace. We
have seen in the past few months the kind of resources
that the international community has been willing and
able to mobilize in Kosovo and East Timor at short
notice. We are pleased with the effort and would like to

 

congratulate the countries involved. Africa urges the
Security Council, therefore, to move with similar dispatch
concerning the tragedies of Africa in order to dispel any
perceptions of discrimination or lack of even-handedness.

If the words of comfort, support and solidarity that
have been offered Africa in this debate were half-translated
into commitments we would spend less time lamenting the
plight of the continent. In our View, Africa's case has often
required less onerous assistance in terms of human lives
and military dispositions than is necessary in post-conflict
management. In fact, as the Secretary-General's report
makes clear, the root of many conflicts in Africa lies in the
difficult socio-economic situation that the continent finds
itself in. There will thus be no peace or security until the
issue of poverty is seriously addressed.

We are compelled to point out that the achievement
of the objectives of peace and security requires an
integrated approach, even in areas outside the narrow
confines of peace and security. While we appreciate the
assistance by developed countries for enhancing Africa's
peacekeeping efforts, this, in our View, should be
coordinated to avoid a situation in which parallel bodies
compete for attention, and thereby waste energy.

The international community must also support efforts
at stemming the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons in West Africa. My Government, in recognition of
the need to address the serious problem of arms
proliferation in our subregion and the related issue of the
forced participation of children in armed conflicts, intends
soon to jointly host with the Government of Canada a
subregional workshop aimed at building on the Mali
moratorium and establishing a framework to keep children
out of conflict. We look forward to the support of the
international community for this forthcoming event,
especially that of the member States of the Council. In this
regard, we also call on countries whose companies and
nationals support the supply of arms and the provision of
soldiers of fortune or mercenaries to fight in wars for the
sake of diamonds or similar resources to assist these noble
regional efforts aimed at halting this trend.

Africa recognizes its responsibility to take steps to
create a viable environment for sustainable development.
Good governance, accountability and measures towards
poverty alleviation are part of this process, and the
Secretary-General's report acknowledges the efforts of
African countries in this direction. We count on the support,
therefore, and the cooperation of the developed countries
for success.

