Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Uruguay would like to thank and
congratulate Malaysia on its assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and for the
presence of its Minister for Foreign Affairs here today.
We would also like to echo congratulations to Malaysia
on organizing this open debate on children and armed
conflict, focused, in particular, on the abduction of
children by armed groups and armed forces, and the
detention of children accused of having links with
armed groups and forces. We welcome the statement by
the Secretary-General and the briefings by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Deputy Executive Director
Of UNICEF.

Today's debate reasserts the commitment of the
Security Council to defend the rights of children and
the Council's conviction that there is an urgent need to
adopt measures to protect their rights and their lives in
view of the recent violations of those rights by armed
groups. In that regard, Uruguay expresses its full
support for resolution 2225 (2015) adopted today.

For Uruguay, the protection and promotion of
human rights, and particularly those of children, are a
key priority of our domestic and international policies.
That is demonstrated by Uruguay's commitment to the
work under way, in particular by the adoption, each
year, of resolutions on the rights of the child here in
New York and in Geneva, where traditionally we have
played an active role, and also by my country's ongoing
concern for the unqualified respect for the rights
of children - particularly their right to education.
We have, accordingly, condemned the use of schools
and other education centres for military purposes. In
that regard, Uruguay is one of 38 countries that has
supported the Safe Schools Declaration. It is essential
that States implement the standards of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its additional protocols,
as well as other international relevant conventions.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which established a
monitoring and reporting mechanism to report on this
type of Violations of children's rights. However, over
the past five years, there has been a significant increase
in those crimes in countries unable to prevent them.
The situation worsened during 2014 with the continuing
growth in violence and the participation of armed
groups in areas of conflict. I am referring in particular

to the Central African Republic, Iraq, Nigeria, Syria,
Palestine, South Sudan, Yemen and Afghanistan.

Armed groups now resort to the mass abduction of
children with greater ease and frequency. Moreover,
the situation has worsened because such groups have
not limited themselves merely to the recruitment of
children, but also have committed the gravest abuses
and most aberrant violations of the rights of the children
whom they have abducted. From The statistics provided
by the Secretary-General in his annual reports show
that between 2002 and 2014 more than 24,420 children
were abducted. That should be seen as an approximate
number, and it would appear that the actual figure is
much greater. Accordingly, we need to obtain more
accurate information regarding such cases.

We know that approximately 95 per cent of
abductions are carried out by non-State armed groups.
Those groups must be fought and eradicated. That is the
only solution, given their espousal of extreme violence,
which includes, among other abuses, using abducted
children as suicide bombers or as human shields;
recruiting them as soldiers; and coercing them into
work or sexual slavery - all of which is committed
barbarously and with total impunity. One need only
mention the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria's treatment
of girls as currency and in forced marriages.

Despite the legal framework and global tools
available to deal with such violence, there is still
no effective implementation of those tools in the
domestic legislation of countries, as well as a lack of
the necessary cooperation at the regional level. There
will be no lasting solution until those problems are
solved. States must be accountable in their obligation
to protect the people under their sovereignty, and we
must punish those groups operating within States
who are responsible for the serious violations of the
human rights of children. Such violations should be
considered crimes against humanity and be condemned
and punished accordingly. Abductions should serve as
a trigger for an adequate response by the international
community - including the adoption of sanctions and
an increase in cooperation aimed at combating them.

In addition to the situation that we just referred
to, the numerous arrests of children for their actual
or alleged membership or association within armed
groups are also of utmost concern to the international
community. It presents a challenge for Member States
and for agencies responsible for protecting children. For
my country, combating sexual violence during armed
conflict is of the highest priority. As we have mentioned
earlier, Uruguay participates in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and contributes approximately
1,000 troops for the protection of civilians there.
Members of the Joint Protection Teams are used to
monitor and address violations of human rights in
remote regions. Those peacekeepers collaborate with
civil-society associations and provide various types of
support, including the supply of food and water, as well
as medical care. They also conduct patrols to prevent
the rape of women and girls in remote locations.

It is vital that we reinforce the Organization's and
the Security Council's actions aimed at confronting the
impunity enjoyed by armed groups that are responsible
for the abduction of children, and that we improve the
legal protection for children, as well as their human
rights. Accordingly, my delegation urgently calls for
the adoption of appropriate measures, such as sanctions
and the improvement of cooperation at the regional
level.

