Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): First of all, allow me, Mr. President, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the important post
of President of the Security Council. We believe that,
with your wisdom, experience and outstanding ability,
you will most certainly be able to guide the work of the
Council this month to a satisfactory conclusion.

I also wish to thank the previous President, the
Permanent Representative of Botswana, Mr. Legwaila, for
his successful stewardship of the Council's work last
month.

Afghanistan has been and remains mired in
prolonged strife; the situation there is turbulent and
unstable, and has resulted in enormous losses to the
Afghan people in terms of life and property; also, it poses
a threat to the surrounding countries and to the area, and
jeopardizes regional security and stability.

Afghanistan is a neighbour of China's; the Chinese
Government and people are concerned about the situation
there, and hope that Afghanistan will end the strife as
soon as possible and embark on national reconstruction.
The crux of the problem of Afghanistan lies in the lack of
even minimal trust between the factions, and in their
unwillingness to renounce the use of force in resolving
their problems.

At the same time, foreign interference in the Afghan
question and the transfer of arms to that country have
complicated the issue, so that it has dragged on for a long
time now without solution.

For a genuine settlement of the Afghan question, we
are of the view that the factions in Afghanistan should,
firstly, implement a cease-fire, establish mutual trust and
so create conditions for a peaceful settlement. Secondly,
with the assistance of the United Nations, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) and
Afghanistan's neighbours, the Afghan parties should
conduct peaceful negotiations and consultations in order
to find a satisfactory solution unhampered by ethnic,
religious and political differences. All countries should
abide by United Nations resolutions, respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Afghanistan, refrain
from interference in its internal affairs and prevent
transfers of weapons to it.

China has always attached great importance to the
question of Afghanistan. In the past, the Afghan people
have faced the issues of aggression and resistance to
aggression; as is in accordance with its consistent
position, China has supported the Afghan people in their

 

just struggle to safeguard their national sovereignty and
independence.

However, after the withdrawal of foreign troops from
Afghanistan, the Afghan question became essentially an
internal problem. The Chinese Government has consistently
opposed the notion of any country's interfering in the
internal affairs of another, and we are of course against
foreign interference in Afghan internal affairs: foreign
interference in the Afghan question can only complicate the
problem.

We commend the United Nations, the OIC and the
countries concerned on their positive efforts, which we
support, towards restoring peace in Afghanistan. We
support also the relevant United Nations resolutions on
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan and on the right of the Afghan people to
determine their own destiny, and we hope that all countries
will abide by those resolutions. Also, we sincerely hope that
the Afghan parties will put the interests of the country and
the people first, set aside their past differences, end their
armed conflict and, through friendly dialogue and
consultations, achieve national reconciliation and stability
so that the Afghan people can begin to rebuild their homes
at the earliest possible date and live and work in peace and
security.

