Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Ijoin other
speakers before me in thanking Ambassadors Raimonda
Murmokaite of Lithuania, Oh Joon of the Republic of
Korea and Gary Quinlan of Australia, the respective
Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) on the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, for their briefings.
I congratulate them on their leadership at the head of
those Committees.

Allow me also to add my voice to those of previous
speakers in condemning the attack against the Jewish
Museum in Brussels and to offer our condolences to the
families of the victims and the Government of Belgium.

Chad welcomes the growing cooperation among the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Group of Experts of the 1540 Committee and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team.
With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee, Chad
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2129 (2013), which
renewed the mandate of the Executive Directorate by
providing it with guidance in order to better assist
Member States in fully implementing resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005). Furthermore, Chad welcomes
the Committee's activities set out in the briefing by
its Chair and underscores the threat posed by ransom
payments. Such a practice is a source of revenue that
perpetuates criminal and terrorist acts. In that regard,
we look forward with interest to the special meeting to
be held on the issue of kidnapping for ransom.

With regard to the 1540 Committee, Chad
commends the adoption of its programme of work from
1 June 2014 to 31 January 2015, the visits to Niger and
Bangladesh and the 46 global awareness-raising actions.
Moreover, Chad awaits with interest the development
of a strategy for the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), recommended by the Security Council in the
presidential statement of 7 May (S/PRST/2014/7) and the
review of recommendations on strengthening assistance
mechanisms. Chad reiterates its commitment to
working for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and calls for increased dialogue between the

1540 Committee and the 21 Member States that have
still to submit their reports.

With regard to the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, Chad welcomes the
fact that Boko Haram is now on the Al-Qaida sanctions
list. Chad is concerned about the growing threat posed
by Boko Haram, which is increasingly organized and
professional, as demonstrated by its modus operandi.
Boko Haram has human, materiel and logistical
resources.

Chad is also concerned about the regrouping of
the militants of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
(AQIM) in southern Libya following their defeat in
Mali, as the fifteenth report of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team (S/2104/14) notes. We
are also concerned about the diverse and sophisticated
means used by the terrorist group and their movement
around the world.

The use of the Internet, its social media and
improvised explosive devices and the regrouping of
more than 9,000 foreign fighters in Syria are likewise
of concern. Chad calls for the identification of the main
leaders in order to include them on the sanctions list and
encourages the ongoing review of that list, in which all
Member States should participate by providing detailed
and up-to-date information.

With regard to the sanctions regime, like many
other States, Chad believes that the listing and delisting
procedures of individuals on the sanctions list should
be examined in depth to ensure a more transparent
mechanism that is consistent with the relevant legal
standards and practices.

Finally, with regard to the considerable threat posed
by a number of terrorist groups in Africa, such as Boko
Haram, AQIM. and Al-Shabaab, Chad calls for increased
cooperation among the Committees, Member States
and regional and subregional organizations in order to
strengthen legal, technical and professional capacities,
including in the military and security fields, with a
view to the effective implementation of sanctions. In
line with its means, Chad is ready to participate injoint
and coordinated actions to restore peace and stability in
Africa and elsewhere.

