Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset I would like to express our great pleasure at
seeing you, Mr. Minister, preside over the deliberations
of the Council as it debates this important subject.
Also, I would like to take this opportunity to express
our thanks and appreciation for the truthful and
courageous positions taken by Bangladesh, a friendly
country, during its membership in the Security Council,
and the extraordinary effort made by the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh to the United Nations in
this regard.

I would also like to express thanks to the
Secretary-General and to welcome his tireless efforts to
enhance the role of the United Nations in the
prevention of armed conflicts and in the maintenance
of international peace and security.

The United Nations in general and the Security
Council in particular have a clear responsibility in the
maintenance of international peace and security. From
our perspective, this requires the promotion of a global
environment that is anchored in the principles of
respect for the Charter of the United Nations, the
norms of international law and the resolutions of the
United Nations, and the end of what has become
known as the "culture of reaction". This also requires
the enhancement of the principle of peace, anchored in
justice and fairness and the right of peoples to self-
determination, especially those who continue to
languish under foreign occupation.

In this context we welcome all efforts aimed at
promoting the roles of the General Assembly, the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and
the International Court of Justice, as well as the role of
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

I would like to make three specific remarks
regarding the report of the Secretary-General, on the
understanding that we shall make a more detailed
statement before the General Assembly when it
considers such report.

First, we have noticed for some time now that the
reports of the Secretary-General and the Secretariat
regarding the various aspects of armed conflicts,
including this report under discussion today as well as
reports issued earlier on the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts and other documents, have all
avoided - for reasons that we do not fully
understand - addressing foreign occupation as being
one aspect of armed conflict. These reports have also
avoided specific reference to the Israeli military
occupation of the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem, as well as other Arab territories
occupied since 1967.

Paragraph 77 of the report before us today refers
to "Occupied Territories", but this is unclear, as if
those territories belonged to the moon. Especially at
this point in time, this lapse is unacceptable and
difficult for us to understand, because the Israeli
occupation and its illegitimate practices pose a threat to
peace and security not only in the region, but also to
the entire world.

Secondly, this tendency in the reports, whether by
commission or omission, reflects a serious disregard
for the imperatives of international law and
international humanitarian law, as well as the
permanent responsibility of the United Nations towards
the question of Palestine. It is unacceptable that the
question of foreign occupation and what it represents in
terms of violations of principles of the United Nations
Charter and international law, as well as the threat that
it poses to international peace and security that falls
within the responsibility of the United Nations 7
particularly the Security Council - should be left to the
wishes and policies of occupying authorities.

Thirdly, the failure of the Security Council to
play any meaningful role during the past nine months
regarding the ongoing events in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, in the face
of the oppression and brutality inflicted upon the
Palestinians, and the failure to provide international
protection for the Palestinian people, indeed represent a
challenge to the credibility of the Security Council and
its ability to fulfil its duties in a firm and consistent
manner that is free of double standards.

The Security Council has, in fact, been prevented
from fulfilling its obligations under the Charter, vis-a-
vis the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem. This actually undermines the
credibility of the Council regarding the prevention of
armed conflicts and the achievement of peaceful
resolutions of such conflicts. We, for our part, look
forward to a rectification of this anomaly.

