Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to start by paying tribute to our dear colleague Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, as I believe this is the last time he will be in the Chamber. I thank him for his excellent cooperation throughout his time here. I would also like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock, Ms. Wafa'a Alsaidy and Ms. Raja Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi for their briefings. The fast spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Yemen and its high mortality rate is indeed worrisome and demands the attention of the internationalcommunity. The briefers have confirmed that COVID-19 in Yemen is as deadly as the conflict itself. I want to reiterate Mr. Lowcock's warning that Yemen cannot afford to fight two battles at the same time. Mr. Griffiths also gave a gloomy picture of prolonged escalation and suffering. Listening to the briefers is, once again, like riding on a roller coaster - there was a glimmer of hope some time ago and then, suddenly, the opportunities to achieve peace are slipping away. In that regard, let me highlight three important points in connection with the briefings we just heard. First, we cannot overemphasize that a political solution is urgently needed. We are hopeful that the joint declaration can be agreed upon soon. That will determine the future of Yemen, as the new agreement will reinvigorate the moment of peace that is currently fading away, as indicated by the increase in hostilities. The draft agreement will also include important confidence-building, humanitarian and economic measures, alongside the continuation of the peace process and a nationwide ceasefire. We are confident that this is what the Yemeni people need now. In that connection, Indonesia would like to reiterate its support for the Special Envoy's efforts, with the Council ready to back those efforts to facilitate an inclusive Yemeni- led and -owned peace process. Secondly, we cannot underestimate the threat that COVID-19 poses to the overall humanitarian situation. Saving people's lives has consistently been our top priority in the Security Council. It is indeed frustrating that we continue to hear from Mr. Lowcock every month about the constant, or even worsening, humanitarian situation in Yemen. COVID-19 and its restrictions, reduced remittances, locusts and the flat and significant underfunding for the humanitarian response this year have all exacerbated an already dire situation. The COVID-19 pandemic is also displacing a great number of people. That will further complicate humanitarian assistance. With that in mind, pushing for a nationwide ceasefire for humanitarian purposes is not an excessive demand. We would also like to reiterate our concern that there has been no progress on the matter of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We had great expectations in that regard following the 15 July meeting (see S/2020/721). We urge Ansar Allah to give access to the United Nations assessment team to enable the necessary assessment and repairs. Thirdly, we must stay the course and follow through on previously agreed commitments, including the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement, as well as all the relevant Council resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015), which are legal documents that provide building blocks for a broader peace agreement. As we previously stated, just because some parts are complicated to implement does not mean that we should toss out the whole agreement. We are also delighted to hear that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is continuing to facilitate the efforts of the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council to implement the Riyadh agreement. The Council has the obligation to monitor that, as its commitments remain valid and relevant. The adoption of resolution 2534 (2020), to extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) for an additional year, after the initial six months, is yet further testament that UNMHA continues to be important and relevant. The ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah is helping to calm the situation, which is crucial for the humanitarian lifeline. In conclusion, month after month in the Council, we have been hopeful about progress on the Yemeni file. We started back in January 2019 with the Stockholm Agreement, when we were full of hope that peace would finally happen. And yet we are still facing a bleak situation. Time is running out. As we approach the holy celebration of Eid Al-Adha at the end of the week, symbolizing the need to make a sacrifice, or Qurban, we appeal to all parties to make the necessary sacrifices for the sake of peace, to be flexible in negotiations, to refrain from further violence and to strive for peace. That is the ultimate sacrifice for the people of Yemen.
