Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): My delegation is grateful to Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno and to the Director of the
Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian
Demining, Mr. Dahinden, for their briefings.

The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to the whole range of problems related to mine action.
We support United Nations efforts to mobilize the
international community to address the issue of the
danger posed by mines. Russia is acquainted from
bitter experience with the tragedy and suffering caused
by the uncontrolled use of mines. Despite the fact that
more than a half a century has elapsed since the end of
the Second World War, Russia's Ministry of Defence
and Ministry for Emergency Situations disarms tens of
thousands of pieces of unexploded ordnance every
yean

We believe it imperative that mine action remains
a priority in peacekeeping operations in crisis areas. In
that connection, we support the inclusion of
appropriate provisions to that end in the mandate of
peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security
Council.

For its part, Russia is making whatever
contributions it can towards mine action. Our
peacekeepers, while fulfilling a critical peacekeeping
task in the Georgia-Abkhaz conflict zone, are also
conducting demining activities in that area.
Unfortunately, more than 10 of our soldiers have died
or have been seriously wounded as a result of mine
explosions in that area.

Russia participates in a number of humanitarian
mine-clearance projects, in particular, under contract
with the United Nations Mine Action Service
programme in Kosovo, where we cleared a territory of
about 240,000 square metres. During work to
rehabilitate the Salang Tunnel in Afghanistan, more
than 4,000 mines and explosives were removed and
disarmed. We are also prepared to participate in a
practical way in mine-clearance operations within the
framework of the plan of action for Africa, endorsed by
the Group of Eight in Kananaskis.

In order to create a normative and legal basis for
Russia's participation in mine-clearance operations, the
Russian Government enacted a measure entitled
"Measures to facilitate the Russian Federation's
participation in international humanitarian mine-
clearance programmes, projects and operations". That
measure regulates the provision of assistance to other
States in the area of mine action.

We support Angola's initiative to discuss mine
action in the context of United Nations peacekeeping
activities. We believe that the Security Council
discussion of this question should focus on specific
tasks that arise when carrying out peacekeeping
operation mandates. At the same time, we believe that
duplication of work by the various agencies and organs
of the United Nations in this sphere should be avoided.

Since the General Assembly considers the matter
of assistance for mine-clearance activities on a regular
basis, we think it would be a good idea for the subject
of providing assistance to mine-affected countries to be
discussed in that body.

