Mr. Lowcock: Inresolution 2451 (2018) ofDecember
2018, the Security Council offered unequivocal support
for the humanitarian relief operation in Yemen.
Specifically, the Council called for, first, respect for
international humanitarian law; secondly, unhindered
humanitarian access; and thirdly, more funding for the
United Nations response plan. The Council also noted
the link between ending the conflict and alleviating
people's suffering. Unfortunately, the Council's calls
have not been heeded.

As I said last month (see S/PV.8551), conditions for
most people in Yemen are getting worse, not better. And
if the current trajectory continues, we should all expect
that they will continue to get worse. The fighting rages
on. Since June, 120,000 more people have fled their
homes, bringing total displacement this year to more
than 300,000 people, on top of the millions forced to
flee in earlier years.

We have seen renewed conflict in Al-Hudaydah
governorate, despite the governorate-wide ceasefire
agreed in Stockholm. Two weeks ago, artillery fire
and heavy clashes gripped several neighbourhoods
in Al-Hudaydah city, damaging private homes, an
abandoned hospital and other civilian sites. One
civilian was killed and four injured when shells hit a
local mosque. Seven children were injured in a separate
shelling incident. Conflict also flared south of the
city. In Al-Khawkha district, shelling struck a site
hosting displaced families, injuring three children and
destroying a water tank. In Ad Durayhimi, a civilian
was killed by a landmine, and in Al-Tuhayat, sniper fire
killed a child. And in May and June, war planes carried
out at least six air strikes across Al-Hudaydah.

As Martin Griffiths just said, hostilities in
Al-Hudaydah have now subsided again and relative
calm has returned, but violence continues elsewhere.
At the end of June, air strikes reportedly hit a private
home in Taiz, killing seven family members, including
four children. Shelling also struck an aid distribution
point in Taiz, killing four civilians and injuring two
more. In Al-Dhale'e, we continue to receive reports of
indiscriminate shelling affecting front-line villages.
And in Al-Bayda, clashes in Rada'a killed one civilian
and injured three last week, while shelling in another
area injured a civilian and damaged family homes.

There are many other examples from more than 30
active front lines across the country. Ansar Allah forces
have also continued drone and missile attacks on the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which have killed and injured
civilians, as well as damaged civilian infrastructure.
Those attacks are reprehensible, and they are universally
condemned by the international community.

As Martin Griffiths said, urgent steps are needed to
de-escalate the violence. For months, I have called for a
nationwide ceasefire that would end fighting in Yemen
and attacks on neighbouring countries.

Let me turn now to progress on the Council's call
for unhindered humanitarian access.

Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities in the north
continue to hinder humanitarian assistance in areas
they control through bureaucratic impediments and
interference. The Council will hear shortly from David
Beasley about the difficult decisions that has forced on
the World Food Programme (WFP). But the obstacles
go far beyond WFP. In April and May, humanitarian
agencies reported 375 access incidents across the
country, some across Government-controlled areas,
but mostly in areas controlled by Ansar Allah. During
that time, Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities detained
more than 180 trucks carrying humanitarian cargo
and held them for an average of 36 days before they
were released.

Ansar Allah authorities also continue to delay a
United Nations technical assessment of the decaying
FSO SAFER oil tanker, which, as I have told the Council
many times before, threatens to spill up to 1.1 million
barrels of oil into the Red Sea. The United Nations
assessment team had planned to deploy to the tanker
next week, but the necessary permits remain pending
with the Ansar Allah authorities. Discussions to resolve
this as quickly as possible continue. I would like to note
that this is additionally frustrating when one recalls
that the same authorities wrote to the United Nations
early last year requesting assistance with the tanker and
promising to facilitate its work.

In Government-controlled areas, coalition forces
continue to impose bureaucratic requirements on
humanitarian agencies trying to travel up the west coast
from the south. That policy frequently delays assistance
for people in those areas. The Government is also
moving to introduce new regulations on commercial
fuel imports. Fuel is essential to power generators at
hospitals, to pump water and to run sanitation systems.
Any mechanism to regulate those imports risks
worsening the humanitarian situation.

Let me be clear that although access challenges are
pervasive, they are not stopping the world's largest aid
operation. I cannot say the same of the third point in
the resolution, which is funding. At this time last year,
the humanitarian response plan was 60 per cent funded.
Substantial, flexible funding early in the year - mainly
from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates - allowed the aid operation to scale up across
all sectors at a critical time. That unquestionably saved
millions of lives.

At the High-Level Pledging Event for the
Humanitarian Crisis in Yemen, for this year's
humanitarian response plan, which the Secretary-
General convened in February - six months
ago - donors pledged $2.6 billion. Twenty-seven
of the 40 donors who pledged have paid more than
75 per cent of their pledges, and 20 of those donors
have paid 100 per cent, and in some cases even more.
But those who made the largest pledges - Yemen's
neighbours in the coalition * have so far paid only a
modest proportion of what they promised. As a result,
the response plan is currently just 34 per cent funded,
compared, as I said, to 60 per cent this time last year.
So what are the consequences of that?

Well, there are not yet major consequences for
emergency food aid led by the World Food Programme
(WFP), as David Beasley will detail. Even after
accounting for suspended programmes in Sana'a, WFP
is reaching more than 11 million people, which is more
than we have previously reported. But the situation is
different across the rest of the relief operation.

Last month, I told members of the Council that
support to medical facilities was being suspended
in some areas (see S/PV.8561). Suspensions are now
disrupting services of health facilities that serve
9 million people. Agencies are starting to suspend
some regular vaccination programmes targeting
13 million people, including 200,000 infants. Work on
30 new feeding centres in areas with the worst levels of
hunger has also been halted. Up to 60 existing centres
could close in the coming weeks, putting at least 7,000
malnourished children at immediate risk of death.

In Sana'a, a United Nations-supported treatment
plant that purifies water for agriculture has also started
to shut down. That means that up to 4 million people
could soon be eating vegetables irrigated with dirty
water, making them more likely to contract cholera.

In the next two months, United Nations agencies
expect to close 21 more key programmes. In August,
that could mean, for example, an end to shelter services
for more than 800,000 displaced people, as well as
an end to reproductive health services available to
1 million impoverished women. We already see the
impact of those cuts in the fight against cholera.

The Council will recall that, in 2017, more than
1 million suspected cases of cholera were reported.
Many experts called that the world's worst-ever cholera
epidemic. Last year, with funding provided under the
United Nations response plan, humanitarian agencies
implemented a major country-wide campaign against
cholera. The effect was to reduce the number of cases
to 380,000 for the whole year. That is, of course, still a
very high figure, but it is also a huge improvement over
2017, and it was achieved despite substantial further
degradation of water, sanitation and health facilities
caused by the war.

Those gains have now been lost. So far this year,
nearly 500,000 cases of cholera have been reported. We
have received reports so far of more than 700 deaths as
a result, including more than 200 children. The death
toll will surely grow.

