The President (interpretation from Russian): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Australia, Austria, Brazil,
Canada, Colombia, Cuba, Egypt, Greece, India, Ireland,
Japan, Luxembourg, Malaysia, New Zealand, Norway,
Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, Spain, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine and Zimbabwe, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lamamra
(Algeria), Mr. Rowe (Australia), Mr. Manz (Austria),
Mr. Patriota (Brazil), Mr. Fowler (Canada),
Mr. Londono-Paredes (Colombia), Mr. Rodriguez
Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Awaad (Egypt), Mr. Zacharakis
(Greece), Mr. Shah (India), Mr. Campbell (Ireland),
Mr. Owada (Japan), Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg),
Mr. Yoogalingam (Malaysia), Mr. Keating (New Zealand), Mr. Biarn Lian (Norway), Mr. Kamal
(Pakistan), Mr. Yang Lee (Republic of Korea),
Mr. Ydfiez-Barnuevo (Spain), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia),
Mr. Celem (Turkey), Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine) and
Mr. Sengwe (Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1995/ 1025, which contains the text of a letter dated 8
December 1995 from the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,
Romania, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

I should like also to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/ 1995/ 1043, which
contains the text of a letter dated 18 December 1995 from
the Permanent Representative of Djibouti to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.


