Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the Foreign Minister of South Africa as she
presides over today's meeting, and I thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.

At the root of the turbulence in the Middle East,
the Palestinian issue must be placed at the centre of the
international agenda. At present, the Middle East peace
process is stalled. The conflict over the final status
of Jerusalem continues, the humanitarian situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory remains grave, and
settlements continue to be built. China finds all of these
elements to be very concerning. What we lack is not a
grand plan, but the courage to deliver on commitments
and the conscience to uphold justice. I wish to make
some observations.

First, we must promote the overall goal of the
two-State solution. The two-State solution and the
principle of land for peace represent the bottom line
of international justice, from which we cannot retreat
any further. The establishment of an independent
State is an inalienable national right of the Palestinian
people, a right that cannot be traded away. In the spirit
of responsibility towards the Palestinian and Israeli
people and with a View to achieving regional peace,
the international community, especially countries with
influence over Palestine and Israel, should uphold
the two-State solution, the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and other
international agreements based on consensus in order
to get the Middle East peace process back on track.

Secondly, we should stick to the general approach
of maintaining a peaceful dialogue. The task at hand is
to act to prevent the escalation of tensions and resume
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks as soon as possible.
We should immediately put an end to all actions that
undermine peace talks and mutual trust, earnestly
implement Council resolution 2334 (2016) and cease
new settlements and violence against innocent
civilians. The recent clashes at the Al-Aqsa Mosque are
disconcerting. All parties must remain committed to
the relevant United Nations resolutions and resolve the
final status of Jerusalem through political negotiations.
We should gradually rebuild and increase mutual trust
and create favourable conditions for peace talks.

Thirdly, we should continue to pursue a
comprehensive solution. We should promote political
negotiations and concentrate on development. We must
also closely follow and improve the economic and
humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people and
unwaveringly promote peace through development.
China encourages both Palestine and Israel to resolve
the issue oftax collection through consultation and calls
for the earnest implementation of the Paris Protocol,
other relevant international treaties and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. We also call for the formal
lifting of the blockade on Gaza as soon as possible.

The international community should continue to
firmly support the work of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East and improve the humanitarian conditions
of Palestinian refugees. China is ready and willing to
continue its cooperation with Palestine in the areas of
the economy, finance, culture, education and health,
and take concrete actions to promote the national
stability and development of the country.

The world today faces the prominent threat of
unilateralism and protectionism. Tension in the Middle
East is escalating, and its spillover effects are becoming
increasingly apparent. Furthermore, terrorism is
presenting additional challenges. At this critical
juncture, when the future and fate of the world are at
stake, major countries bear a special responsibility for
maintaining international stability. In this regard, the
permanent members of the Security Council should
play an exemplary role. In his address at the general
debate in the Assembly in September, Chinese State
Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Wang
Yi, put forward a three-point proposal on the situation
in the Middle East and the Gulf (see A/74/PV.9).Russia
also recently released its collective-security concept for
the Gulf region.

China welcomes any dialogue initiative that is
conducive to peace and security in the Middle East
and will maintain open lines of communication with
all parties. As always, China will stand on the side of
peace andjustice and is committed to resolving disputes
through dialogue and consultation and to addressing
common threats through international cooperation. We
also pledge to promote a world of lasting peace and
universal security and to play a constructive role in
maintaining international peace and security.

