Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Council members for agreeing to
an open debate on this issue of widespread interest
among Member States. We are grateful for this
opportunity to express our continued strong concerns
with respect to the principle underlying resolution 1422
(2002). We appeal to the Council to ensure that the
extraordinary situation created by the draft resolution
not become permanent.

Last year, the Council heard clear opposition to
resolution 1422 (2002) expressed by many Members of
the Organization. This year, I will not reiterate all of
the concerns we registered a year ago. Those concerns
remain.

(spoke in English)

I will focus only on the salient points: our belief
that the resolution is unnecessary, our concern that it
diminishes the importance of accountability and justice
for victims, our worry that it undermines fundamental
principles of international law, and our doubt about its
compatibility with the Council's mandate.

We respect the right of States not to become
parties to the International Criminal Court (ICC). We
believe, nonetheless, that this resolution is unnecessary
and counterproductive.

We fully appreciate the need to prevent frivolous
investigations and prosecutions. We understand the
concerns triggered by ill-founded complaints that have
been initiated in certain national and international
jurisdictions. Canada has no desire to see the citizens
of Canada or of any other peacekeeping country
subjected to political harassment in judicial forums.

However, it is important to emphasize that the
ICC is not a court of frivolous prosecution. In fact, its
existence is a deterrent to frivolous prosecution. The
ICC Statute's extraordinary array of safeguards and
checks and balances screen out any frivolous claims
that may be submitted. Many of those safeguards were
proposed by the United States and were willingly
incorporated. Those safeguards include careful
definitions of crimes, accepted by all States, with
rigorous thresholds, focusing on major and deliberate
atrocities; the election of judges and prosecutors by the
Assembly of States Parties, in accordance with
established criteria of professionalism and competence;
the requirement that the Prosecutor assess complaints
and screen out all but the most serious ones; the
requirement that accusations pass an independent
review by a pre-trial chamber and then by an appeals
chamber; the capacity of States parties to remove
prosecutorial officials in the highly unlikely event that
they abuse their power; and not least, the principle of
complementarity. That principle means that the ICC
cannot act where States fulfil their duty to investigate
and prosecute credible allegations of crimes. Citizens
of countries that diligently investigate and prosecute
crimes by their own nationals will not be investigated
or prosecuted by the ICC.

The exemplary qualifications of the individuals
already elected demonstrate the credibility of that
institution. The first statement of the newly elected
Prosecutor, Luis Ocampo, on 22 April, reveals his
responsible, sober approach to the Court's mandate.
Mr. Ocampo emphasized that he will act "with caution
and within the strict limits provided for in the Statute"
and highlighted the significance of complementarity
and respect for national jurisdictions. From the
President of the Assembly of States Parties to the
President and Judges of the Court, to the Chief
Prosecutor, the Court is in good hands and on the right
path. We have every confidence that the Court will
prove to be apolitical and fair.

We respectfully submit that Council action is not
needed to address the risk of frivolous prosecutions
because that risk is already fully addressed within the
ICC Statute. If legitimate concerns remain, we would
be more than prepared to see them addressed in an
open dialogue, based on the actual safeguards and the
actual risks and rewards inherent in international
justice.

Given the safeguards and given the principle of
complementarity, the only way this resolution can
come into operation is both where a peacekeeper
engages in the most serious international crimes and
where his or her national legal system refuses to
investigate or prosecute the crime. The only possible
impact of this resolution is to grant, in such a case,
impunity for crimes against international law.

The ICC's principal purpose is to try humanity's
monsters, the perpetrators of heinous crimes. We
regard the ICC as a centrepiece in the effort to end
impunity for genocide and other mass crimes. We see
its deterrent character as crucial to sparing future
potential victims. We believe that it is the logical and
necessary extension of previous international tribunals
such as those at Nuremberg, The Hague and Arusha -
albeit with more safeguards and even higher standards
of due process.

We therefore call on Council members to support
the effort to end impunity and to help provide greater
human security for all. As a minimum, we ask the
Council at least to refrain from hindering the collective
efforts of States parties to promote law and
accountability.

Resolution 1422 (2002) was one of several
initiatives over the past year aimed at securing
exemptions for some nationalities from the ICC. We
have watched those developments with concern. Our
concern arises not because we wish to see persons of
any particular nationality brought before the Court.
Rather, our concern arises because claims to exemption
by any State entail a rejection of some very important
and well-established principles of international law.

Whether one chooses to be a Party to the ICC
Statute or not, there should be no doubt that the
jurisdictional reach of the ICC is not limitless and that
its approach is entirely founded in established law.
States have jurisdiction over crimes committed on their
own territory. It is also clear that they may exercise
their jurisdiction over international crimes individually,
through national trials, or jointly, through international
trials. That principle was established at Nuremberg and
has been affirmed many times since.

The issue at stake is, therefore, more important
than support for any single institution. Long-agreed
principles of jurisdiction and accountability are in
question.

We believe that a system based on the law - the
fair, predictable, equal application of principles agreed
to by all - is in everyone's interest. We believe we
must defend those basic principles, even if it means we
sometimes must respectfully disagree with friends in
doing so. We hope that through discussion over time
these differences of view can be narrowed and
ultimately resolved.

We are also concerned about the legitimacy of the
action recommended to the Security Council. Under the
Charter, Member States have entrusted certain powers
under certain conditions to the Council in order to
maintain international peace and security. The exercise
of those powers is a solemn responsibility. The Council
has repeatedly affirmed that impunity is a threat to
international peace and security and that accountability
for international crimes contributes to stability. We are
distressed, therefore, that the Council, in purporting to
act in our name, appears in this resolution to come
down on the side of impunity, and for the most serious
of international crimes. We are troubled that action
would be taken in the absence of any apparent threat to
international peace and security, which is the
fundamental precondition for action under Chapter VII
of the Charter.

In conclusion, resolution 1422 (2002) raises
grave concerns of principle, and we urge the Council
not to renew it indefinitely.

We are confident that the Court will prove itself
and that it will become clear to all that such measures
are unnecessary and counterproductive.

We hope that the Council will cooperate with the
Court, for example in referring grave atrocities to the
Court. And we call upon Council members and all
other States to continue the dialogue so that the basic
principles of international law and justice can be
reinforced and strengthened.

