At the outset, I would like to commend the delegation of Estonia, in its capacity as President of the Security Council for the month of May, and the delegation of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, as Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, for holding this meeting and for submitting a concept note (S/2020/374, annex) on the topic. We also thank the briefers for their presentations. The working methods of the Security Council, on which the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security is conferred, continue to attract heightened attention and interest among the broader membership of the United Nations. The emergence of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has triggered the need for taking additional urgent measures aimed at safeguarding the effectiveness of the Security Council under unprecedented and extraordinary circumstances. We acknowledge the role being played by the Informal Working Group to advance ways to enhance the transparency, accountability and overall efficiency of the Council's work, and we welcome the progress achieved in improving its working methods. I would also like to praise the work done so far by Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, as the current Chair of the Informal Working Group, as well as the efforts and contributions made by the former Chairs. Taking into account the questions proposed for consideration at this meeting, I would like to focus briefly on the following three points. First, it is clear that unity among the permanent members is absolutely necessary for agreements to be reached. At the same time, it is important to keep in mind that both permanent and elected members of the Security Council collectively bear responsibility for international peace and security. We note the general recognition among Council members that transparency and efficiency can be jointly secured, and we would welcome further deliberations and contributions to make the Council a more collaborative and inclusive organ. Secondly, the broader United Nations membership should be given more opportunities to be heard and informed in a full and timely manner. We take positive note of some developments in that respect and would like to particularly commend some elected members for their efforts aimed at ensuring the Security Council's transparency and greater openness in its interaction with the wider membership, especially at present, during the COVID-19 pandemic. Thirdly, the Security Council's effectiveness and accountable functioning necessitate, first and foremost, the implementation of Council decisions. Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations is clear about the obligations of Member States to that effect. The fact that the unlawful use of force against sovereign States with resultant territorial acquisitions continues, Security Council resolutions notwithstanding, does not mean that such a state of affairs is a constitutive part of the Council's working methods. The objective of maintaining international peace and security is hardly attainable if universally recognized fundamental values, norms and principles are overtly disregarded, misinterpreted or made conditional by aggressors who seek to whitewash their illegal actions. The purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations are fundamental building blocks in the shared rules-based international order. They are universally binding and apply to all crises and conflicts whatever their distinct root causes or nature. The powers and responsibilities of the main organs of the United Nations and the decisions adopted therein cannot be substituted, conditioned or limited by regional and subregional organizations or their conflict-settlement or mediation formats and mechanisms. Protracted conflicts and their political, military and humanitarian consequences, including prolonged foreign occupation, ethnic cleansing and the lack of accountability for atrocity crimes, cannot be overlooked. The implementation of resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993), on the Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict, must be among the top priorities of the United Nations. The primary objective of the ongoing peace process, whose mandate is based on those resolutions, is to ensure the immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of the occupying forces from all the occupied territories of Azerbaijan, the restoration of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan within its internationally recognized borders, and the return of the forcibly displaced persons to their homes and properties. The achievement of those objectives is mandatory and non-negotiable, as the use of force, together with its resultant military occupation and ethnic cleansing of the Azerbaijani territories, is incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations and international law and will never bring peace, reconciliation and stability. In the year of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, the shared purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the Organization remain as important as ever. Strict compliance with these purposes and principles and the fulfilment in good faith of the obligations assumed by States under the Charter are of the greatest importance for the maintenance of international peace and security and the promotion of sustained economic growth, sustainable development, human rights, justice and international law.
