Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would like
to welcome today's opportunity to participate in the
open debate on so important and pertinent a subject as
terrorism vis-a-vis international peace and security, and
to thank Ambassador Arias for his very interesting and
informative briefing.

A bit more than two years ago, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1373 (2001), reaffirming its
unequivocal condemnation of the terrorist attacks that
took place in the United States on 11 September 2001
and expressing its determination to prevent all such
acts in the future.

The decision to establish a Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) that would increase the capability of
States to fight terrorism was dictated by the shared
common vision of States of the radically changed
security environment and by the necessity to jointly
face new threats and challenges.

Azerbaijan highly values the activities of the
CTC, including its proactive cooperation with regional
organizations and groups, aimed at facilitating dialogue
and exchange of information on the global and regional
levels. As a coordinator on counter-terrorism issues
within the Georgia, Uzbekistan, Ukraine, Azerbaijan,
Moldova Group (GUUAM), my country shared within
the CTC the Group's perspective on addressing new
threats caused by terrorism. In this capacity we actively
participated in the 6 March 2003 meeting of the CTC
with regional and subregional organizations as well as
in the follow-up meeting jointly organized by the CTC
and the Organization of American States this October
in Washington, DC. We consider that regular exchange
of opinions and information on the subject will be to
the great benefit of our joint work.

Indeed, today we find ourselves in an era of
increased and globalized instability that respects no
borders. The threats, risks and challenges to
international peace and security have undergone a
serious qualitative transformation. In the meantime, the
scale of those threats has also increased. Today,
terrorism and other asymmetric threats and challenges
to security are more international and far more lethal
than before. Terrorist attacks that have been taking
place on a regular basis ever since 11 September 2001
have, unfortunately, had a strong grip on the news
headlines and prove that, despite certain progress
achieved in addressing this challenge, the threat is still
with us.

Azerbaijan condemns in the strongest possible
terms all terrorist attacks perpetrated recently
throughout the world, including the terrorist act against
the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad and the
most recent terrorist attack against the Turkish
Embassy in the same city, which were further attempts
to undermine the international community's efforts to
improve security within Iraq.

While actively participating in the global fight
against terrorism and reiterating our continued
readiness to provide an important contribution to that
effort in future, we would like to stress once again that
the fight against terrorism cannot be successful if that
evil is treated on its own, in isolation from such
terrorism-breeding threats as organized crime,
aggressive separatism, militant nationalism, drug
trafficking and the proliferation of small arms and of
weapons of mass destruction.

It is imperative to target ways and means of
accumulating the huge financial assets that fuel
organized criminal groups with close operational ties to
international terrorist networks and illegal armed
separatist movements. The territories that are currently
controlled by unlawful separatist regimes, in particular
within the zones of so-called frozen conflicts, have
been turned into grey zones of various criminal
activities, and illicit profits gained therein are being
actively used to bolster armed separatism and
terrorism.

All of this once again testifies to the necessity for
the international community to take a more resolute
and bolder stance on the question of resolving the
aforementioned conflicts on the basis of ensuring and,
where necessary, enforcing respect for the norms and
principles of international law, including the principle
of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the
Member States.

