Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing, and the Permanent
Representative of Haiti for his additional comments
before the Council.

Bosnia and Herzegovina takes positive note of
the efforts of the Government of Haiti, which, with the
steady assistance of the international community, is
largely overcoming the immediate humanitarian and
security challenges that Haiti has faced in the period
after the earthquake. We commend the international
community on its efforts and commitment to address
the remaining challenges and help the people of Haiti
to build a prosperous future.
However, much more has to be done in order to
address the fundamental consequences of the
earthquake. Haiti still faces a grim reality, with
hundreds of thousands of internally displaced (IDPs)
and a fragile political, social and economic situation.
In the coming period, which will be marked by
extensive reconstruction efforts and presidential and
legislative elections, it will be critical to ensure
stability and security within the country.

With regard to the forthcoming elections, both
presidential and legislative, which, according to the
calendar established by the Government, will be held
on 28 November 2010, we urge the Government to do
use all means at its disposal to ensure that the elections
are free and fair. Only credible and legitimate elections
will guarantee political stability in this critical period
for the country. The United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has an important role
to play in providing assistance to the Government of
Haiti in organizing elections in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1927 (2010). It is essential
that MINUSTAH, in collaboration with the United
Nations Development Programme, continue to provide
technical support to the Provisional Electoral Council.

Bearing in mind that the elections also constitute
a potential security challenge, the cooperation between
MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police in the
preparation of an integrated electoral logistics and
security plan is commendable. The coordination role of
MINUSTAH in the context of international assistance
for the preparation of elections with other international
stakeholders will be essential.

Taking into account pre-existing conditions in
Haiti and the magnitude of the earthquake, it is
fundamental to ensure that the rebuilding of State
institutions takes place. Rebuilding and strengthening
the security sector and the judicial and penal system is
a basic precondition for stable and secure environment.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the view that without a
secure environment there can be no substantial
recovery and development. MINUSTAH's assistance to
the Haitian National Police has played an important
role in providing security and is of utmost importance.
The cooperation between MINUSTAH and the Haitian
National Police in providing the widest possible
coverage for camps for internally displaced persons
and in addressing violence against women and children
is commendable. With regard to the judicial and penal
system we support MINUSTAH'S efforts to provide
assistance to the Government of Haiti with respect to
those institutions, which are crucial for the rule of law.

We share the Secretary-General's view that a
major challenge to the Government of Haiti is the
sustainable resettlement of displaced persons. A
decisive commitment by the Government and
assistance of the international community in this regard
will be crucial in order to find a solution for this very
complex and delicate problem, which has an impact on
many other issues and could generate serious problems
if it remains unresolved.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the
establishment of the Interim Haiti Reconstruction
Commission (IHRC) which will coordinate medium-
and long-term reconstruction in Haiti. It is crucial that
donors continue their commitment to Haiti. In this
context, we would like to express our sincere gratitude
to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, former
United States President Clinton, for his efforts in that
regard.

In these challenging times, the United Nations and
MINUSTAH have played a central role in Haiti. It is
vital that the partnership between Haitian people and the
United Nations be further foster in order to preserve
positive developments and to meet the remaining
challenges. Only joint and timely efforts by the United
Nations and the Government of Haiti will bring tangible
results and secure a better future for this proud nation.

Let me in conclusion, on behalf of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, commend Special Representative Mulet
and United Nations and MINUSTAH personnel for
their tireless efforts and the important work they have
carried out to date.

