Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. Esono Angue, for joining us
and presiding over today's meeting. I also thank
Mr. Fedotov and Mrs. Ukonga for their briefings. The
United States thanks Equatorial Guinea for putting this
deeply problematic side effect of our modern global
economy on the Security Council's agenda. All of us
rely on ships to carry the world's goods safely from
one port to another. We all have a stake in stopping
crime at sea. It is an issue too large for one nation to
handle alone.

Every country should be deploying a broad range
of tools - diplomatic, economic, social, military,
intelligence, law-enforcement and judicial - to tackle
the problem. Likewise, all countries that have ratified
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols should redouble
their efforts to implement it more effectively. We
urge all States that have not yet done so to ratify the
Convention, and all States parties to ensure that their
domestic laws appropriately criminalize the core
offences listed in the Convention and its Protocols.
Doing so will make it easier for law-enforcement and
criminal justice authorities to investigate and prosecute
transnational criminals.

In addition, there are numerous existing Security
Council resolutions that promote maritime security,
and their implementation is keeping our seas safer.
Resolution 1816 (2008) led to the coordinated
deployment of international naval forces to fight piracy
off the coast of Somalia, resulting in a steady decline
in pirate attacks and hijackings since 2011. Resolution
2036 (2012) banned the export of Somali charcoal,
successfully cutting off an important revenue stream
for Al-Shabaab and weakening its ability to carry out
its acts of terror. Resolution 2216 (2015) established
a targeted arms embargo to prevent acts that threaten
peace, security and stability in Yemen, and in connection
with it, the United States Navy has seized weapons that
were destined for Houthi rebels. Resolution 2375 (2017)
banned ship-to-ship transfers of any items or goods to
or from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
prevent it from illegally selling coal and buying fuel,
and resolution 2397 (2017) enabled States to seize
and impound any ships violating those sanctions.
Resolution 2146 (2014) banned illegal oil exports from
Libya and authorized States to take action against such
vessels through the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011).

In addition to those tools, capacity-building is Vital
to addressing maritime security. The United States has
been a long-time partner for many countries in those
efforts. President Trump renewed that commitment in his
February 2017 executive order on transnational criminal
organizations, in which he directed our Government to
assist partners in strengthening their maritime security
capabilities. In support of the 2013 Yaounde process,

the United States works with INTERPOL and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to provide
assistance to Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, Benin and
Nigeria in the Gulf of Guinea. We work together to
improve regional information-sharing, maritime law-
enforcement interdiction and investigation capabilities
and legal reforms. To combat offshore listed activities
in Africa, the United States Africa Command has
worked with European and African partners since 2011
to conduct annual at-sea maritime exercises in the
Gulf of Guinea and the Gulf of Aden, programmes that
have increased law enforcement's capacity to interdict
illicit goods, counter human trafficking and prevent
unlawful fishing.

International drug trafficking also threatens
maritime security, including for people who depend
on our oceans, especially since global cocaine and
opium production hit record highs in 2018. In order to
address that, President Trump announced a global call
to action on the world drug problem in his September
2018 speech at the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.6),
with the objective of reducing drug demand, cutting
off the supply of illicit drugs, expanding treatment and
strengthening international cooperation.

Organized crime at sea hurts us all and requires
a coordinated response from us all. Making real
progress on that issue will require concrete action and
even stronger international cooperation, for which the
United States will remain a strong partner.

