Mr. de La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
am grateful to you, Sir, for organizing today's debate.
As you know, my country, which is linked to Haiti by
historical ties, is particularly concerned by the grave
situation in that country.

I welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Jamaica, current Chairman of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Bahamas, and thank them both for their
statements. We share their sense of urgency and their
will to act. We too have been in close contact in recent
days with our main partners concerning this crisis.

We are aware that CARICOM. and the
Organization of American States (OAS) bring to the
issue legitimacy, expertise and a will to act, assets that
are essential to finding a solution. I will say at the
outset that, in our view, the point of departure for
resolving the crisis lies in the Plan of Action put
forward by CARICOM. and the OAS. The crucial
mobilization of the international community must
revolve around that Plan of Action.

What can we do, in this grave hour, for the
Haitian people? We are facing a situation that is urgent
on two levels. It is urgent, first, with regard to the
humanitarian situation of the people, which is
worsening in a very troubling manner and in particular
with regard to the human rights violations to which
people are falling victim. We must support
international efforts to respond to that situation.

Secondly, it is urgent in terms of finding a
solution to the political crisis, a solution that must lie
within the current constitutional framework. We
therefore believe it is important to insist on the
proposals of the two regional organizations relating to
the establishment of a transitional government of
national unity, led by a prime minister and designated
according to the provisions of the CARICOM. Plan of
Action.

To ensure the necessary support for that plan, it
would be useful, as the French Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Dominique de Villepin proposed yesterday,
to supplement it, inter alia by accelerating the timetable
for presidential and general elections.

It goes without saying that international
assistance should be deployed to prepare for such
elections through the establishment of an electoral
commission, legitimate voter registration roles and the
organization of international observer missions. In that
context, we, like others, believe that a civilian
peacekeeping force should be envisaged. Such a force
would not be a United Nations force, but should be
authorized by the Security Council and based upon a
Council mandate. It could be an important complement
to a political solution: established immediately to
support a government of national unity, it could help
re-establish public order and support the international
community's action on the ground, especially in the
humanitarian and human rights spheres.

As my authorities have indicated at the highest
level, France would be prepared to contribute to a
civilian peacekeeping force meeting those conditions,
supplementing the contingents that must necessarily
come, first and foremost, from the countries of the
region.

I would add that it is up to the Haitian political
forces themselves to make the concessions necessary to
achieve a political agreement. I can only join in the
calls issued by the Security Council both to the
Government authorities and to the opposition.

We are profoundly disturbed by the violence and
the attacks on human rights that are currently taking
place in Haiti. We beseech the country's political
leaders to make the necessary gestures of openness. We
believe that then, the international community, through
its support for CARICOM. and the OAS, will be able to
fulfil its part of the contract in the areas that I
mentioned, both in the political arena and on the
humanitarian level, in the area of human rights and
with respect to the economic and social reconstruction
of the country.

The United Nations will have an essential role to
play in that regard. We commend the Secretary-General
for the decisions he has already taken, and we would
support the appointment, when the time comes, of a
special representative capable of acting on the ground
and, in particular, of ensuring optimal coordination
among the agencies and organizations in extending
assistance to the Haitian people.

The Council may be assured that France is
determined to continue its efforts to contribute to the
international community's mobilization for Haiti.

