I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing. As has been the case every month for far too long, we are once again witnessing a complete lack of cooperation by the Syrian regime. I wish to emphasize three points. First, last July, the Executive Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) called on Syria to comply with its obligations and gave it 90 days to remedy the situation. The Director General of the OPCW accordingly sent us a report a few days ago, which takes stock of the implementation of that decision (see S/2020/1033, annex). The report is two pages long and its conclusion is clear: no, and I stress no, progress has been made. That must be a matter of concern to us. We hope that the Conference of the States Parties, which will begin on 30 November in The Hague, will fully draw conclusions from the report. In 2013, the Syrian regime committed to cooperating with the OPCW transparently and in good faith. The least one can say is that it has not kept its word. Seven years after the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), we still do not know the state of Syria's chemical stockpiles. Secondly, I would like to recall that the regime's repeated use of chemical weapons against its own people unfortunately needs no further proof. In April this year, following a rigorous investigation, the OPC W's Investigation and Identification Team issued a damning report, which establishes that chemical-weapon attacks were carried out in Ltamenah in March 2017 by elements of the regime's air force. In that context, I wish to stress the professionalism and impartiality of the OPCW and condemn all attempts by those who seek to discredit the organization, which is so important to our collective security. Finally, I wish to stress that the use of chemical weapons, wherever, whenever, by whomsoever and under whatever circumstances, is unacceptable and constitutes a crime that threatens all humankind. The re-emergence of chemical weapons is one of the most serious threats with which we have to deal in the Security Council. The Council made that clear in its presidential statement S/PRST/2019/14, of November 2019. As President Macron recalled on 21 September, "[t]aboos that were thought to be inviolable have been lifted". No impunity in that regard can be tolerated. That is why France, along with 40 other countries and the European Union, has been leading the International Partnership against Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons since 2018. Restoring the credibility of the prohibition regime is also one of the conditions for a just and lasting peace in Syria on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015).
