Mr. Charwath (Austria): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this very timely
open debate.

Austria, of course, fully aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union. Let me therefore offer just a few
additional remarks from my national perspective. I
should like to talk about three issues.

First, in recent years, two of the most
significant international security challenges of our
time - terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) - have increasingly come
to overlap and thereby compound each other. Recent
instances of the use of chemical weapons not only by
the Syrian regime but also by the Islamic State have
increased public attention to this danger. In the current
situation, resolution 1540 (2004) is becoming ever more
relevant, and, with last year's resolution 2325 (2016),
we now have a new instrument to further improve the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in the face of
these growing threats.

Secondly, Austria is firmly committed to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. My
country is party to all relevant international treaties,
such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological Weapons Convention.

Austria considers export controls as an important
tool to prevent proliferation and therefore actively
participates in the Zangger Committee, the Nuclear
Suppliers Group, the Australia Group and the Missile
Technology Control Regime.

Importantly, Austria has in place legislation aimed
at implementing effectively, at the national level, its
international non-proliferation commitments, such as
the relevant articles of the Austrian penal code and of
our Foreign Trade Act. Let me also mention that Austria
serves as the Executive Secretariat of the Hague Code
of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation. We
also participate in the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism.

But, thirdly, the most horrific scenario of all, namely,

the acquisition of nuclear material or, even worse, a
nuclear weapon by terrorists can, unfortunately, not be
dismissed as unrealistic today. It is clear that there are
actors with a firm intention to achieve exactly that, and
there is evidence that some are working systematically
to overcome the remaining obstacles. The humanitarian
and other consequences of a nuclear terrorist attack
would be catastrophic.

While we have to redouble our efforts within the
existing nuclear non-proliferation regimes to prevent
such an occurrence, we also have to reinforce these
regimes. One of the major obstacles, of course, is the
continued existence of nuclear weapons as such. The
greater their number and the greater the number of
possessor States, the more difficult it is to secure them
against theft, hacking or other forms of unauthorized
access by non-State actors.

Equally importantly, so long as a number of States
possess such weapons, others will be tempted to
develop or to get hold of them as well. And the greater
the number of States that possess nuclear weapons and
related material, the more opportunities there will be
for non-State actors to get their hands on them.

Inversely, the smaller the overall number of nuclear
weapons in the world and of States possessing them,
the smaller the risk that non-State actors will achieve
their nefarious objectives. That is why real progress on
nuclear disarmament is crucial, not least in the context
of our discussion here.

The convention on the prohibition of nuclear
weapons that is currently under negotiation at the
United Nations - downstairs in this very Building - is
aimed at facilitating such progress. Let me emphasize
that this initiative is fully in line with the existing
non-proliferation regime, with the NPT at its centre,
and that its aim is to strengthen, not weaken, the regime.
Moreover, the initiative has already delivered some
other positive results, as the multilateral disarmament
machinery, both here in New Nork and in Geneva, seems
to have geared up recently compared with recent years.

In our View, we must work in both directions to
ensure greater security for all, strengthening the
existing non-proliferation and control regimes and
seeking the elimination of nuclear weapons worldwide.

