Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): First, let
me extend a warm welcome to the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Maitre Beye, and commend him
once again for his tireless efforts on behalf of peace in
Angola. I also want to extend our warm thanks to
Ambassador Mahugu for his willingness to travel to the
region for the important mission of sanctions enforcement.

Three months ago, the United States welcomed the
agreement by the Government of Angola and UNITA on a
timetable to complete the remaining tasks of the Lusaka
Protocol. Since then, most of the tasks have been
accomplished. We recognize the patience and flexibility of
the Government of Angola and UNITA, which made this
progress possible.

Now the Angolan Government and, in particular,
UNITA must take the final steps towards peace. They must
complete the normalization of State administration
throughout the national territory, especially in Andulo and
Bailundo. They must also disarm the civilian population,
cease all hostile propaganda and turn their efforts towards
reconciliation and reconstruction.

As the tasks of the Lusaka Protocol are completed, the
United States renews its commitment to reconsider the need
for sanctions against UNITA according to the provisions of
resolution 1127 (1997).

However, the United States is increasingly concerned
that the Government of Angola and UNITA are meeting
the letter, but not the spirit, of the Lusaka Protocol. For
example, although UNITA declared its troops to be
demobilized, we continue to receive reports that armed
UNITA units exist and are involved in attacks against
United Nations and international personnel, as well as
against Angolan national authorities. The Government of
Angola, for its part, must ensure that the National Police
carry out their duties with regard to the normalization of
State administration in a manner that promotes
reconciliation. If there are abuses by Government
authorities during this difficult process, the Government
of Angola must bring those responsible to justice. It is
time to set violence aside and to heal the wounds of so
many years of war. To that end, we again urge that the
long-awaited meeting between President Dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi take place as soon as possible.

We support the draft resolution before us today,
which contributes to the transformation of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) from a
peacekeeping operation to the observer mission it was
originally intended to be. As the peace process proceeds,
a further review of MONUA's mandate, size and
organizational structure will be needed. However, the
withdrawal of MONUA must not be precipitous. The
international community must ensure that its years of
investment in peace are not jeopardized in the final
months. This draft resolution provides the right balance.

The goal of the international community should be
to reinforce stability by gradually transferring the non-
military functions of MONUA to other United Nations or
international agencies. During this process, we fully
expect both the Government of Angola and UNITA to
give full support and cooperation to MONUA.

Even in peace Angolans face a difficult period of
recovery. People are still not able to move freely
throughout the national territory because of illegal
checkpoints and, worse yet, because of deadly landmines.
Angola will continue to need international assistance to
strengthen its democratic institutions, reinforce the rule of
law and initiate economic reform leading to a full
economic recovery.

The progress to date in the peace process would not
have been possible without the untiring work of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative and the
umbrella of security provided by the personnel of
MONUA. We express our gratitude for their efforts. We

 

would like to take special note of the contribution of Major-
General Phillip Sibanda, who will complete his tour of duty
with the Mission tomorrow, after years of distinguished
service.

