Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank you for having facilitated the
taking up ofthis item at an open meeting in order to shed
light on the various dimensions of the humanitarian
crisis in Syria, the largest humanitarian crisis in the
world today. It is important that the international
community be aware of the deliberations in the Security
Council in order to know how to respond to this crisis
and its implications for neighbouring countries and
security in the region.

I should like also to thank the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs not only
for the assistance they have given Jordan to help it deal
with this humanitarian crisis, but also for all the efforts
they have made.

The crisis in Syria has been raging for more than
four years now. The Jordanian people feels the pain of
the Syrian people and continues to work, along with the
Government, to find a political solution to the crisis.
I will not repeat what is stated in the reports of the
United Nations and of non-governmental organizations
on the situation in Syria. Words cannot describe the
magnitude of the tragedy and the suffering of women
and children.

I wish to stress today the need for the international
community to break its silence regarding the heinous
acts and atrocities committed in Syria, including
attacks against civilians and public infrastructure such
as hospitals and water and electricity supplies, with
full impunity. We must also emphasize once again how
important it is that the parties to the conflict, including
the Syrian regime, end the use of barrel bombs, which
is a flagrant violation of humanitarian law. All the
parties must commit to complying with humanitarian
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions by
ending this practice.

I also believe that the international community
should increase its efforts to enable humanitarian aid
to reach the more than 12 million Syrians in Syria who
need it, particularly in the areas under siege. For its part,
Jordan is committed to implementing all the relevant
Security Council resolutions designed to mitigate the
humanitarian situation in cooperation with France and
Spain. We are also working to achieve adoption of other
resolutions aimed at saving lives. Jordan will continue
to facilitate the passage of humanitarian convoys
through the Ramtha corridor, and we call on the United
Nations and its partners to take as much advantage as
possible of the resources made available to them by
Jordan in making use of this humanitarian corridor.

The humanitarian crisis has continued to worsen,
increasingly exacerbated as it is by extremism and
terrorism, and is taking a heavy toll on the countries
of the region, which are having to take in an unending
number of refugees. We have opened our doors
to Syrians since the beginning of the crisis, when
Jordanians took Syrians into their own homes, before
we had built refugee camps, one of which is now the
size of Jordan's fourth-largest city. We are currently
hosting a million refugees and providing them with
as much as is in our power. I would like to emphasize
various concepts that Jordan has been highlighting
since the Berlin Conference on the Syrian Refugee
Situation, particularly that of fatigue. Not just donor
fatigue - because we have still not been able to supply
all the aid that the refugees need - no, I am talking
about the fatigue of Syria's neighbours. Jordan has been
exhausted by the assistance it has given to the Syrian
refugees.

Now more than ever, we urge the international
community to shoulder its responsibility to help Jordan
and the other countries sheltering Syria's refugees to
take them in and provide them with what they need.
We are grateful to Kuwait for volunteering to organize
a donor conference, and we call on all the relevant
parties to participate. We also call for implementation
of the final declaration of the Berlin Conference, which
emphasized economic, social and humanitarian needs
and security issues in the countries bordering Syria.
We stress that it is vital that countries help to find a
solution to resettling the refugees.

There can be no humanitarian solution to the crisis
in Syria. The only solution is political, one that can
enable the country to begin a political transition that
can re-establish security and stability, restore social
cohesion among Syria's peoples and reinstate a safe
environment so that Syrian citizens can return home.
In the absence of a political solution, extremism will
spread around the region and destroy it. We stress that
it is vital that peaceful solutions be found, and we urge
the various countries involved to continue to seek them,
in accordance with the Geneva final communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and Egypt's efforts. We also call
on the various entities of the United Nations to continue
to work to settle the crisis in Syria. We also support
the plan of Special Envoy de Mistura aimed at ending
the violence and enabling humanitarian aid to reach the
region.

