Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Like other Security Council members, we are
happy to see you, Madam President, presiding over
today's meeting of the Security Council. We also wish
to welcome the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for Iraq, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
and we welcome the members of the interim Governing
Council of Iraq.

The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to today's meeting of the Security Council. For the first
time since the adoption of resolution 1483 (2003), the
Security Council is conducting a comprehensive review
of the situation in Iraq, which in all respects is still
extremely complex. The manner in which the problems
facing the country are dealt with will determine the
future of the Iraqi people and stability in the Middle
East region as a whole.

The priority task of the international community
at this stage, as we see it, is to help the people of Iraq
find a way out of the crisis. We believe that this will be
possible only if there is respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Iraq and if Iraq
is given the right to dispose of its own natural
resources and wealth. We believe it fundamentally
important that this is the very approach on which the
Secretary-General's report pursuant to resolution 1483
(2003) is based. We agree with the conclusions and
evaluations contained in the report. The Secretary-
General's recommendations clearly identify those areas
where the United Nations can make a contribution to
achieving an Iraqi settlement.

The Russian delegation greatly appreciates the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General who, in a difficult situation, is seeking to
resolve the tasks facing the United Nations there. We
would stress that the successes achieved would have
been even more impressive had appropriate security
conditions been provided in Iraq to ensure the work of
the international staff there. Without such security,
carrying out the major tasks mapped out in the
Secretary-General's report will be much more difficult.

It is clear that the problem cannot be resolved by
military methods alone, without establishing a political
process. Within that context, we regard the formation
of the interim Governing Council of Iraq to be a step in
the right direction, making it possible to implement one
of the key provisions of Security Council resolution
1483 (2003), on the establishment of a representative
interim Iraqi administration. But this has to be a
transitional period leading to the establishment of a
legally elected leadership of the country by the Iraqi

people, which will be able to lead the country out of
crises.

We agree with the conclusion in the report that
the people of Iraq themselves must determine their own
future. The international community, through the
United Nations, is to provide them with assistance in
attaining that goal. It is important that in contacts with
the Iraqi political forces, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General focus on the need to establish a
Government that is based on the rule of law and is able
to ensure for all Iraqi citizens equal rights and justice,
without distinction as to ethnic origin, religion or sex.

We fully agree with what is stated in the report
about the need to develop a clear timetable setting out a
sequence of events leading to the full restoration of
sovereignty and the ending of the military occupation.

We approve of the broad contacts made by the
Special Representative with Iraq's regional neighbours.
The report quite rightly notes that the situation in Iraq
has a very clear regional aspect to it, and that the kind
of independent State Iraq becomes will depend to a
large extent on its cooperation with the States of the
subregion.

We commend the Special Representative for the
work he has been doing in the area of the economic
recovery of Iraq. It is important that representatives of
the United Nations Development Programme, the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank work
alongside him.

We expect that proposed measures for the
economic recovery of Iraq will help to raise the living
standards of the people of Iraq, who have suffered so
long from a very severe humanitarian crisis.

As the Council is aware, recently the economic
viability of Iraq has been ensured almost primarily
through the United Nations oil-for-food programme,
which has helped the Iraqi people to survive. In this
connection, I should like to note the need to continue
United Nations involvement in resolving humanitarian
problems in Iraq after the oil-for-food programme is
phased out in late November.

The international community can and must
provide comprehensive assistance to Iraq in
reconstruction. The United Nations has broad
experience and the necessary potential to do so. From
this standpoint, we deem timely the proposal to
establish the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, and we agree with the parameters described in the
Secretary-General's report.

Russia also considers it necessary, in developing
resolution 1483 (2003), to consider in the Security
Council the possibility of taking a decision on specific
steps to enhance United Nations involvement in a post-
war settlement and to supplement the mandate of the
United Nations with the appropriate additional
functions or tasks. This would be in keeping with our
main goal, which is to deal with the challenges facing
Iraq today. It is our hope that the international
community will be able to develop agreed decisions
that will make it possible to provide the necessary
assistance to the people of Iraq.

Russia, which has past and present ties with the
people of Iraq, is ready to continue making its
contribution to normalizing the situation in Iraq, to its
economic reconstruction and to ensuring that it enjoys
full State independence.

