Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): My delegation
would also like to welcome Senator Biden. We share
the views expressed by the representatives of France
and the United Kingdom, but we also share what
Ambassador Greenstock termed the United States

S/PVAZAS

 

Congress' fundamental intentions with regard to United
Nations reform. It is precisely because we do so that
we always find it encouraging to hear Senator Biden
admit that he is aware that a Member State of the
United Nations cannot legally attach conditions to the
payment of its financial contributions to the
Organization.

We also welcome Mr. Klein, and we thank him
for his interesting briefing. In that regard we subscribe
to the statement of the representative of France, which
was made on behalf of the European Union (EU). But
because this is presumably the last time that the
Netherlands can speak on this subject while on the
Security Council, we would like to make a few
additional comments.

Five years after Dayton we can only conclude
that despite generous foreign aid, to the tune of $5
billion, both the political and the economic situations
of Bosnia and Herzegovina are disconcerting. Senator
Biden spoke of a strikingly positive reality: that is,
Bosnia is at peace. Well, there is no more fighting, and
the security situation is generally good. But the
animosity among the three population groups has
hardly subsided since Dayton. People are daily
reminded of the war in a country where the borders of
the entities reflect the military frontlines of 1995.

The Dayton Accords have granted important
powers to the two entities. Among them, there is little
willingness to cooperate to build strong State
institutions. The recent elections, held on 11
November, were disappointing, in that they underlined
how Bosnia and Herzegovina is divided along ethnic
lines. Croats even took the opportunity to hold an
illegal referendum about possible independence for
their entity.

If I am not mistaken, I believe that in this
Chamber, whenever Bosnia and Herzegovina is being
discussed, most of the criticism is usually levelled at
Republika Srpska. But the events I have just referred
to, including the election results, have highlighted the
unhelpful role played by the Croat side. It is difficult to
be optimistic if only the Muslim population seems to
take the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina really
seriously.

Under Dayton the entities have received so many
powers that the State institutions, such as the Prime
Minister and the six ministries, are almost powerless in
the face of regional ambitions. There is no political
will among the leaders of the large parties to reinforce
the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The major problem, as we see it, is the virtual
absence of State revenue. The State depends on
financial transfers from the entities, and the entities
keep these to a minimum. As a result, the State
institutions are almost entirely financed by the
international community.

The EU statement ends with a reference to
considerable challenges that remain. I would like to
conclude my statement with the same words.

