Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the Belgian presidency for organizing today's very important opendebate on this topic. I also thank all the briefers for their interventions. We extend our warmest welcome to the Foreign Ministers of the Niger, Guatemala and Spain and the Deputy Foreign Minister of Estonia. My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. At the international level, justice plays an extremely important role in relations among States and has solidified its place in international law, including in the Charter of the United Nations itself. Similarly, at the national level, in conflict and post-conflict situations, transitional justice can play an important role in national reconciliation and development. The United Nations in general and the Security Council in particular have attached vital importance to promoting justice, the rule of law and post-conflict national reconciliation, as well as preventing a return to conflict in the future. Over time, the Security Council has used all of its tools to address transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict contexts. I would like to share the following points in that regard. First, justice shall be served, and justice shall serve. It can be an immediate result, but it also is a means to the long-term goal of sustainable national unity and development. All efforts to promote transitional justice and post-conflict peacebuilding need to always keep that long-term goal into consideration, including addressing the root causes of conflict. While the past can be heavy and difficult, focusing on a future that is sustainable, peaceful and prosperous may be the way forward. We owe it to future generations to make the right choice. Secondly, transitional justice needs to be nationally owned and nationally led. As mentioned earlier, transitional justice reflects a society's attempts to come to terms with a legacy of large-scale past abuses. Transitional justice needs to be society-based and play a harmonious role in conjunction with other attempts to heal society. As such, the State concerned should have primary responsibility for its own transitional justice, reconciliation and future. Here I would like to underscore one point in the report of the Secretary- General, mentioned also in Ms. Bachelet's briefing: that transitional justice cannot be imported or imposed from outside. A locally led and locally appropriate implementation of transitional justice has the best chance of success. In other words, nationally owned and nationally led is the only way to go, and there can be no one-size-fits-all solution to all conflicts. Thirdly, international assistance is crucial and can be most effective if based on national needs, particularities and capacities. The international community should focus on helping build up and strengthen national institutions and mechanisms in accordance with national conditions. Training, knowledge and experience-sharing are very useful in most situations. Ensuring a smooth transition should be the benchmark of international assistance, especially of United Nations missions. Fourthly, the development and implementation of the processes and mechanisms of transitional justice need to take into account their impact on and the active role of women, youth, children and other vulnerable groups in peacebuilding processes. Fifthly, regional arrangements can play a constructive role in assisting peace and reconciliation processes, in accordance with the aforementioned points and the principles of international law. As the central mechanism for peace, security and stability in South-East Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) established the ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation and other mechanisms for conducting activities on capacity- building, experience-sharing on _ reconciliation, peacebuilding and the promotion of the role of women and children. In conclusion, based on Viet Nam's own experience, we always speak with candour and are sympathetic to countries and peoples who are going through difficult phases of conflict and post-conflict peacebuilding. They can count on our continued support inside and outside the Council.
