Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for organizing this public meeting, which will
allow us to take stock of the activities of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), entrusted with the implementation of
sanctions approved by the Council against Al Qaeda
and the Taliban.

On the basis of the exhaustive report just
introduced by the Chairman of the Committee, it would
appear that the Committee has done outstanding work
during the period under consideration. I wish here to
commend the activities of Ambassador Mufioz at the
head of the Committee, which is an essential link in the
United Nations machinery to address threats that Al
Qaeda and its associates have wielded against
humankind. The mobilization of States within that
machinery has been given due priority, and the results
achieved have been commensurate with the importance
of the meaningful implementation by all States of
measures set forth by the Security Council and of the
establishment of a list, constantly updated, of targeted
individuals and entities. In that regard, we commend
the growth in the number of countries that have
submitted reports pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003),
thus demonstrating their renewed interest in the work
of the Committee since the adoption of resolution 1526
(2004) to strengthen its means of action.

Among the factors that have contributed to
creating the positive situation reflected in the report
before the Council, I would mention, inter alia, the
additional efforts to raise public awareness made by
the Chairman of the Committee, as well as the
initiatives of the Monitoring Team established under
resolution 1526 (2004) to streamline the Committee's
work. We believe that the fact that some States have
not deemed it necessary to adopt new legislative texts
in order to incorporate the provisions required by the
sanctions into their domestic legal order demonstrates
that the rules of the state of law are well suited to the
campaign against terrorism, which in many instances
can be coterminous with other forms of crime and
addressed as such.

The recent visit of the Committee Chairman to
Spain and Africa has allowed us to entertain a
constructive dialogue with the authorities of countries
concerned and to understand their approach to and
vision of the fight against terrorism. We note the
priority attached to assistance to countries that do not
have the human resources and logistics necessary to
allow them to be meaningfully engaged in the
international community's counter-terrorism activities.

In this regard, we feel that the increased
coordination envisaged between the 1267 (1999)
Committee and the Executive Directorate of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee is of the highest
importance. There is thus a need for more active
cooperation between countries that are able to provide
the required assistance and those that may be targeted
by terrorist movements because of their minimal
capacity to monitor their own territories. This
consideration is clearly reflected in the analysis of
reasons put forward by some countries to justify their
non-submission of a report pursuant to resolution 1526
(2004). This applies, above all, to those States stating
that they lack coordination and supervision
mechanisms at the national level with which to
coordinate the diverse efforts being made to deal with
new terrorist threats. This situation calls for the
Committee, in pursuing a proactive policy to aid the
countries concerned, to mobilize adequate assistance
for those States so that they can establish national focal
points for collecting the information relevant to the
Committee's work.

The fact remains that eliminating the threat of
terrorism should not be based solely on coercive
measures. The fight against terrorism can, and must,
also spread its roots to educational systems in order to
foment among citizens tolerance and respect for human
life in order to counter the spread of fundamentalist
ideas of all kinds, also taking into account the need to
find a solution to the grave economic and social crises
which provide fertile soil for the proliferation of
terrorism.

