The President (spoke in Arabic): The Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
before it. I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Cote
d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America

The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2401 (2018).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Kuwait.
I associate myself with the statement just made by
the Permanent Representative of Sweden on our behalf.

The unanimous adoption today of resolution 2401
(2018), following lengthy and intensive negotiations,
demonstrates that the penholders, Kuwait and Sweden,
are keen to ensure unanimity on this important
humanitarian resolution. The resolution renews hope in
the Security Council's ability to be unified and speak
in one voice, sending a clear and explicit message
that it rejects any violations of the Charter of the
United Nations.

I wish to thank all Member States that voted
in favour of the resolution, which includes key and
specific demands in response to the appeals of the
international community, the most important of which
are as follows. First, it demands that all parties cease
fire without delay throughout Syria for a minimum of
30 days. Secondly, it allows the United Nations and its
partners to immediately undertake medical evacuations
safely and unconditionally. Thirdly, it requires all
parties to ensure the unimpeded and safe access of all
humanitarian and medical workers. Fourthly, it calls on
all parties to lift the siege of populated areas, including
eastern Ghouta.

We are totally convinced that, while the resolution
may not end the humanitarian suffering in Syria at
once, it is a positive message that the Council today is
solidary and united to end this humanitarian suffering
and hostilities right away. The biggest task now is to
ensure the implementation of the provisions of the
resolution in order to save civilian lives in Syria and
deliver their humanitarian needs immediately.

The Security Council still has a great deal to do
so as to end this tragic crisis in Syria, which is about
to complete its seventh year. The resolution that we
have adopted today is only an interim solution, as a
political solution in Syria is the only way to achieve
a comprehensive settlement of the crisis and meet
the aspirations of the brotherly Syrian people, in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communique' (S/2012/522, annex).

The State of Kuwait stresses the importance of
reaching an agreement among Council members to
prevent any attempt to obstruct a draft resolution
aimed at stopping flagrant violations of human rights.
Kuwait supports the code of conduct proposed by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, whereby Council members would pledge not to
obstruct draft resolutions that address crimes against
humanity, genocide and war crimes. We also support
the Mexican-French initiative calling on restraint in
the use of the veto in the event of serious violations
of human rights, based on our commitments to abide
by the four Geneva Conventions and their Protocols,
international humanitarian law and the outcomes of the
2016 World Humanitarian Summit.

We call for engagement on general humanitarian
issues, such as the delivery of humanitarian aid, the
evacuation of the sick and injured, and humanitarian
truce, as procedural issues. In order to prevent the
recurrence of such tragedies and the great suffering of
humankind, the veto must not be used in such instances.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the other members of the Council
that wish to make statements.


