The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council in September
2008, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Jan Grauls, Permanent Representative of Belgium,
for his service as President of the Security Council for
the month of August 2008. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Grauls for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Somalia

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Somalia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Duale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the
signing of a peace and reconciliation Agreement
("the Djibouti Agreement") between the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the
Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia (ARS)
in Djibouti on 19 August 2008, the preliminary
work undertaken by the High Level Committee
and the Joint Security Committee set up under
that Agreement, as well as recent political
developments. The Security Council expresses its
determination that the Agreement should provide
the basis for lasting peace, security and stability
for the people of Somalia, including the ultimate
withdrawal of foreign forces. The Security
Council commends the efforts deployed by the
TFG and the ARS to this end and their
commitment to peace.

"The Security Council reaffirms its respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia.

"The Security Council extends its gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia, Mr. Ahmedou Ould-
Abdallah, and to the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia for mediating dialogue
between the parties and garnering support for the
political process. The Security Council further
expresses its gratitude to the Government of
Djibouti for hosting talks between the parties.

"The Security Council calls on the parties to
meet all elements of their Agreement in full. In
particular, the Council underlines the crucial
importance of the parties taking all necessary
measures to ensure, without delay, unhindered
humanitarian access and assistance to the Somali
people, and of the parties and their allies
terminating all acts of armed confrontation. The
Security Council states its support for the
implementation of the Agreement and its
intention to review that implementation
continuously.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
support for the African Union Mission to Somalia
(AMISOM) and urges again the international
community to provide financial resources,
personnel, equipment and services for the full
deployment of AMISOM.

"The Security Council takes note of the
parties' request in the Djibouti Agreement that the
United Nations, within a period of 120 days,
authorize and deploy an international
stabilization force. The Council further notes, in
this regard, communique's by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union of 29 June
2008, 8 August 2008 and 20 August 2008.
08-49576

"The Security Council, acknowledging
recent positive political developments in the
wake of the Djibouti Agreement, as confirmed by
Mr. Ould-Abdallah, reaffirms its willingness, as
set out in its resolution 1814 (2008), to consider,
at an appropriate time, a United Nations
peacekeeping operation to take over from
AMISOM, subject to progress in the political
process and improvement in the security situation
on the ground.

"The Security Council recalls the Secretary-
General's contingency planning for a United
Nations integrated peacekeeping mission in
Somalia, which recommends that plans be put in
place for the deployment of an international
stabilization force, in the framework of the
approach presented by the Secretary-General in
his report of 14 March 2008 (S/2008/l78).

"In this regard, the Security Council
requests that the Secretary-General elaborate on
his contingency plans and provide, in
consultation with the parties and other relevant
stakeholders, a detailed and consolidated
description of a feasible multinational force, its
mandate and derived tasks, to include, inter alia,
the size and geographical scope of that force,
08-49576

the

progressively deployed, and further provide a
detailed concept of operations for a feasible
United Nations peacekeeping operation.

"The Security Council further requests the
Secretary-General urgently to identify and
approach States that might contribute the
financial resources, personnel, equipment and
services required, stands ready to support the
Secretary-General in this regard, and calls upon
States to respond favourably.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to report on the
implementation of the Djibouti Agreement by the
parties, including an update on the conditions on
the ground, as well as on his planning, including
discussions with potential contributing States,
within 60 days."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2008/33.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.20 p.m.

