Mr. Stehelin (France) (Spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank the Ambassador of Spain for his
briefing on the quarterly activities of the Security

Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), which established sanctions with regard to
the Iranian nuclear programme.
Almost 20 months have passed since the adoption
of the Joint Action Plan in November 2013. We have
been involved with our partners in the E3+3 in intensive
discussions with Iran.

The interim agreement in April this year in Lausanne
marked an important step towards reestablishing
the confidence of the international community in
the exclusively peaceful purposes of Iran's nuclear
programme. But now those negotiations are entering
a crucial phase, since in principle an agreement is
supposed to be reached before the end of the month,
and it is undeniable that a lot remains to be done.

From the beginning, France has had a constant
and consistent position: Iran has every right to develop
nuclear energy for civilian purposes, but by no means
should it be able to obtain a nuclear weapon. All our
demands during the negotiations have been derived
from that stance. The aim of the negotiations is to reach
a robust agreement. That involves a long-term limitation
on Iran's ability to carry out research and development,
and a rigorous verification regime, which includes,
when necessary, military sites, as has already been
indicated by the Director-General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). That also involves the
possibility of an automatic return to sanctions in the
event of a Violation of Iran's commitments.

That is the position of France: a simple one that
is consistent with our rejection of nuclear proliferation
and our wish to preserve the security of the region. We
are therefore determined with our partners in the group
of six to reach a good agreement before the end of the
month, one that is robust and verifiable and that would
make it possible to ensure the exclusively peaceful
purposes of the Iranian nuclear programme. But Iran
must take courageous steps forward.

Such an agreement also includes renewed
cooperation with the IAEA, especially on the possible
military dimensions of Iran's nuclear programme. In
that regard, we regret the lack of substantial progress on
that front since 2014. The latest report of the Director-
General of the IAEA on the implementation of Iran's
guarantees notes that no new practical measures have

been proposed by Iran. The resolution of all issues
on the potential military dimensions of Iran's nuclear
programme is a key element for the re-establishment of
confidence and, therefore, for the long-term agreement
that we all want.

I wish to recall here that the Council's resolutions
on Iran remain fully in force, pending a comprehensive
solution to the proliferation crisis, as explicitly stated in
the Joint Plan of Action.

We were therefore concerned to read in the final
report of the Panel of Experts (S/2015/401, annex)
that several attempts were made by Iran to bypass
the sanctions, particularly the arms embargo that is
burdening the country. Such attempts are contrary to
the Council's resolutions and represent a destabilizing
factor in the Middle East. This makes clear that vigilance
remains necessary and that it would be irresponsible to
lower our guard in terms of Iran's actions.

We thank the Panel of Experts for its tireless work
and welcome the report, which is a valuable source of
information in assisting Member States to strengthen
implementation of the resolutions.

