Mr. Lukwiya (Uganda): I would like to thank the
Security Council for allowing my delegation to
participate in this debate on the important issue of
children and armed conflict. My delegation has
carefully studied and noted the seventh report of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
contained in document S/2007/757.

My delegation wishes to address itself
specifically to paragraphs 133, 134 and 135 of the
report, as well as to annex II of the report, in which,
once again, references are made to the Uganda
People's Defence Forces (UPDF), as well as to the
now-defunct local defence units, as parties that have
also been responsible for committing rape and other
grave sexual violence against children in the reporting
period.

It has been reported that, due to the lack of
effective monitoring at the local level, children have
continued to join the armed forces. We would like to
state that Uganda has evolved a very effective
mechanism to monitor recruitment into the armed

forces. The mechanism starts at the village level, with
the village chairman or head testifying to the character,
education and age of the potential recruit. A medical
examination is undertaken by a fully qualified medical
officer at the recruitment centre to verify both the age
and the medical condition of the applicant. Any recruit
found to be below the age of 18 years and medically
unfit is discharged. He or she is not allowed into the
forces. We are, however, cognizant of the fact that no
mechanism or system can be perfect. Uganda is,
however, determined to ensure that the system works
and does not allow children to join the armed forces,
contrary to the law and constitution of the land.

It has been stated that, during the reporting
period, 16 cases of recruitment and use of children
aged between 14 and 17 were detected. As a percentage
of the total force throughout the country, that is a very
small fraction, considering that some cases do slip
through the system. However, all efforts are made to
avoid that happening at all. Uganda handles such cases
appropriately through immediate demobilization and
sanctions against those individuals that assisted in the
violation. Demobilization and reintegration in such
circumstances are immediate. In that endeavour, we
work with UNICEF and civil society organizations.
The Government has built a large boarding primary
school in Gulu to facilitate the process. It affords
demobilized children an orderly return to normal
civilian life.

It has never been the official policy of the
military to occupy schools or any other educational or
social institutions. However, in a few isolated cases,
the conflict situation has led the army to occupy some
school structures abandoned by the general population
and students. Schools were constructed near camps for
the internally displaced to service children in the
vicinity. Structures of the former Baralegi primary
school in Okwang sub-county are currently occupied
by the army, as stated in the report. However, at the
time of initial occupation, it had been abandoned and
was in a state of disrepair; now, with the return of
peace to the area, many people are moving back. There
is a population that needs to have the school. Due to
the serious damage that they underwent, it is no longer
possible to use the same structures. New structures
have been constructed and others are under
construction. Those form the new school. The
community is therefore not deprived of educational
services, as the report seems to suggest.
With regard to the agreed action plan for the
prevention of the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
which was finalized in August 2007, I would like to
inform the Council that, on 2 November 2007, the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, as well as
the Chairman of the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, were furnished with a
matrix from my Government showing its achievements
as of August 2007, together with the agreed terms of
reference for the Uganda task force for monitoring and
reporting, which is headed by UNICEF. In doing so, we
believed that we, as a Government, were exercising
maximum cooperation with the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as
with all partners in the cause. We are therefore
disappointed as a Government to learn that our
dedication to the implementation of the same action
plan is being put into question.

The report alleges that there are children within
the ranks of the local defence units. Uganda wishes to
state that those units have been disbanded. Some of the
personnel have been integrated into the national army
and the police. Recruits were diligently vetted for
qualifications, which included, among other things,
successful completion of four years of secondary
school education, a minimum age of 18 years, and
medical fitness. That is not a claim, as the Secretary-
General's report states in paragraph 133; it is a
statement of fact. It therefore follows that all cases
reported about the presence of children in local defence
units are non-existent, since the institution has been
dissolved. It no longer exists. Furthermore, as a
non-existent entity, it should no longer be listed under
annex II.

Rape is a capital offence under both military and
civil Ugandan law. It is punishable by death if guilt is
proven. Moreover, reported cases of rape are always
investigated and tried accordingly. The UPDF Act
prescribes the death sentence for rape if the accused is
found guilty by an appropriate military tribunal.
Individual soldiers who have raped and been tried and
found guilty have had to face the death penalty.

Regarding rape and sexual offences committed by
people in internally displaced persons camps, we wish
to state that those are civilian cases, which should be
tried by civilian courts. In some cases, no conclusive
action has been taken for the following reasons: first,
problems regarding investigative institutional capacity

as a result of the 20 years of insurgency, which has
disrupted institutions, including the police and the
judiciary; secondly, unwillingness of witnesses to
speak out due to cultural inhibitions and fear of
retribution from fellow internally displaced persons,
given the severity of the punishment for the offender;
thirdly, failure of victims to cooperate with police
investigators due to fear of social stigma.

It is also alleged in the report that "children who
had escaped from [the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)]
were used for gathering intelligence before being
released in February 2007" (S/2007/757, para. 133).
Uganda wishes to state that whenever children are
rescued from the LRA, the Government forces
undertake a normal debriefing exercise. The exercise is
meant first and foremost to help establish the children's
areas of origin, education levels and age. That assists
the army officers in referring the children to the
relevant locations and organizations for psycho-social
rehabilitation. In some cases, however, those children
have information of military value, including the
location of LRA arms caches. In such situations, they
can help the army recover hidden arms, thus reducing
the capacity of the LRA to wage war. They are
immediately released upon the completion of any arms
recovery exercise. It is not the policy of the
Government or the UPDF to use children to gather
intelligence. What happens in that case is the careful
extraction by the UPDF of any actionable intelligence
information that the children have at the time of
reporting or rescue. They are not used to gather
intelligence, as reported in the report of the Secretary-
General.

It is also our view that Uganda should be de-
linked from the LRA, as the LRA is no longer
operating in Uganda. The international community, and
the Security Council in particular, should exert
maximum pressure on the LRA to release all women
and children within its ranks and in captivity.

Allow me to conclude by stating the view of the
Government of Uganda that the UPDF entry should be
removed from annex II of the report, given the
circumstances under which it was put there and the
measures we have taken to ensure that underage people
are not recruited into our armed forces. We find it a
little irritating for Uganda to be called upon year after
year to explain a situation that is no longer the case, as
if we were a guilty party. If this unjustified trend
continues, we know that it will only harm our
cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. We would not like that to happen.

