Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his briefing.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.

As of 1 January, Afghanistan has opened a
new chapter in its history. The Afghan people have
entered the transformation decade, fully assuming
responsibility for their security, with the first peaceful
and democratic transition of power and first ever
national unity Government. Nonetheless, further
perseverance from the Afghan authorities is critically
needed as the situation in the country remains volatile
and a number of formidable challenges loom.

The first and foremost task is to strengthen
Afghanistan's ailing economy, which poses a threat to
its stability and affects the Government's capacity to
carry out administrative functions and provide services.
In that regard, we strongly encourage President Ghani
and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah to press ahead
with good governance and other relevant reforms. The
road map for the way ahead is clearly agreed upon, most
notably in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework
and the recent paper of the Afghan Government on
the reform programme, entitled "Realizing Self-
Reliance". In particular, Afghan authorities must step
up the fight against corruption; the illicit economy, in
particular by boosting counter-narcotics efforts; and the
embezzlement of public funds. It must also significantly
improve revenue collection, while simultaneously
developing economic sectors 4 especially agriculture,
mining and services.

Secondly, ensuring security remains yet another
daunting task for the Afghan Government. The past
year and the first months of this year were marked with
record numbers of incidents and civilian casualties,
including among women and children. Almost every day
Afghan forces are challenged by insurgency activities,
armed clashes, targeted killings and suicide attacks. We
commend the resolve of Afghan National Security Forces
in thwarting attacks by anti-Government elements.
However, continued international assistance to further
develop Afghan security forces and institutions remains
essential. In that regard, we believe that the new NATO
non-combat, training, advisory and assistance mission
is another important contribution. But beyond that,
the appalling human cost borne by ordinary Afghans
underscores the necessity for an inclusive peaceful
resolution to the conflict. In that context, we welcome
President Ghani's leadership in calling for Afghan-
to-Afghan dialogue and building closer relations with
its neighbours, particularly Pakistan. We welcome the
new Administration's increased emphasis on regional
dialogue and cooperation.

Thirdly, to sustain the impressive progress on
development achieved since 2001, Afghanistan has to
continue tghe meaningful progress made on human
rights, and in particular on women's rights. We call
on Afghan authorities to deliver on their promises to
advance the position of women and girls in political,
economic and social life, including by appointing
women ministers and urgently developing a strategy
to fully implement the elimination of violence against
women law, including by providing services to victims
and access to justice. The United Nations has repeatedly
raised concerns over the illegal practice of arresting and
prosecuting women for so-called moral crimes. Special
focus must be placed on human rights and gender
issues in the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and
reconciliation process. The December 2014 meeting of
Chief Executive Officer Abdullah with the heads of
the provincial peace committees, which encouraged
greater participation by women in the peace process,
was a positive step.

Lastly, my delegation commends Mr. Ghani
and Mr. Abdullah for their leadership and spirit of
compromise. Lithuania urges the political leaders
to quickly conclude the process of a merit-based
appointment and the approval of senior Government
officials. Likewise, swift electoral reform is needed so
that it can take effect prior to the holding of the Wolesi
Jirga and the district council elections envisaged for
2015.

Notwithstanding the support of international
community, the primary responsibility for the future
of Afghanistan lies with the Afghans themselves. The
reform programme and commitments presented by the
Afghan unity Government are encouraging. Lithuania
stands ready to support its efforts by remaining
committed to the political, military and civilian support
to Afghanistan, including through participation in the
Resolute Support Mission, the EU Police Mission in
Afghanistan and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, as well as contributing to the Afghan
National Army trust fund. The interaction, synergies
and close cooperation among the United Nations, the
EU and NATO are of great importance as we continue
our efforts to promote durable peace and reconciliation
processes, stabilization and the development of the
country.

My delegation expresses its appreciation to the
Permanent Mission of Spain for resolution 2210 (2015)
,on the UNAMA mandate extension for one year, as
well as for its efficient facilitation of the negotiating
process. The continuous presence and role of UNAMA
and other United Nations agencies, including at the
provincial level, remain crucial for the development of
Afghanistan and the benefit of each and every Afghan.

