The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States.

We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto for his briefing and are particularly
grateful to Afghan youth representative Ramiz Bakhtiar
for sharing the critical and important perspective of
youth and civil society in Afghanistan, and especially
regarding the upcoming elections.

Last week, a man wearing a vest armed with
explosives walked into a crowd protesting a corrupt
local police commander in eastern Afghanistan. The
man blew himself up and killed around 70 other people.
Hundreds more were wounded. Earlier that same day,
a 14-year-old boy was killed and four others were
wounded when two bombs went off in front of a school
in Jalalabad.

This is the dangerous and difficult situation that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the people of Afghanistan confront as
Afghanistan approaches parliamentary elections in
October. Violent extremist groups are attempting to sow
fear and distrust among the Afghan people. No doubt,
their attacks will intensify. It seems they would like to
return to the zero-sum, tribal violence of the civil war
in the 1990s, which paved the way for the tyrannical
rule of the Taliban.

The United States fully supports and hopes
for timely, credible, and transparent parliamentary
elections in Afghanistan on 20 October, as well as
subsequent elections when the Afghan people will
choose their president in April 2019. But timely and
credible elections will not come about easily. Building
a democracy necessarily involves creating trust and
confidence among the people in the integrity of the
system, along with belief in the ability and willingness
of those who are elected to improve the lives of the
people. As a first step in that process, there must be
voter registration that is as accurate and transparent
as possible, ensuring that women have the opportunity
to participate and have their voices heard. And most
fundamentally, it depends on the safety of those who
would campaign, register and vote in the elections.

Today, preparations for the parliamentary and
presidential elections in Afghanistan are at a critical
stage. UNAMA plays an essential role in supporting
Afghanistan's electoral commissions as they prepare
for the vote. We want to specifically recognize and
thank Special Representative Yamamoto and his team
for their hard work under very difficult conditions. As
part of the preparation for timely and credible elections,
the United States welcomes the efforts of the Afghan
Government to advance a peace process with the
Taliban. The people ofAfghanistan are calling for peace.
President Ghani has responded to their call. The ball is
now in the Taliban's court. They must come to the table
and enter into peace talks without preconditions.

The Taliban face a decision - they can grow
obsolete in the old Afghanistan or they can thrive in
a new one. Not just the Taliban, but all of us, are at an
inflection point in the Afghan conflict. A prosperous
and secure future for Afghanistan can be created only
by and through the will of its people. This is the goal
to which the Security Council, international donors and
the international community more broadly must devote
themselves in the critical weeks and months ahead.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Turkey.

