Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.

We are holding this meeting in the open Chamber
today after reports of a series of chemical attacks in
eastern Ghouta within the past month, as the Al-Assad
regime continues its merciless bombing and killing
of civilians. Over the weekend, there were further
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Idlib, as
well as air strikes by pro-regime forces that reportedly
hit three hospitals, leaving doctors scrambling to
remove premature babies from their incubators in order
to move them. I cannot say that they were moving them
to safety, because the reality is that for the citizens of
Idlib and eastern Ghouta, nowhere is safe.

We are appalled by this violence and the reports
of deliberate targeting of civilians and civilian
infrastructure, and we call on all parties to the conflict
to uphold international humanitarian law and protect
civilians. The Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is already investigating
reports of the use of chemical weapons in recent weeks,
but establishing who is responsible for that use will
be much more difficult, because Russia has vetoed
the continuation of the independent, expert OPCW-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
three times, in order to protect the Al-Assad regime.
We would welcome any serious attempt to re-establish
a properly independent investigative and attribution
mechanism for continuing the JIM's meticulous work.
Sadly, we do not yet see that in the Russian proposal.
Any successor investigation must be empowered to
investigate all use of chemical weapons, whoever the
perpetrator may be. Yet the Russian proposal focuses
only on non- State actors. We have repeatedly condemned
Da'esh for its use of chemical weapons, which the JIM
clearly reported. But given Al-Assad's track record of
chemical-weapon use and its failure to comply with
the Chemical Weapons Convention, it is imperative to
ensure that any new mechanism also investigates the
use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime.

A second objection is the proposal that experts
would merely gather evidence, leaving the Council to
decide what it meant. No other United Nations expert
panel that I know of is specifically prohibited from
reaching conclusions and reporting to the Council on its
findings on what has happened. We are not specialists
on chemical weapons around this table. We rely on
independent, United Nations-selected expert panels.
The entire purpose of the JIM. was that an independent
panel would reach conclusions on the basis of the
evidence, taking the issue out of the hands of us, the
Member States and Council members, because we have
been unable to agree. Russia's proposal looks as if it is
designed to avoid the political embarrassment of having
to use its veto power to defend the indefensible when
independent bodies report on what has truly happened.
The underlying intent seems to be to ensure that there
are no clear conclusions in future reports.

Thirdly, we object to the proposal's demands that the
standard of proof should be beyond reasonable doubt.
That standard has not been used in any other comparable
past or current United Nations investigation. It is used
in relation to criminal prosecutions in courts of law,
which have significantly greater investigative powers
and independence than those envisaged in Russia's text.

Finally, the proposal insists on site visits, despite the
explicit provision in the Chemical Weapons Convention
for other ways to gather relevant evidence, recognizing
the difficulty of safe and timely visits. There is no
scientific basis for this proposal. It is simply an attempt
to hamstring future investigations and discredit the JIM.
Of course, Russia made much of the lack of a site visit
to Khan Shaykhun, despite the fact that the Al-Assad
regime handed over to the United Nations samples from
the site that contained chemical signatures unique to
regime sarin, obviating the need for such a visit. It is for
those reasons that the current text is unacceptable. The
JIM. set a high standard of impartiality and expertise.
We expect that standard from any future mechanism.

The Syrian regime, of course, claims not to have
used chemical weapons. Yet over the years two separate
reports from the JIM, under separate leadership panels,
drawing on a broad range of respected independent
international experts, concluded that the regime had
used chlorine at least three times - in Talmenes in April
2014 and in Sarmin and Qmenas in March 2015 - and
had used sarin to attack Khan Shaykhun in April 2017.
We should also remember the infamous attack in eastern
Ghouta in August 2013, when a separate United Nations
investigation found that sarin was used to kill hundreds
and injure thousands. That attack brought near-
universal international condemnation, and following
our concerted international pressure, Syria joined the
Chemical Weapons Convention. Syria promised, as it
was legally obliged to do, to destroy and abandon its
chemical-weapon programme. Yet it has been unable to
satisfy inspectors that it has done so. We have to ask
ourselves why that is. In 2013 Russia promised to act as
a guarantor for the Al-Assad regime's compliance with
the Chemical Weapons Convention. Yet month after
month we all sit here and hear that Al-Assad has not
done so. Why does Russia not compel the Syrian regime
to comply with its obligations and make it impossible
for it to use chemical weapons?

Tragically, for the people of Syria, the regime
continues to use chemical weapons with impunity. If
it is confirmed that Al-Assad has again used chemical
weapons on his own people, it would not only be
another entry in the catalogue of his war crimes, it
would also be another attack on us all, Members of
the United Nations who have worked for decades - in
the words of the Chemical Weapons Convention, for
the sake of all mankind - to completely exclude the
possibility of the use of chemical weapons. Throughout
history, our peoples have said "never again" - among
others, starting with the First World War battlefields,
in Ethiopia, in Manchuria and in Saddam Hussein's
attacks on Iran and on Iraqi Kurds. Let us, the members
of the Council, stand up for the peoples of the United
Nations, determined that such abhorrent chemical
weapons should never be used. Let us stand up for the
people of Syria and give them a real investigation into
those responsible for the use of chemical weapons - an
investigation that pursues justice for the horrific crimes
committed against them. Let us signal our determination
to pursue accountability by all means available, even
if one member of the Security Council is currently
preventing us from taking action here.

