Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all I would like to express my gratitude to you,
Sir, Prime Minister Hariri, for presiding over this
meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
statement.

While the pursuit of peace, development and
cooperation has become a major trend of our times, the
world has also witnessed the emergence of new
challenges to international peace and security. The
interlinking of traditional and non-traditional security
threats, the incessant outbreak of regional conflicts and
hot-spot issues, terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction are threats that we cannot
afford to ignore. Discrimination and prejudice against
religions and cultures have given rise to violent
conflicts and strife and have caused unprecedented
clashes and friction among civilizations. The
international community bears the common
responsibility of strengthening cooperation to respond
to those challenges, and it faces the arduous task of
bridging differences and seeking common
understanding.

China supports Lebanon's initiative to hold this
thematic debate and believes that this meeting will help
promote intercultural dialogue, enhance mutual
understanding and peaceful coexistence among
countries and maintain international peace and security.

Strengthening interfaith and intercultural
dialogue is in conformity with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations and is conducive to
preventive diplomacy, peaceful settlement of disputes
and post-conflict peacebuilding. It will also help the
United Nations better fulfil its responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security.

Here I would like to emphasize the following
points. First, different faiths and cultures should be
treated equally on the basis of mutual respect. While
faiths and cultures vary in terms of the era of their
origins and development, there is no hierarchy among
them in terms of merit. All are a crystallization of
human wisdom and have contributed to the progress
and development of human society and thus deserve
equal respect. Different faiths and cultures should learn
from each other and coexist peacefully.

Secondly, intercultural dialogue should be
strengthened in an open and inclusive spirit. History
has shown that dialogue with other civilizations leads
to mutual enrichment and development. In a post-crisis
situation, strengthening intercultural dialogue is highly
practical. Dialogue and discussion represent the best
way to resolve differences and prevent conflict.
Countries should adhere to the concepts of openness,
inclusiveness and cooperation, and strengthen dialogue
to overcome barriers, dispel misunderstandings and
resolve disputes in order to prevent or reduce outbreaks
of conflict.

Thirdly, we must show respect for differences and
settle conflicts by peaceful means. Conflicts often
result from the alienation, prejudice, discrimination
and even hatred that can arise from differences. Our
world should be varied yet harmonious. We believe
that we should recognize and accept the diversity of
our world and the differences among civilizations. We
are opposed to linking terrorism to any particular
nation, ethnic group or religion. The international
community should function on the basis of mutual
trust, mutual benefit, equality and cooperation. It
should use peaceful means, such as mediation,
negotiation and good offices, to resolve problems,
settle disputes and promote the solution of regional
hot-spot issues in order to build a harmonious family of
States.

China supports and actively participates in the
efforts of the international community to promote
interfaith and intercultural dialogue and cooperation,
and has been a constructive partner in multiple United
Nations initiatives and mechanisms relating to dialogue
among civilizations and the culture of peace. China is
willing to continue to work with the international
community to strengthen intercultural dialogue and
build bridges of communication and cooperation, with
a View to creating synergies promoting the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
advancement of common human development, and the
building of a harmonious world.

