Mr. El Othmani (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me, at the outset, Mr. President, to express to
you and to your friendly country our sincere and deep
appreciation for France's principled positions, its bold
initiatives and its prominent role as a permanent member
of the Security Council. The success of the French
presidency of the Council this month, culminating in
today's ministerial meeting, is eloquent testimony to
France's engagement and to the central role it plays in
the United Nations.

(spoke in Arabic)

It is our hope that this meeting will result in
a robust, unified commitment on the part of the
international community to extend a helping hand to
the Syrian people and to put an end to the spiral of
violence that it is living through. We also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson and Mr. Antonio Guterres,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for
their comprehensive briefings.

About 17 months ago, large numbers of Syrian
people from all sectors came out to peacefully voice
their legitimate demands for democracy and human
rights. They were met with oppression, violence and
the use of excessive force. Because of the failure of
the international community, especially the Security
Council, to deal resolutely and decisively with the
deteriorating situation in Syria, recent months have
seen the crisis develop into an armed conflict - a
conflict characterized by the use of heavy weapons,
tanks and warplanes against populated areas and by
the proliferation of kidnappings, arbitrary detentions,
extrajudicial executions and serious violations of
human rights and international law.

As the representative of the Group of Arab States
in the Security Council, the Kingdom of Morocco
has spared no effort, in coordination with other
Arab countries, to push for an end to the violence
and for finding a political solution that would stop
the bloodletting of the Syrian people, spare them the
scourges of war and ensure them the exercise of all
their rights under a democratic regime in which all
segments of Syrian society participate. To act on that
commitment, the Kingdom of Morocco contributed to
the Arab League observer mission and to the United
Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic. We did so in the hope, at a minimum, of
helping to achieve an end to the violence and finding
a political solution to the Syrian crisis. Morocco has
worked effectively in support of resolutions of the
Council and the General Assembly.

Faced with the unlikelihood ofa political settlement,
the widening scope of the violence now encompassing
most villages and towns in Syria and the grave threats
to Syrian civilians and to peace and security in the
region, the Kingdom of Morocco once again expresses
its profound concern over those serious developments
and reiterates its denunciation of the grave violations of
rights, especially the rights of women and children. We
call on the international community, led by the Security
Council, to adopt courageous decisions allowing for
a prompt intervention to end the violence, protect
civilians, stop the human rights violations and seek
a peaceful transfer of power. In coordination with its
brother Arab States and its fellow Council members,
the Kingdom of Morocco will continue to pursue those
objectives.

We commend the tireless efforts oer. Kofi Annan
towards an abatement of the crisis. We also congratulate
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi on his appointment as Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States. We wish him success in his mission in the
service of the interests of our brother Syrian people and
in restoring stability to the region.

It is with great sadness and regret that we follow
the bitter humanitarian situation our brothers and
sisters in Syria are living through, manifesting itself
especially in the acute shortage of food, potable
water, housing, sanitation, sewage treatment and
other necessities of life. According to United Nations
data, more than 3 million people have been harmed
by the conflict, including the 2.5 million who are in
need of urgent humanitarian assistance and the more
than 1 million internally displaced persons who face
conditions of abject poverty. Moreover, United Nations
reports have documented that children have been
deliberately subjected to serious violations such as
arbitrary detention, abuse, torture, mutilation, murder
and the use of them as human shields. Women have also
been subjected to various kinds of violations, including
sexual and physical assault and arbitrary detention.

Despite the support provided by the United Nations,
its humanitarian organizations and non-governmental
organizations, the humanitarian assistance shortage
remains acute because of the lack of financial resources
and, in many regions, because of the difficulty in
reaching those in need due to the fighting. It is
incumbent upon all parties to honour the requirements
of international humanitarian law as it applies to
the protection of civilians - especially women and
children - and to human rights.

The High Commissioner for Refugees informed
us today that more than 200,000 Syrian refugees have
been registered in four neighbouring States. That is in
addition to scores of thousands who are unregistered.
The escalating violence in Syria and the systematic and
ongoing use of heavy weapons and aircraft push that
number up daily. On behalf of the Kingdom of Morocco,
I would like to take this opportunity to express to the
fraternal and friendly States of Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon
and Iraq our great appreciation for standing by the
Syrian people during this difficult and crucial period
and for generously hosting Syrian refugees in spite of
the fragile economic situation they are experiencing.

The international community is being called upon
today to take a strong position that provides for several
elements.

The first is to ensure secure access on the ground
for international relief organizations in order to provide
assistance to suffering civilians, including necessary
food and medical support. Prohibiting such access is a
crime and its perpetrators must be punished.

The second is to find a way to protect internally
displaced persons and provide them with humanitarian
assistance.

The third is to provide adequate logistical and
material support to assist States hosting Syrian refugees.

The fourth is to urgently carry out an independent
investigation into the brutal massacres and violations
that have been continuously perpetrated against
civilians. The most recent of those was the Darayya
massacre, which raised the ire and condemnation of the
international community.

The final element entails reporting the results
of that an investigation so that the international
community can take the necessary measures against
the perpetrators.

In view of the bonds of brotherhood and the
duty of human solidarity, the Kingdom of Morocco,
in accordance with the express instructions of His
Majesty King Mohammed VI and in solidarity with
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, has established
a multipurpose field hospital in the Zaatari refugee
camp, including the necessary logistical equipment
to treat thousands of refugees. Through the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), Morocco has also supplied emergency
food and medical assistance to refugees on Jordanian
territory. The Kingdom of Morocco remains in
contact with Syrian relief organizations, neighbouring
countries and UNHCR and will continue to increase its
contribution to the relief efforts.

Finally, as members of the Security Council it
is our duty to seek to overcome existing divisions in
order to achieve a comprehensive political solution to
this prolonged crisis, while taking into account the
main interests of the Syrian people in line with their
aspirations to a better future and a guaranteed system
of rotating power in which all segments of Syrian
society may participate.

