Mr. A] Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I am
honoured to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), in Kuwait's
capacity as Chair the OIC Council of Foreign Ministers
at its current session.

At the outset, I am pleased to congratulate you, Sir,
on your successful presidency of the Security Council
during this month, and on the concept note (S/2015/678, annex) prepared on the subject of this important
meeting. We also thank the delegation of Nigeria, a
member State ofthe OIC, for presiding over the Council
and the successful conduct of its work during the past
month.

The settlement of conflicts in the Middle East
and North Africa and countering terrorist threat in
the region are the prime concern of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and its members. Those issues
top the list of priorities in the Organization's meetings,
and many meetings have been held to discuss them.
The OIC has adopted many resolutions and initiatives
to deal with the issues in regular and extraordinary
sessions. It has made efforts in supporting those of the
United Nations and its various bodies aimed at finding
solutions to the conflicts that have spread across the
region and threaten international peace and security.

The circumstances prevailing in the region
are exceptional and difficult. There are enormous
unprecedented security and political risks and
challenges. The violence and turmoil that erupted
in more than one country over the past few years are
still going on unabated and have caused utter chaos
and instability, producing dangerous fallout and
consequences that everyone is suffering from.

Due to the instability and the continued circle of
violence and fighting, many countries in the region
have witnessed a remarkable decrease in various levels
of economic and social growth, thus exacerbating the
plight ofthe peoples in the affected countries. Currently,
millions of people are displaced persons, refugees
or immigrants. For the first time, the international
community is facing a humanitarian crisis of great
magnitude, wherein the number of people in the world
in need of humanitarian assistance exceeds 60 million,
the majority of whom are from the Middle East and
North Africa.

The tragic circumstances witnessed by the region
have provided fertile ground for terrorist and extremist
groups, who exploit them to disseminate their aberrant
and destructive thoughts. They have used parts of the
areas under their control as a launching pad to commit
the most horrible crimes, such as killing, displacing
and terrorizing the innocent and committing serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law.

Some terrorist groups justify their heinous and
extremist acts as being inspired by the teachings of the
true Islamic religion, although they are far removed
from the principals and the basic concepts of the
tolerant Islamic Sharia. Such acts run counter to all
moral values and principles and pillars of our Islamic
teachings. The Islamic religion is a religion of love and
peace that calls for tolerance, solidarity and moderation;
it rejects fanaticism and extremism. Therefore, all the
Islamic States condemn terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations wherever it is committed, regardless of
its motives and justifications.

The Organization also rejects linking the crimes
committed by such groups with the Islamic religion.
Terrorism has no religion and is not tied to any one
country, race or culture. It cannot be fought through
confrontation or conflict with a great religion like Islam,
stoking feelings ofhatred and incitement and promoting
erroneous concepts about Islam that contribute to the
growth of Islamophobia across Western countries,
because of which millions of members of the Islamic
communities suffer.

In the framework of combating terrorism and
extremism, the OIC has established partnerships with
international and regional organizations and with
relevant governmental centres for combating terrorism
and extremism. It has convened numerous meetings and
taken initiatives to highlight the values of moderation,
justice and equality and is paying the necessary
attention to studying the phenomenon of terrorism
and extremism. The OIC has devised practical plans
to deal with the various dimensions and roots of that
phenomenon. In addition, an emergency meeting of
the OIC Executive Committee was convened at the
ministerial level on 15 February 2015. Another special
meeting was held in the State of Kuwait on 15 May
2015 to develop an active strategy to counter terrorism,
Violent extremism and Islamophobia.

The failure of the international community,
represented by the Security Council, to resolve
conflicts and grave political and security crises in the
region has contributed to the exacerbation of suffering
and to a further deterioration of the economic and
social conditions. As time passes, those crises have
become more intertwined, difficult and complicated,
thus increasing the costs incurred by the international
community in attempts to resolve them and to limit
their consequences and their negative impact on
international peace and security.

Perhaps the most outstanding example of that failure
is the fact that the Palestinian question, the core of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, has remained without solution.
The stalemate in the peace process and the persistence
of the occupying Power in pursuing its practices and
settlement policies, its blockade of the Gaza Strip and
its continued aggression against the Palestinian people
and their properties - in gross violation ofinternational
law and United Nations resolutions and without any
accountability for or condemnation of such acts - have
created ofa state of despair and distrust in international

justice. That failure has also undermined credibility of
the international community with regard to standing
by the Palestinian people in their quest to obtain their
legitimate rights. The latest aggression against the
sanctity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, without any regard for
the feelings ofthe Islamic world, is merely one link in a
chain of oppressive and systematic measures to Judaize
the city of Jerusalem and alter its demographic nature.
In conclusion, we call upon the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities, as stipulated by the Charter
of the United Nations, and to work on implementing its
resolutions in support of the rights of the Palestinian
people. That includes their right to self-determination
and the establishment of an independent State on their
territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as
the full Israeli withdrawal from Palestinian and Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including the Syrian
Arab Golan and the occupied Lebanese territories, and
finding an equitable and just solution to the question
of the Palestinian refugees, according to the relevant
resolutions of international legitimacy.

