Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to express my gratitude to Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing on the ICC and the crimes
committed in Libya.

The Libyan authorities believe that the restoration
of justice and the fight against impunity are the
cornerstones of efforts to bring about national
reconciliation and stability. That objective cannot
be met through national efforts alone, especially in
the light of the precarious situation of the country's
institutions and the complex demands imposed due to
the transitional phase.

We welcome the support that has been received by
the Libyan authorities from the United Nations and from
friendly nations, as well as the understanding between
the Libyan judicial authorities and the ICC. Moreover,
we are even more optimistic now that we have read the
report of the Prosecutor on the cooperation between
her Court and various countries aimed at reaching
creative solutions, given the security gaps faced by the
investigations in Libya and the difficulties encountered
in trying to restore the rule of law in the country.

As I have said before in the Council, the International
Criminal Court is a significant and necessary partner
for Libya at this stage, in particular in restoring justice
and fighting impunity, particularly with respect to the
serious crimes committed in Libya since 15 February
2011. The memorandum of understanding signed
between the two parties at the beginning of this month
crystallizes their partnership and provides for burden-
sharing in investigations and trials.
The judicial authorities in Libya have come a long
way in terms ofinvestigations and trials in the cases of
perpetrators of the most heinous crimes committed in
Libya who are currently detained in Libya. However,
those authorities are encountering some difficulties
with respect to investigating cases against people
who are outside of Libya due to non-cooperation by
the States where those people are residing. Some of
the high-level authorities of the former system who
fled to neighbouring countries continue to engage in
activities aimed at destabilizing Libya. They do so
by promoting discord and massacres, and they use, to
that end, property pillaged from the Libyan people.
Unfortunately, the countries in which they are residing
have not made enough efforts to follow the money
trail and freeze their funds, in violation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council in that respect.

With regard to paragraph 21 of the Office of
the Prosecutor's report, we are pleased about the
collection of testimony concerning suspects residing
outside the country and concerning trials. However,
we reitereate the responsibility of pro-Al-Qadhafi
forces living outside Libya. We are very committed to
judicial complementarity between the Libyan judicial
system and close cooperation between Libya's General
Prosecutor and the Prosecutor ofthe ICC, with a view to
restoring justice and combating impunity in the context
of stabilizing Libya's institutions and promoting peace
in society.

In addition to Libya's respect for the decisions
handed down by the International Criminal Court,
our intention is to cooperate with the Court as much
as possible. Nevertheless, above and beyond the
judicial context, the televised images of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi threatening people on 20 February 2011 are
still very fresh in the minds of our people, especially
the families of the victims. Those families tend to place
responsibility for murder and destruction throughout
the country squarely on the shoulders of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. And they want to
see justice done to them.

No Government, regardless of its popularity, can
accept a trial taking place outside Libya, as that would
destabilize the peace of our society, which is quite
precarious. Indeed, it might even pose a threat to the
lives of the perpetrators of the crimes. The Libyan
judiciary has begun trials against against Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Al-Senussi, and it is clear that the
international criteria for justice will be respected,
either in the Al-Qadhafi case or in cases concering
some of his accomplices, including Al-Senussi. We
hope that the International Criminal Court will very
soon recognize Libya's responsibility in terms of
trying those perpetrators and rendering justice and
accountability for those two men.

Libya is deeply committed to the rule of law, in
spite of the exceptional circumstances prevailing in
the country. The Libyan people are clear about the fact
that the path to prosperity includes bearing witness to
the truth, restoring justice and compensating victims.
Without justice, it is impossible to bring about national
reconciliation; without national reconciliation, it
is impossible to restore stability. Without stability,
it is impossible to achieve development; without
development, our people will not enjoy prosperity.

Our authorities are working as hard as they can to
restore security using the various elements in place,
including the army, security forces and the judiciary.
That is taking place in spite the difficulties faced by
the Government in connection to being able to establish
a national army and reforming the police and security
services. Nevertheless, it has gone a long way towards
bringing about a reform of the judiciary through the
separation of power, especially between the executive
and legislative branches of Government, and by issuing
indictments for serious crimes in accordance with the
law, including the transitional law. The latter is geared
towards bringing about national reconciliation and
helping the country emerge from the current phase and
move to a new stage of prosperity and development - all
the while holding accountable the perpetrators of the
most serious crimes, including crimes against humanity
and genocide.

In addition, we have criminalized torture, while
the Minister of Justice is also addressing the issue
of compensating victims. We hope that the relevant
legislation will be adopted very soon. The national
transitional Government is taking the necessary steps
to put in place an entire transitional justice system. We
hope that, very soon, we will be able to restore overall
security, as well as administrative security, in order to
restore the rule oflaw as soon as possible.

The Libyan Government fully understands the
concerns of human rights organizations, as well as
the concerns of some countries with regard to certain
excesses that have taken place in detention centres
over the past couple of years. The competent Libyan
authorities have affirmed that they will not neglect
any violations of human rights: all of them will be
addressed, in spite of the fact that those are individual,
isolated events. The international community, civil
society organizations and others have noted that cases
of human rights violations are constantly decreasing,
which is due to the law just adopted on torture and
other crimes.

The Libyan Government stresses punishing the
perpetrators of all crimes and ending impunity. We
are working energetically to bring all perpetrators
of crimes to justice. However, we face a number
of security problems - of which all members are
aware - resulting from the murder of judges and army
and security officers. That is a great challenge for our
authorities, as is the use of weapons by some elements
intent on impeding the export of gas and oil from Libya.
Those elements are attempting to use to their own ends
the flexibility of the Libyan authorities over the past
two years, aimed at avoiding further bloodshed.

We would like to thank the Prosecutor and the ICC
for their efforts to cooperate with my country. We very
much aspire to the same goals. We hope for more support
from the Security Council, especially with regard to
encouraging countries that have not yet done so to send
all suspected criminals back to Libya in order that their
cases may be prosecuted in our country - people who
are responsible for very grave crimes. We also await
further support in terms of freezing assets and helping
us to restore security and the rule of law and protect
judges.

