Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Iraq would
like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Sameh Hassan
Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab
Republic of Egypt. I would also like to express our
condolences to the Government and the people of Egypt
in the wake of the killing of Egyptian policemen by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

I thank the Arab Republic of Egypt for convening a
meeting on this important subject relating to combating
terrorism. We often focus on the operational and
military aspects of terrorism at the expense of the
intellectual dimension. We also welcome and commend
the clarity and frankness of Egypt's concept paper
(S/2016/416, annex), which clearly outlines the elements
in the current dialogue.

Today an area of Baghdad was hit hard by a
number of car bombs, which killed more than 100
people - women, children, merchants and others. Such
suicide attacks are among the tools used by terrorists
to spread their erroneous ideologies. Their watchwords
are killing and destruction and we thank the States that
have expressed their condolences today and shared our
pain at the loss of so many innocent civilians.

Violent extremist ideologies are a direct threat to
international peace and security. They are damaging to
peace, social cohesion and the stability of States. We are
therefore obliged to adopt a well-defined approach to
dealing with such challenges, based on a clear strategy
and declared positions. I would like to point out that
the adoption of curricula that call for making takfiri
accusations of others, and spreading erroneous takfiri
religious fatwas and concepts through social media, will
foster such distortions both in thinking and ideology,
which can lead those influenced by them to resort to
terrorism in its various forms and manifestations as
a way to impose such thoughts - thoughts that are a
serious threat to international peace and security and
human civilization.

This is what we must do in order to participate in
the international community's efforts to establish a
global strategy aimed at combating ideological, takfiri
terrorist thinking and messaging. First, we must identify
the sources and religious and ideological foundations of
terrorism. Secondly, we should ensure that ideologies
that hark back to old extremist views expounded in
books that some publishing houses have printed and
reprinted again and again must be confronted. Thirdly,
the international community must differentiate
between respect for freedom of thought, as it is agreed
on internationally, and for takfiri ideological thought,
which calls for killing and repressing anyone who does
not believe in an extremist ideology. Repressing such
ideologies and preventing them from spreading is not a
violation of people's right to freedom of opinion.

Furthermore, the only way to counter terrorism is
to confront the madrasas and takfiri centres that exhort
the killing of others. People are only lured by aims that
can be attained, and if those objectives are extremist,
terrorism will certainly follow. We believe that the
world strategy against terrorist ideology must be based
on the following measures.

First, we need an international list of books and
publications disseminating takfiri thought and terrorist
ideology that are liable to confiscation by States
members of the United Nations and whose sale should
be prohibited by national legislation criminalizing the
publication of such books. Secondly, States suffering
from international terrorism should receive assistance
to establish mechanisms and initiatives allowing all
stakeholders to combat takfiri sources of terrorism
in their national communities. Thirdly, best practices
and lessons learned need to be applied in combating
the takfiri message of violence, in cooperation with
other States. Fourthly, experts or writers in the field of
religion - people who truly understand the religious
ideas used by extremists to spread their ideology -must
implement such a plan.

Terrorist organizations such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Nusra Front, Boko
Haram and Al-Qaida are perpetrating the most heinous
forms of destruction and killing in the name of Islam.
Islam washes its hands of those people. It is the duty
of Governments and religious people everywhere
to counter takfiri extremist thinking and distorted
fatwas. Persons of moderate faith must fight against the
message whose aim is to eliminate others.

In conclusion, we thank Egypt as Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. We also thank the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
for its field visit to Iraq and for the first meeting held to
brief States on Iraq's needs in combating terrorism and
extremist thinking.

