Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
conveys its deepest condolences to the victims of the
terrorist attacks that recently took place in Afghanistan
and the United Kingdom. We hope that the injured have
a swift recovery. China strongly condemns terrorist
acts in all their forms.

China commends Bolivia's initiative to convene
this high-level open briefing on preventive diplomacy
and transboundary waters. China welcomes President
Morales Ayma as he presides over the meeting. We also
thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.

Water is essential for human survival and the
sustainable development of economies and societies.
Transboundary water resources affect the common
interests of river basin countries or countries within
the lower or upper reach of river basins. Enhanced
transboundary water resource cooperation is conducive
to promoting regional security and stability, ecological
conservation and sustainable development. I would like
to emphasize the following three points.

First, it is important to strengthen development
and the protection of transboundary water resources.
We must avoid conflicts by utilizing water resources
reasonably. Countries in transboundary water basins
should bear in mind the importance of safeguarding
regional peace and security in the spirit of win-win
cooperation through various means, such as improving
disaster prevention and increasing agricultural
efficiency. We must take an integrated approach
towards soundly developing, reasonably allocating,
conserving and efficiently using transboundary water
resources, with a view to comprehensively enhancing
our ability to ensure water security. We must enable
the sharing of water resources in order to promote
win-win cooperation.

Secondly, enhanced dialogue and consultations

among countries in river basins represent effective
means of managing transboundary water resources. As
parties directly involved in transboundary water issues,
countries in river basins should make an effort to build
and improve coordination mechanisms. They must step
up their communications with respect to transboundary
waters, foster mutual trust and deal with disputes in
a timely and proper manner. The United Nations and
regional organizations should fully respect the wills
of the countries concerned. In view of the specific
contexts on the ground, they should play a constructive
role of promotion. They should help those countries
in river basins defuse tensions and build consensus in
order to make transboundary water resources a subject
of regional cooperation.

Thirdly, we should deepen international cooperation
on international water resources and step up capacity-
building for developing countries. It is important to
strengthen international water resource cooperation
arrangements. We must put into place a solid legal
framework for transboundary water cooperation.
We should further support the United Nations High-
level Working Group on Water Resources, the High-
level Panel on Water Resources and peace, and other
mechanisms in their work, actively provide technical
assistance to developing countries and improve water
resource management and the sustainable use of
water, all with a view to fostering synergy among the
international community with respect to water.

Great emphasis should be placed on addressing
issues of water shortages in Africa. We should support
African countries in cooperating on transboundary
water resources and help them build water conservancy
infrastructure, all in order to bring concrete benefits to
African people. The protection ofwater resources should
be incorporated into the framework of peacebuilding
in order to ensure water security in post-conflict
situations. Along with the rest of the international
community, China stands ready to continue promoting
the sustainable development and utilization of water
resources so that transboundary waters can serve as
pillars of cooperation and peace, thereby making even
greater contributions to the prosperity and development
of humankind.

