Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to align myself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Venezuela on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The Israeli occupation of Palestinian lands is
central to every conflict in the Middle East. That
injustice has continued for more than seven decades
and has been exacerbated by Israeli expansionism and
aggressive policies towards the Palestinians and the
region. Any attempt to exclude the issue from Security
Council debates is simply a denial of obvious facts and
the suffering of innocent people.

The Israeli regime's entire history has been defined
by acts of aggression towards its neighbours and other
countries in the Middle East and beyond that have
occurred at least 14 times since 1948. Emboldened by
the support of the new United States Administration,
the Israeli authorities have been questioning and
challenging the Palestinians' inalienable right to
their homelands as never before. That aggression has
continued on a daily basis, the latest episode being a
brutal crackdown on the oppressed nation of Palestine
under the pretext of preventing Palestinian worshippers
from entering the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The Israeli regime
has continued to arrogantly and flagrantly violate
dozens of Security Council resolutions, from resolution
54 (1948) to resolution 2334 (2016), as well as many
other resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, the
Human Rights Council and specialized United Nations
agencies on illegal settlement activities. The violations
are made possible by the international community's
irresponsible granting of total impunity to the regime.

Israel also continues to flout all the international
regimes designed to govern weapons of mass
destruction by refusing to adhere to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons
Convention. The nuclear weapons in its hands represent
the most serious threat there is to the security of every
State in the Middle East. World Powers, especially the
United States, are undermining the stabilization and
counter-terrorism efforts that they claim to champion
by dumping untold amounts of beautiful military
equipment in the hands of irresponsible State and
non-State actors in the service ofadventurist projections
of power. The profits that these wealthy countries reap
from such transfers have come at a tremendous cost to
the region's security and its people.

The United States and its allies are bombing Syria
and Yemen, using cluster munitions or enforcing
blockades of humanitarian aid under the guise of
restoring legitimacy. Such actions are the seeds of new
conflicts. The world remembers vividly how the last
United States invasion in the Middle East, launched on
false pretences based on allegations of the existence
of weapons of mass destruction, resulted in the deaths
of more than half a million people in Iraq and in the
rebirth of Da'esh. When is the Council is going to seek
accountability for those who created and support the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and Da'esh and its affiliated groups,
or for their role in the proliferation of terrorist activities
in the Middle East and around the globe?

Iran has always supported efforts to resolve the
Syrian conflict diplomatically and has advocated for the
self-determination of the Syrian people. Our assistance
to the Syrian Government is geared towards counter-
terrorism and de-escalation. Our participation in the
Astana, International Syria Support Group and Geneva
processes is testament to that. We continue to welcome
any genuine effort to help stabilize the situation on the
ground, as a prerequisite for any political process that
will enable the Syrian people to decide their own future.

Today we heard some unsubstantiated allegations
about my country that I categorically reject as part of
the misinformation and propaganda campaign against
Iran that has been designed and perpetrated with
hysteria by Israel and various countries of the region,
including some that wholeheartedly supported Saddam
Hussein's aggression against Iran.

I would like to conclude on a rare happy note by
offering our heartfelt congratulations to the brave
people and Government of Iraq on the liberation of
Mosul from the takfiri Da'esh terrorist group that has
wreaked havoc not only in Iraq but in the entire region.

