Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): At the outset, I wish to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Acting Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham, as well as both of their teams, for all the work that they are doing under very difficult circumstances. We come here every month and hear these briefings, which normally swing between optimism and pessimism, but we all know the underlying realities of the situation in Yemen and the risks that the Yemeni people face. In that connection, I have to say that I find it astonishing that the kind of fighting that both Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Rajasingham have described today continues to take place. I want to begin by echoing both Mr. Griffiths' and Mr. Rajasingham's pleas to all parties for the fighting to stop and for de-escalation to begin. As Mr. Griffiths said, the process must be public, accountable and nationwide. We have to enter into more and broadernegotiations that actually make tangible progress. The United Kingdom calls upon all the parties to please act in good faith, engage in the process and seize the opportunity to ensure that 2020 is the year we bring this dreadful conflict to a close. Mr. Griffiths has laid out the road map to that destination and we urge the parties to follow it without delay. I also want to echo what Mr. Griffiths said about his time in Ma'rib - the conflict cannot be solved on the battlefield. In that connection, I wish to mention the continuing obstructions placed on the Redeployment Coordination Committee by the Houthis. I note the announcement today that the Government of Yemen has suspended its participation in the Committee. Less engagement is not aroute towards peace in Al-Hudaydah or Yemen as a whole. Again, the United Kingdom urges and implores all the parties to constructively cooperate with Lieutenant General Abhiyit Guha and the United Nations Mission to support the Hodeidah Agreement. There is one positive development in that there has been increased engagement between Saudi Arabia and Oman - at least, that is how it seems. Increased dialogue between regional actors is key for stability, not just in Yemen but in the region as a whole. Regarding humanitarian access, I_ think Mr. Rajasingham is absolutely right to cite the issue in the context of international humanitarian law. The fact that the number of children's casualties has risen from one in five to one in four is shameful. It should horrify us all and urge us to redouble our efforts. On the difficult issue of the operating environment for humanitarian actors, I know there have been some small signs of improvement in the north of Yemen, but much remains to be done. We call on the Houthis to deliver on the minimum operating requirements that the international community has clearly set out. The world's worst humanitarian crisis cannot be allowed to deteriorate any further. We look to the United Nations and the international community to remain united in response to access constraints, which we saw was possible at the helpful donor meeting in Brussels on 13 February. Any plans to scale back assistance should be fully coordinated in order to limit the impact on Yemenis in need. I wanted to echo what Mr. Rajasingham said about the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Again, it is incredible that we come here every month and every month we hear how precarious the situation with that tanker is, yet nothing gets done. So, while I know negotiations are under way to find a diplomatic way forward, I once again call on the Houthis to either allow the removal of the oil or allow a repair mission to proceed. Continued Houthi inaction on this issue is nothing short of reckless. They are playing dice with people's lives and the environment in a very important part of the world. Such huge environmental and humanitarian damage must be avoided and all steps must be taken to that end. I followed with interest what was said about the economy. We are very concerned that the Central Bank of Yemen may run out of foreign currency reserves in the next few weeks, which will of course have dire humanitarian and political consequences. Significant external financial assistance to the Central Bank on the scale of $1 billion to $2 billion dollars, we believe, is urgently needed so that imports can come in. I heard what Mr. Rajasingham said about the banknotes, which is obviously a situation that needs to be resolved quickly. The currency needs to stabilize so that ordinary Yemenis can afford the food and medical supplies they need. We look to the Government of Yemen to urgently come up with a credible and transparent plan that reassures potential donors of their investments to the Yemeni people. Again, I think that this is an issue on which we are drawing closer and closer to the precipice, so we really do need to take action. Lastly, if I may, I would like to say something about COVID-19. The last thing Yemen needs is an outbreak of that virus. I note the increasing restrictions that many States are implementing in the region. It is good to know that United Nations agencies are taking steps to ensure that the effect on their work is as limited as possible.
