Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Albania, as well as Ukraine, align themselves with
this statement.

We thank the Security Council for unanimously
adopting resolution 2315 (2016) renewing the mandate
of the European Union-led peacekeeping force's
Operation Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina for
one year. I join other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Council and
assure him of the European Union's continued support.
I also welcome the Permanent Representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and thank him for his statement.

The year 2016 is a very important year for Bosnia
and Herzegovina's European Union prospects. On
15 February, the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
submitted the country's application for EU membership.
On 20 September, the EU Council decided to ask for the
Commission's opinion on that membership application.
This decision marks an important milestone for the
European integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
follows the joint efforts of the country's leadership
at all levels, demonstrating their commitment to the
reforms, answering to citizens' demand for change and
moving closer to the European Union.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has demonstrated a
serious commitment and readiness to take difficult
political decisions in order to meaningfully implement
the Reform Agenda, an ambitious set of socioeconomic,
rule of law and public administration reforms.

Together with our international partners, including
the international financial institutions, we provided
clear incentives to move forward with reforms of labour
laws, the pension system and banking regulations, as
well as long-term improvements ofthe business climate
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Currently, Bosnia and
Herzegovina's economy is showing potential for growth
in the next three to four years.

It is essential to keep the momentum going
regarding both effective reforms and the EU integration
process. The next stages will be equally demanding.
The Reform Agenda will pass into its second stage,
where much remains to be done to improve the political
atmosphere in the country, rule of law issues and public
administration. The reply of Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities to the comprehensive list of questions
prepared by the European Commission will provide the
basis for the assessment of the country's membership
application and its capacity to meet the criteria set by
the Copenhagen European Council of 1993 and the

conditions of the Stabilization and Association process.

This is also an election year for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Although the local elections of2 October
were generally conducted in an orderly manner, they
unfortunately brought to the surface persisting political
divisions and challenges that have the potential to
undermine stability in the country. The irregularities
and isolated violent incidents that occurred should
be investigated by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities without any delay. Once more, elections in
Mostar did not take place due to disagreements on the
electoral requirements.

The European Union regrets the unlawful holding of
an entity-level referendum on Republika Srpska Day, in
violation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court decision of 17 September. The referendum
caused unnecessary tensions and challenged the rule of
law. Such action also distracts attention from the social
and economic problems that people throughout Bosnia
and Herzegovina face on a daily basis. The European
Union encourages all political actors and institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to resolve this issue through
the established legal processes and constructive
dialogue and within the existing constitutional
framework. It urges the parties, in accordance with
the Peace Agreement, to abide by their commitment to
cooperating fully with all institutions involved in the
implementation of the peace settlement, as described
in the Peace Agreement, including the Constitutional
Court ofBosnia and Herzegovina. It also more generally
recalls that under the Peace Agreement, Bosnia and
Herzegovina consists ofthe two entities that exist legally
by virtue of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution,
which does not allow either entity to secede.

Next year will be an election-free year in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and I would like to take this
opportunity to encourage all parties to resolve pending
issues that present a challenge to the respect of human
rights and democratic institutions, and to embark on
further and deeper socioeconomic reforms. Beyond the
general need to ensure the further implementation of
the adopted reforms and to build a solid track record,
one area in need of a strong focus in the coming
period is the rule of law, including the fight against
corruption and organized crime, addressing any
outstanding shortcomings of the judiciary and the need
for its depoliticization, impartiality and independence,
including in the prosecution of war crimes. In that
respect, the European Union is concerned over recent
cases of the glorification of persons convicted for the
gravest crimes against humanity. All political leaders
and institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina have a
responsibility to assess wartime events honestly, in the
interests of truth, reconciliation and a peaceful future.

I would also like to encourage the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to work towards the
implementation of the rulings of court institutions,
especially of the European Court of Human Rights
case of Sejdie and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina
and related rulings, as well as of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which will be an
important factor in moving forward its European
agenda and contribute to establishing a democratic
and well-functioning society in which the equality
of all constituent peoples and citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is warranted.

The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country. The
European Union will continue to use all available
instruments to support Bosnia and Herzegovina's
stability and progress. While the overall security
situation has remained relatively calm and stable,
stability has not been fully entrenched. The European
Union welcomes the continued presence of Operation
Althea, which retains the capability to contribute to
the deterrence capacity of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities if the situation so requires, while focusing
on capacity-building and training. In this regard, as part
of the overall EU strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the European Union confirms its readiness at this stage
to maintain the executive military role of Operation
Althea to support Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities
in maintaining a safe and secure environment, under a
renewed United Nations mandate.

The European Union invited its High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to present a
strategic review in autumn next year, as a basis for
internal discussion within the EU on options for the
future of the Operation, also bearing in mind Bosnia
and Herzegovina's progress in its EU integration
process and taking into account the security situation
on the ground.
As the country's stability continues to strengthen
and further progress is achieved in reforms and on
the EU path, the European Union looks forward to
continuing, in the appropriate forum, the discussion with
the international community on the reconfiguration of
the international presence. In this regard, the European
Union calls on the authorities ofBosnia and Herzegovina
to meet the outstanding objectives and conditions for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative.

In conclusion, over the two decades that the
Council has been discussing the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we have witnessed substantial progress
in the country in all fields: stability, democracy,
security, economic development and EU integration.
Still, much more needs to be accomplished in terms
of improving the daily lives of citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and of reconciliation among citizens, as
well as the responsible behaviour of all members of the
political leadership in the country. But we believe that
the progress the country achieves on its EU integration
process will catalyse reconciliation and the resolution
of chronic issues, addressing in parallel urgent demands
for comprehensive reforms.

