The President: I thank Mr. Niamah for his briefing.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2014/673, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Afghanistan, Albania,
Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, the Congo, Costa Rica, C6te
d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malawi, Mali,
Maldives, Mauritius, Marshall Islands, the Federated
States of Micronesia, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, the Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova Romania,
the Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-
Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Viet
Nam, Yemen, and Zambia.

It is my understanding that Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by a Show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2177 (2014).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

I thank Secretary-General Ban for his briefing and
Dr. Nabarro and Ms. Chan for their remarks and for
the essential role that the United Nations is playing
in confronting the Ebola epidemic. I would also like
to recognize all the people on the front lines in this
battle - people like Mr. Jackson Niamah who are
risking their lives to curb this deadly virus. Their
dedication and compassion humble us.

Today the Security Council is holding an emergency
meeting on a health crisis for the first time in the history
of the United Nations. The Security Council has just
issued a call to action. We have called on all nations
to take swift and decisive action to contain the further
spread of Ebola, and we have declared the current
outbreak a threat to international peace and security.

As we heard unequivocally from the experts today,
the scale of this outbreak is unprecedented. By next
week, more people will have died from Ebola in Liberia
alone than in the 20 previous Ebola outbreaks combined.
The director of the United States-based Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention told United Nations
representatives earlier this week: "I have never seen an
infectious diseases of this lethality spreading so fast".
Without a dramatic shift in the scale of our response,
the number of infected individuals is projected to
double every three weeks. Looking away will not make
this go away.
One of the main reasons this outbreak has spread
so dramatically is because up to now we have not
come together sufficiently to confront it. Over the past
10 months as the deadly virus spread across Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone we relied on tactics that
worked to contain past outbreaks. But West Africa had
never been hit by Ebola before, so the affected countries
had no prior knowledge or experience dealing with
Ebola. The virus jumped across borders and penetrated
urban areas, and local burial customs aided its spread.
Picking up speed, it has overwhelmed clinics and
hospitals, shuttered schools and businesses and sowed
fear in communities.

Precisely at the moment when a robust, united
intervention was needed, some countries started to
seal their borders. This reaction, driven by a mix of
fear and the desire to protect one's own citizens from
the virus's spread, was understandable. The problem is
that while isolation is effective and indeed necessary of
dealing with individuals who may have been exposed to
Ebola, it is utterly counterproductive when applied to
entire countries. It deprives them of the very resources
they need to bring the virus under control. Thus,
when Governments in the region te11 over 70 disease
investigators that if they travel to the affected areas
to volunteer they will not be allowed back into their
own countries, they put not only the currently affected
countries at greater risk, but also their own countries.

Today, instead of isolating the affected countries,
we call for flooding them with the resources that are
desperately needed to turn the tide in this fight. On
Tuesday, President Obama announced that the United
States was going to establish a military command
centre in Liberia to support civilian efforts across the
region, involving an estimated 3,000 United States
forces. Supporting United Nations, regional and
national efforts, we are gong to create an air bridge
to get health workers and medical supplies into West
Africa faster. We are going to build a new training site
to prepare thousands of local health workers so they
can effectively and safely care for more patients. We are
going to stand up additional treatment units, including
new isolation spaces and more than 1,000 beds. We are
going to work with partners to distribute supplies and
information kits to hundreds of thousands of families
so they can better protect themselves.

Today several other Governments ~ many other
Governments, we hope - will announce commitments,
joining a growing cadre of countries that have already
stepped up, such as the troop- and police-contributing
countries that serve commendably in the United
Nations Mission in Liberia. We welcome the Secretary-
General's announcement of the new United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, which will
lead a historic effort to mobilize commitments and
direct them where they are most needed.

This challenge far surpasses the abilities of any one
nation or even any region to tackle alone. This must
be an all-hands-on-deck operation. The private sector,
foundations and non-governmental organizations also
have a crucial role to play, and some, like Medecins
Sans Frontieres (MSF) and the Gates Foundation, are
already leading the charge. One MSF staff member,
Pierre Trbovic, was deployed last month to Monrovia,
to the biggest Ebola treatment centre ever built. But by
the time he arrived, it was completely full, just like the
clinics Jackson Niamah described today. Pierre had the
devastating job of telling patients and their relatives
that MSF could not take them in. Pierre wrote:

"The first person I had to turn away was a
father who had brought his sick daughter in the
trunk of his car. He was an educated man and he
pleaded with me to take his teenage daughter,
saying that while he knew he could not save her
life, at least we could save the rest of his family
from her. Other families just pulled up in cars, let
the sick person out, and then drove off abandoning
them. One mother tried to leave her baby on a chair
hoping that if she did, we would have no choice but
to care for the child."

That scene is playing itself out right now in clinics
across the region. We do not want to live in a world
where a father burying his sick daughter is turned away
from treatment. It is against everything that we believe
in and stand for. It is wrong, and it is dangerous because
people we turn away are all but certain, as we heard, to
infect others.

Today's resolution is important. It is a call to
action, not just from the Security Council, but from
the entire United Nations family. Today's resolution
has a 130 sponsors - the most sponsors ever for any
Security Council resolution in the history of the United
Nations. That means that the 2,176 resolutions that came
before this one had fewer sponsors. This is a degree of
unanimity and unity that we rarely see.

But iftoday's resolution is not followed by action on
a scale and scope commensurate to the virus, it will be
cited years from now as evidence that we raised hopes
that we did not deliver on. Knowing what we know now
about the exponential spread of this deadly virus, we
will have no excuse if we still fail to come together to
do what is needed - ifwe do not dig deep. Nobody will
be able to say, "We did not realize it could get so bad".

The problem is solvable. We know how to give
people who are infected with Ebola a fighting chance
and how to care for them with dignity. We know how
to prevent new outbreaks and how to prepare countries
to find and stop them when cases occur. While our
response will take time to ramp up, and the epidemic
will get worse before it gets better, our actions can save
countless lives. The math is simple; the sooner we act,
the more lives we will save.

I would ask the representatives of every country
represented here, especially those that are still figuring
out how they will respond, to please take this message
back to their capitals. The math is simple - the sooner
we act, the more of us that contribute, the more lives
we will save. We can bend the curve. We must bend the
curve. I would ask those who are skeptical to just look
at Nigeria. Two outbreaks were detected there during
the epidemic; one was in Lagos, which has a population
of over 21 million. In just a few weeks, over 1,000
professionals were mobilized and conducted more than
18,000 home visits. They tracked down 20 cases of
infected people, as well as 890 people with whom the
infected people had come into contact. As a result of
that swift, methodical effort, so far Nigeria's outbreaks
seem to have been contained.

I would urge them to look also to Ghanaian
President John Dramani Mahama, who visited Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone this week and warned that
panicking and isolating affected countries will only
make the outbreak worse. The United States also wants
to express its gratitude to Senegal for allowing its
main airport to serve as a regional hub for emergency
personnel and supplies.

We have all been alarmed by the models of the
Ebola trajectory that we have seen - models in which
infections rise in steep, terrifying curves. We have
seen those kinds of things in Hollywood movies, but
not in real life in recent history. Those models show
what could happen if we continue to let fear, in action
or indifference drive our response. We have to find
resources that, right now, many think they cannot
afford to spare.

Every country represented in this Chamber today
can contribute something that will save a life: doctors,
nurses, hospital beds and, as we have heard, food, soap
and buckets. Models are forecasts of the future. But it is
what we do - by "we" I mean all of the countries that
we here represent, and those beyond - that actually
determines our future. Individuals make history,
not models. The United Nations was built for global
challenges like this one. That is why we are here. Let us
rise, together, to confront this challenge head on.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.


