Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, I would like to thank the Secretariat for making it possible for us to return to this august building. As you suggested, Mr. President, I will be brief. First, I join other speakers in extending a warm welcome to Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia. It is an honour to have her here at this briefing. I would also like to thank Ms. Clemencia Carabali Rodallega for sharing her inspiring contribution in supporting the implementation of the Final Agreement to End the Armed Conflict and Build a Stable and Lasting Peace on the ground. I would also like to express Indonesia's appreciation to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu Aguirre and his team for today's briefing and for the work of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. While the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has created an additional challenge and clearly affects the implementation of the peace agreement, we are encouraged by the commitment and efforts made by all stakeholders in Colombia to adapt and to ensure its continued implementation. Having said that, let me make three brief points. First, with regard to the progress and challenges during the reporting period, we acknowledge several positive steps that have been achieved, including by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace in the area of legal guarantees, as well as in the various programmes for social and economic integration. However, it is also crucially important to continue to focus on areas where progress is still limited, such as the illicit crop substitution programme, access to housing and the allocation of land to former combatants. Indonesia continues to call on all the relevant parties to redouble their efforts in ensuring the effective implementation, sustainability and success of those programmes. Reintegration is key. We look forward to further progress despite these unprecedented and difficult times. Secondly, we remain deeply concerned about the continuing violence against, and killings of, human rights defenders, social leaders and formercombatants. We therefore call for more progress in the operationalization and implementation of related programmes, such as the action plan of the Intersectoral Commission on Security, Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders and the reintegration road map, so as to enhance their safety. In that regard, we would like to join the Secretary-General in welcoming the progress made by the Special Investigations Unit of the Office of the Attorney General in investigating those responsible for crimes against social leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants. However, we are also concerned about the increasing presence and activities of illegal armed groups and criminal organizations in various regions. That must be stopped. We therefore urge them to refrain from violence so as to enable relief to be provided to communities already affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Lastly, we once again join the Secretary-General in urging all actors to avoid reopening discussions on possible modifications to the final peace agreement. We believe that this is not the time for modification, which could lead to renewed polarization and division among Colombians. Instead, let us continue to build on the positive momentum to ensure that the implementation of the final peace agreement moves forward. Like in many other place, the COVID-19 outbreak will pose many challenges for Colombia in the coming months. However, we are confident that the resilience and courage of the people of Colombia to achieve peace, security and development in their country will continue to inspire the world. To that end, the Security Council owes them its continuing support.
