Mr. Hilale (spoke in French): At the outset, on
behalf ofthe Peacebuilding Commission, in my capacity
as Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
I thank the members of the Security Council for having
invited me to brief the Security Council on my visit to
Bangui from 13 to 15 February. A detailed report of
that visit was sent to members this morning.

I take this opportunity to commend Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), on his detailed briefing on the
situation in the Central African Republic and to warmly
thank him and his entire team for their welcome and
support during our visit. I also commend all the other
speakers for their statements and would ask the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic
to convey to His Excellency President Touadera
our heartfelt thanks for the welcome we received in
their country.

My fourth visit to the country in my capacity as Chair
of the Central African Republic configuration stands
out from previous visits. I had the pleasure of being
accompanied this time by Assistant Secretary-General
for Africa Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacebuilding Support Oscar Fernandez-Taranco and
their respective teams, as well as the representatives of
several members of the configuration, namely, China,
the Republic of Korea, France, Italy and Russia. Our
diverse delegation enjoyed the benefit of being able
to send a strong message conveying the unflagging
commitment of the international community in support
of the Central African Republic to all our interlocutors
in Bangui.

The visit took place the day after the signing of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic between the Central African
Government and the 14 armed groups in Bangui on
6 February. The Agreement, described as historic, is a
first step towards the restoration of peace and stability
in the country. It offers a unique window of opportunity
to end the conflict, which has lasted too long, and lays
the foundations for a truly inclusive reconstruction of
the country.

During the audience that he accorded to our
delegation, His Excellency Mr. Archange Touadera,
President of the Central African Republic, informed
us of his personal commitment and determination to
spare no effort in swiftly implementing the provisions
of the Agreement. Aware of the enormous difficulties
and expectations of the population, he appealed to the
international community to support the implementation
of the Agreement. The President also expressed his
wish that the Security Council adjust the mandate of
MINUSCA to allow adequate support for the Mission,
in particular the deployment of joint patrols.
The same determination and willingness to be
part of the peace process was demonstrated by all the
Central African authorities, including the President
of the National Assembly as well as the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, Justice and Planning.

In addition, during in its exchanges with
representatives of civil society, in particular women
and young people, the delegation sensed a strong desire
for peace and justice, as well as tremendous hope for a
better future. Such aspirations underline the importance
not only of strong symbolic acts in the coming days and
weeks but also of actions that will enable the population
to have a lasting benefit from the peace dividends in the
very short term.

During our exchanges with the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund, they informed us
that they had significantly increased their involvement
in the country, in particular in the context of the
implementation of the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan (RCPCA). The delegation also met
with the United Nations country team and humanitarian
actors. All the representatives present responded
positively to my appeal encouraging them to step up
their efforts in carrying out their respective mandates
despite the very difficult working conditions. However,
they emphasized that the support necessary for the
implementation of the peace agreement would require
additional funding to be made available quickly.

In that regard, following the launch of the 2019
humanitarian response plan for the Central African
Republic on 7 January and given the prevailing
humanitarian emergency in the country, in my capacity
as President of the humanitarian affairs segment of
the United Nations Economic and Social Council, I
extended an invitation to the President of the Central
African Republic to participate in the annual high-
level meeting of that organ, to be held in Geneva in
June. President Touadera's participation will provide
the ideal opportunity to advocate the Central African
Republic's cause, particularly with regard to its
humanitarian needs.

The improvement of the security situation, as well
as the redeployment of State authority throughout the
entire territory, will allow all those stakeholders to
become more involved in the recovery of the country
and the implementation of the peace agreement. The
delegation was also able to discuss the implementation
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan.
The talks allowed us to note a certain momentum,
strengthened by the signing of the Agreement.
While $2.6 billion had been announced at the
Brussels Conference for the Central African Republic,
the implementation rate of ongoing projects for which
funding had already been obtained was only 16 per
cent in 2017. That rate significantly increased to reach
54 per cent in 2018, demonstrating that the accelerated
implementation of the RCPCA is well and truly
under way.

On thejustice front, we were pleased to see progress
on the reform of the justice and corrections sector.
The main donors have informed us that the justice
sector policy being developed will be an essential
step in guiding their priorities for action. Despite that
progress, there are ongoing financial needs that require
the sustained attention of the international community,
in particular for the establishment of the truth, justice,
reconciliation and reparation commission and a trust
fund for Victims, as provided for in the peace agreement.

With regard to support for the upcoming elections,
the configuration will continue to mobilize the
international community to ensure a free, transparent
and inclusive election that can free the Central African
Republic from the cycle of instability and violence and
start the recovery on a democratic basis, as was the case
with the last elections.

Finally, on the way to Bangui, I made a stopover
in Paris to meet the senior officials of the International
Organization ofla Francophonie (OIF). I called on them
to work for the implementation of the peace agreement
and to strengthen their support for the Central
African Republic. I intend to soon contact Ms. Louise
Mushikiwabo, Secretary-General of the OIF, to seek the
support of her organization for trilateral cooperation
regarding the Central African Republic, in particular to
mobilize the human resources potential of the Central
African diaspora and other francophone expertise to
support the country in implementing the RCPCA and,
ultimately, to strengthen the implementation of the
peace agreement.

Allow me now to share the main observations that
emerged from our visit to Bangui. First, the Central
African Republic needs the support and assistance
of the Security Council more than ever. Government
officials and the population expect a strong commitment
to implementing and supporting the Agreement, in
particular since the window of opportunity created by
its signing is likely to quickly close due to the upcoming
presidential and legislative elections of 2020-2021.

Secondly, MINUSCA must be able to communicate
rapidly on the actions that it intends to undertake in
support of the Agreement and must continue its efforts
to raise awareness among the various political and
community stakeholders in support of the Central
African authorities. The latter, at the highest level, also
expressed their desire to see MINUSCA fully support
the implementation of the Agreement, in particular the
deployment of joint patrols.

Thirdly, communication on the content and the
challenges of the Agreement is very important and
will be crucial to its success. An urgent first step will
be to translate the Agreement into Sango, the national
language, in order to facilitate the people's ownership
of the document. In addition, better communication
on the Agreement will help to prevent rumours from
spreading about its content.

Fourthly, the partners of the Central African
Republic are urged to show flexibility and adaptability
in executing their programmes, since without the
rapid disbursement of funds, the implementation of
the Agreement, in particular its economic component,
could be jeopardized and deprive the population of the
long-awaited peace dividends.

Fifthly, neighbouring countries are called on more
than ever to support and assist the Central African
Republic in implementing the peace agreement. They
participated constructively in the talks in Khartoum and
are part of the solution in getting the Central African
Republic out of the crisis. That indispensable support
was also raised by the President of the Republic, who
made it one of the conditions for the success of the
Agreement. Their commitment will be decisive.

Sixthly, MINUSCA is not intended to remain
in the Central African Republic indefinitely. It
is therefore conceivable that tailored and, as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General said,
targeted assistance towards implementing the peace
agreement would help it to fulfil its mandate, thereby
strengthening the exit strategy for peace operation so
strongly supported within the Security Council.

Finally, in conclusion, I would like to pay a warm
tribute to Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who arrived in
the Central African Republic under difficult conditions,
leading a multidimensional mission that faced
many challenges. His seriousness, self-sacrifice and
frankness, which is always constructive, have enabled
him to successfully meet many of those challenges. He
can leave Bangui with a sense of accomplishment.
My tribute also goes to the Deputy Special
Representative, Ms. Naj at Rochdi, who during her tenure
has consistently drawn attention to the humanitarian
situation in the country and worked tirelessly for better
coordination and complementarity between the country
team and MINUSCA.

Lastly, the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, takes over
the leadership of MINUSCA at a pivotal moment for
the country's future. With his extensive experience,
Mr. Ndiaye will be able to count on a strong and
competent management team within MINUSCA. He
will also be able to count on my full support, as well as
that of all the members of the configuration.

