The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Rooijmans for the information that she has
provided.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.

First of all, I should like to stress that it is an honour
for Uruguay to convene this Security Council open
debate to address an issue of such vital importance
as the protection of civilians in armed conflict. It
is of vital importance because it concerns the most
elementary human right, that is, the right to life, and
also because it has a bearing on the very credibility
of the Organization and the hopes placed in it by the
millions of people living in situations of conflict.

This topic and this debate have a very broad and
deep scope. They can be approached from different
angles and can find each and every one of us playing
different roles and focused on different priorities, be it
as members ofthe Security Council, where, for example,
protection-of-civilians mandates are established for
United Nations peacekeeping operations; countries
suffering from internal conflict; troop-contributing
countries; or humanitarian actors, among others.

But in spite of these differences, there is something
essential that we all share: the moral and legal duty to
do everything within our means to ensure that in such
situations all possible efforts are made to guarantee the
highest possible level of protection and to minimize
civilian exposure and risk.

Regrettably, despite the courageous efforts and
significant progress made, we are still falling far
short of our best. The latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/453) highlights in paragraph 4 the fact
that "shocking levels of brutality and casual disregard
for human life and dignity have come to characterize
most of today's armed conflicts". Death, torture, the
recruitment of child soldiers, forced disappearances,
sexual and gender-based violence, summary and
extrajudicial executions, attacks against schools and
hospitals and the misuse of those facilities, and attacks
against humanitarian personnel: these are just some
of the tragic situations that today continue to affect
civilians, especially women and children.

As a direct result of that escalation of violence,
today we are witnessing an unprecedented humanitarian
and refugee crisis. There are currently over 60 million
refugees, internally displaced persons and asylum-
seekers around the world, the highest number ever
known. There is therefore no doubt that the protection
of civilians remains one of the greatest challenges
facing the United Nations system. It is a comprehensive
issue with important corollaries such as the situation
of children in armed conflict; sexual and gender-
based violence; and the women and peace and security
agenda. To address those challenges it is essential to
ensure the basics, among which are respect for, and the
implementation of, international humanitarian law, in
particular the four Geneva Conventions and the two
Additional Protocols, wherever armed conflict exists
and those instruments are applicable.

Another basic issue is that ofprevention. Preventing
mass human rights violations is a complex issue, but
it would appear to be the most advisable. The proper
use, improvement and strengthening of early warning
mechanisms, as well as improved coordination among
the various actors on the ground, are some of the
fundamental tools of prevention. In that regard, we
welcome the initiative of the Secretary-General entitled
Human Rights Up Front, which focuses on the need
for a prompt response to human rights violations, a
preventive action plan for the protection of civilians,
and better organizational preparedness to address
any situation. The initiative's plan of action places
improved system preparedness and preventive action to
ensure respect for human rights at the centre of United
Nations efforts to prevent conflict, while reaffirming
the central role of human rights in the Organization's
work.

But since each State has the primary responsibility
to protect its population, it is in strengthening the rule
of law, the institutions responsible for protecting and
promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms,
social inclusion, non-discrimination and tolerance,
that the chances of systematic violations against
human rights will be significantly reduced. Acting in a
coordinated manner with local authorities, it can be said
that the international community has a responsibility to
prevent situations that lead to attacks on civilians. Also,
combatting impunity, which the perpetrators of the
worst acts of violence continue to enjoy, is our shared
obligation. We wish to emphasize the importance of
accountability as a key element for prevention. We
should make use of the various bodies established for
that purpose by the international community, such as
the International Criminal Court. Crimes must never
be tolerated, nor can they go unpunished, regardless of
their perpetrators.

When the threat is imminent, the response should
be timely, decisive and legitimate. It is necessary to
step up efforts to ensure that humanitarian assistance
reaches those in greatest need. We must facilitate its
rapid, safe and unhindered access to the affected
territory. It should be recalled that, for more than
15 years, this body has recognized that the deliberate
targeting of civilian populations or other protected
persons and the systematic, flagrant and widespread
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law in situations of armed
conflict may constitute a threat to international peace
and security.

Finally, and in line with what was said and stressed
earlier with regard to the various angles and priorities of
each of us, as a troop-contributing country committed
to the protection of civilians, allow me to briefly bring
attention to the role of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
It is important to recognize the achievements we
have obtained in recent years. No one is questioning
whether the protection of civilians should be a
component of peacekeeping organizations; what is
basically at issue here is "the how". Uruguay, aware that
peacekeeping is a multidimensional activity involving
many stakeholders, has made its modest contribution for
several years in order to achieve the broadest possible
consensus on the issue because, as we have always said,
in order for protection to be effective, every link in the
chain must be strong. In particular, we are proud of the
work our Blue Helmets are doing in the field, and of the
frank, open and constructive debate that, together with
Australia, we have promoted since 2009 to the present.

However, despite progress, as stated in the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations, results in the
field have been mixed, with a growing gap between
expectations and implementation. Fittingly, the
challenge of creating realistic and achievable mandates,
which was already recommended in the Brahimi report
(see A/55/305), remains valid 15 years later.

Uruguay believes that the General Assembly
and all the relevant bodies, including the Security
Council, should conduct a thorough discussion of
the recommendations contained in the report of
the Independent Panel led by President and Nobel
Prize laureate Ramos-Horta, and of the subsequent
implementation report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/682), with a view to implementing those
measures that, for example, could result in the approval
of sequential mandates, would help make a qualitative
leap towards effective implementation and, especially,
to live up to the expectations not only of those affected,
but those that we generate ourselves.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

