Mr. Garang (Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army): First and foremost, I would like to
thank the Council wholeheartedly for having invited
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army
(SPLM/A) to this significant and historic Security
Council meeting on the Sudan, Somalia and other
African affairs, so that we can share our perspective on
the peace process and on the situation in our country in
general. I understand that this is the fourth time in its
history that the Security Council has met outside its
New York Headquarters. We appreciate this significant
gesture and concern.

Indeed, this is another momentous occasion in the
history of our country. I would like to take this
opportunity to reaffirm our unwavering commitment to
the peaceful resolution of all conflicts in the Sudan. It
is our hope that the meeting of this body in Nairobi
will expedite the swift closure to the peace process in
the Sudan of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) so that we can also reach a
comprehensive peace agreement for the whole country.

The core of the peace agreement, in the form of
six protocols, is already in place. The task that remains
to finalize the agreement on a comprehensive ceasefire
and the modalities for implementing what we have
agreed. These will form annexes to the peace
agreement. The parties - the Government of the
Sudan and the SPLM/A - signed the six protocols
with a view to implementing the agreement and with
the primary aim of ending the war. Obviously,
therefore, the two annexes that remain - on a
comprehensive ceasefire and on implementation
modalities - should not be stumbling blocks to
closing the deal.

One makes agreements in order to implement
them, and we made the agreement in order to end the
war. I want to assure the Council that the SPLM/A is
willing and prepared to work with the other party to
move swiftly to complete and sign the framework
comprehensive peace agreement in the shortest time
possible. We in the SPLM/A have absolutely no reason
to cause any delays. On the contrary, and in the
interests of our country, we have every reason to
expedite the process and to sign the final agreement
today rather than tomorrow.

Under the ceasefire negotiations of the first
annex, there are two outstanding issues, the cardinal
one being the funding of the armed forces - both the
SPLM/A and the Government army. According to
section 1 (b) of the security arrangements protocol,
which we have signed, it has been agreed that the two
armed forces - the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and
the SPLM/A - are to be "considered and treated
equally as Sudan's National Armed Forces during the
Interim Period". That entails funding from the national
treasury in all their aspects the two armed forces and
the joint integrated units that will be constituted from
them. It was precisely for that reason that the SPLM/A
settled for only 50 per cent of revenues from oil
extracted from the southern Sudan and only 50 per cent
of non-oil revenues collected by the central
Government in the southern Sudan, so as to enable the
national Government to retain sufficient financial
resources to meet national obligations, including
expenditure on the National Armed Forces.

The other party's position on this issue is both
untenable and inconsistent with the meaning and the
spirit of the security arrangements framework
agreement during the interim period, because it limits
funding from national coffers to the Government army
component of the National Armed Forces, completely
ignoring the funding of the other component of the
Sudan National Armed Forces - that is, the
SPLM/A - leaving it to be funded by the government
of the southern Sudan, which is a subnational-level
government and therefore is not responsible for
funding national institutions, including the SPLM/A.
However, I believe this is an issue that we, the parties,
with the assistance of the mediators and the
international community, should be able to resolve,
because obviously the SPLM/A must be funded during
the interim period.

The second outstanding issue in the ceasefire
agreement - although relatively less problematic than
that of funding the armed forces - is the time frame
for incorporating other armed groups into SAF or
SPLM/A structures, depending on their individual
choice, as stipulated in the security arrangements
agreement signed by the parties in September 2003,
which states in paragraph 7 (a) that the process of the
integration of other armed groups should be
accomplished before the comprehensive peace
agreement comes into effect so that by then there will
be only two armed forces - the SAF and the
SPLM/A - as agreed upon. That is also an issue that
we can resolve.

Regarding the second annex, on implementation
modalities for the agreement, sufficient progress has
been generally achieved with respect to the two areas
of the Nuba Mountains, Southern Blue Nile and Abyei.
Further good work needs to be done to bridge the gaps
in relation to power-sharing.

However, one obstacle in the implementation
modalities is that there are two main outstanding issues
that must be resolved in the wealth-sharing protocol.
First, the Government of the Sudan proposes a system
for the transfer of funds that seeks to pay in local
currency the share of the government of the southern
Sudan of its oil revenues. That is also a problem that
can, I believe, easily be solved. The other issue is the
sharing of information on existing oil contracts. That is
also something that we have agreed on in the wealth-
sharing agreement. That also should not be a problem.
It's a problem that we can, I believe, also easily solve.

In summarizing this part of my presentation, I
want to state the SPLM. position in unequivocal terms.
The Government of Sudan and the SPLM. have a core
agreement already in place in the form of the six
protocols and, as is stated in the Nairobi Declaration of
5 June 2004, we consider the Sudan peace agreement
essentially already completed. The two outstanding
issues in each of the two annexes of the ceasefire
agreement and implementation modalities should not
take time to resolve, especially in view of the very
precarious situation our country is in, and the fact that
peace has a price and we prepared to pay that price.
That is why we have negotiated in Naivasha with our
counterparts, our compatriots in Naivasha, over the last
one plus years.

Once more, I want to assure you that the SPLM. is
willing and ready to work with the other party to
resolve the outstanding issues in the two annexes and
bring the process to a speedy closure. We will work in
partnership with the National Congress Party in
establishing a new coalition Government of national
unity in accordance with the six protocols.

The SPLM. views the agreement as a prelude to
the beginning of the process of the democratic
transformation of the country, a paradigm shift in the
politics of the country, so that Sudan accepts all its
citizens equally - whether they are Christians or
Muslims, whether they of Arab origin or indigenous
Africans, they are all Sudanese. This is also a paradigm
shift in Sudan's economic development, so that we will
address the issue of rural development as the majority
of our people - 98 per cent of the people in southern
Sudan, for example - live in rural areas. We will have
a paradigm shift in the observance of human rights and
freedoms as endorsed by the parties in the
comprehensive bill of rights in the power-sharing
agreement.

The SPLM. will seek to participate effectively in
the coalition Government of national unity and other
levels of government to ensure the realization of a new
political dispensation in the Sudan. In this context, the
SPLM. will work energetically in partnership with the
National Congress Party and all other political forces
in the Sudan to ensure timely, free and fair legislative
and presidential elections, as shall be agreed in the
remaining implementation modalities. In this context,
we are committed to the preservation of peace, stability
and the territorial integrity of the Sudan during the
interim period, and to ensure the holding of a free,
internationally-monitored referendum on the right of
self-determination for southern Sudan towards the end
of the six-year interim period.

We remain fully committed to the implementation
of all aspects of the peace agreement and will make
full use of the Assessment and Evaluation Commission
throughout the interim period to assess and monitor the
implementation of the peace agreement. This is
necessary to rectify any shortcomings without
renegotiating the agreement.

Through international guarantees and assistance,
the international community will play a significant role
in the implementation of the Sudan peace agreement,
and the present meeting of the Security Council in
Nairobi is a positive signal that we very much welcome
and appreciate. We appeal to the international
community to assist us in the faithful implementation
of the peace agreement. Even if one of the parties to
the agreement feels that there are too many risks
associated with the agreement, in the final analysis, the
cost of non-implementation of the agreement would be
much higher than the cost of implementation for the
whole country. Both parties are therefore best advised
in the interest of our country to desist from anything
that might undermine implementation of the peace
agreement.

Before I close, I come to an issue of grave
concern to the Sudan and to you in the Security
Council. You are undoubtedly aware of the fact that
our country is in dire straits. This situation in Darfur is
rapidly degenerating into chaos and anarchy, as the
government counter-insurgency policy and campaigns
in that region have seriously boomeranged and
continue to spiral out of control. Furthermore, the
Government has recently foiled a coup attempt, and the
prospects for fresh insurgencies emerging in other parts
of the Sudan are increasing. This overall situation, if
left unchecked, can eventually cause the Sudan to
implode and degenerate into statelessness and serious
insecurity, the consequences of which for the whole
region are obvious.

The only way to avert this looming tragedy is to
expedite the Naivasha process and speedily conclude
the comprehensive peace agreement on the Sudan, and
then to install a broad-based coalition Government of
national unity that can best deal with such threats. It is
imperative that the international community do its
utmost to consolidate the Sudan peace process. We
therefore call upon the Security Council - and we
have agreed on this with Vice-President Ali Othman
Mohamed Taha and General Sumbeiywo - to pass a
resolution in this city of Nairobi, that, inter alia,
recognizes, endorses and declares the six protocols
signed thus far by the Government of Sudan and the
SPLM. as binding and irrevocable commitments that
the parties may not under any circumstances
renegotiate and that they must implement. This is in
addition to the Council's urging of the parties to
expeditiously complete negotiations on the two
annexes and sign the comprehensive peace agreement
by a specified date. As I have already said earlier, I see
no serious obstacles that would prevent us from
signing the final peace agreement by the end of this
year, 2004.

The four main remaining issues outstanding in
the two annexes can be resolved in a matter of days.
The situation in the Sudan is sufficiently serious for the
two parties to appreciate the urgency of a quick
conclusion of the Naivasha process and signing of the
comprehensive peace agreement in the shortest time
possible. Furthermore, the parties could use this
comprehensive peace agreement as a basis for making
a fair and lasting peace for the country as a whole,
including Darfur and eastern Sudan, applying and
adapting the agreements to the particular situation, as
well as using the new political dispensation to maintain
peace and stability and the territorial integrity of our
country during the interim period. We firmly believe
that this is the way out of the current Sudanese crisis
and debacle, and the SPLM. assures the Council as well
as assuring the Government of Sudan that the
movement would play a positive role and work in
partnership with the National Congress Party and other
political forces in the country to bring comprehensive
peace to all parts of the Sudan.

Allow me, on behalf of the suffering people of
the Sudan, to conclude by thanking you most sincerely
for having organized and held this historic and rare
meeting in our neighbourhood, in Nairobi, in Kenya.
This signifies your recognition and awareness of the
gravity of the internal Sudanese conflicts and the
dangers that they pose to the region and to
international peace and security.

The Sudanese people eagerly await the outcome
of the Security Council's deliberations and hope that
members will not leave Nairobi without sending them a
message of hope for Christmas and the New Year. For
our part, we pledge - as did my brother, First Vice-
President Ali Othman Taha - that we hope to give
Christmas and New Year's presents to the Sudanese
people, to the region and to the world by concluding
and signing the Sudan peace agreement before the end
of this year.

We would also like to pay tribute to the
Secretariat of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD); to Ambassador Sumbeiywo and
his envoys; to the IGAD member States; to the IGAD
Partners Forum quartet, composed of Italy, Norway, the
United Kingdom and the United States; to the
Government of the Netherlands; and to the African
Union for their unrelenting efforts in search of a just
and lasting peace in the Sudan. Finally, I salute
President Kibaki for taking the time to attend this
important meeting.

