Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank you, Sir,
on behalf of the States members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
for the initiative to hold this debate. We are pleased to
see the presence at this meeting of His Excellency the
Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) of Somalia. We fully subscribe to the statement
delivered by Ambassador Diarra, for which I thank him
heartily.

The situation in Somalia continues to be critical.
The reasons are obvious. First, the end of the transition
period is fast approaching. We realize that those tasks
that the TFG needed to carry out during the transition
period have not been completed. For this and other
reasons, it is impossible to say that the TFG has
discharged all of its responsibilities. However,
allowing the transition period to lapse and thereby
allowing the collapse of the Djibouti peace process
cannot be an option. That explains why IGAD and the
African Union (AU) have taken the steps they have. It
is now a matter of greatest urgency that the TF G carry
out those tasks as speedily as possible.

Secondly, we have seen over the past few days
that it is entirely possible for the TFG to enhance its
Viability and to make progress in the security area,
which is absolutely critical as the minimum
requirement for everything that the TFG has to do in
other sectors. The momentum generated recently needs
to be maintained and expanded. This is very critical,
both for raising the credibility of the TFG and for
conveying the message that extremism is far from
being the wave of the future. The more the momentum
is sustained and additional gains are made, the fewer
the chances the enemies of peace will have to benefit
from the fear they have instilled in the minds of
citizens.

From this perspective as well, the current
situation in Somalia is indeed very critical. There are
opportunities that should be seized. The question is:
Are all stakeholders ready? It does not help much to
harp on the weaknesses of the TFG. But, still, it is
important for the TFG to ensure the full
implementation of the 15 March 2010 agreement with
Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama'a, particularly in the security
area, as well as to strengthen its cooperation with all
those committed to peace and the Djibouti peace
process. We want to underline how critical it is to
adhere to the principle that the Djibouti Agreement
remains the basis for consolidating the process of
national reconciliation in Somalia.

However, a great deal more is expected from
others, including from the Council. Resolution 1964
(2010) only partially addressed the request submitted
to the Council by the African Union regarding the
authorized strength of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), on an enhanced support package
for the Mission from United Nations assessed
contribution, and on the imposition of a naval blockade
of and no-fly zone over Somalia, as well as effective
implementation of sanctions on spoilers. This is
becoming ever more urgent, including as a result of the
worsening humanitarian situation in the country. The
needy should not remain hostage to those who brutalize
them.

I am pleased to note that the IGAD countries
continue to do their share. In this regard, we are deeply
grateful to Uganda and Burundi for the sacrifices they
have been making. We are encouraged by the enhanced
cooperation that we have managed to create between
AMISOM, the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia and IGAD, as exemplified by the
memorandum of understanding signed between them in
April last year, providing for enhanced consultation
and coordination, which became the basis for a joint
regional strategy agreed in February of this year.
Perhaps, this might serve as a template for other
regions.

I wish to conclude by thanking you personally,
Sir, for this very welcome initiative, by appealing to
the Council to give the Somalia situation far greater
attention than it has received to date, and by extending
our gratitude to all States that have rendered assistance
to the TFG, AMISOM, IGAD and the AU.

