I congratulate France on a successful presidency, as well as Germany on assuming the presidency of the Council in July. Let me first express my sympathy to and solidarity with all the people and nations of the world suffering from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The COVID-19 crisis has demonstrated how crucial multilateral cooperation is to our collective health, prosperity and security. Unfortunately, it seems likely that we are to remain seized of this crisis for quite some time. The global security implications of the coronavirus disease must therefore remain under our close and constant scrutiny. It is truly important that the Security Council finally agreed upon resolution 2532 (2020), on COVID-19. This must be seen as a unified and clear call to now put the guns down. I thank particularly France and Tunisia for their leadership on this matter. This also confirms that the Council must remain regularly involved in the peace and security implications of COVID-19. It also means that we will listen to the wise advice and observations of Secretary-General Guterres. Allow me to congratulate Mr. Guterres on being a visible and vocal voice of the United Nations family during this ongoing crisis. The COVID-19 outbreak has clearly highlighted how crucial it is to have a safe and reliable digital infrastructure and that we collectively work towards a more stable and secure cyberspace. Since the start of the pandemic, we have been observing with concern an increase in attacks against one of the most important infrastructure sectors - hospitals. Actors that use cyberspace for malicious purposes will be investigated and these attacks will not go unnoticed. We raised the cybersecurity topic at the Security Council Arria formula meeting in May, where the majority of participating States reaffirmed their commitment to following the commonly agreed rules of responsible State behaviour in cyberspace. We should all remain seized of this topic, including in the future. The ongoing global pandemic has revealed serious risks brought by uneven digital transformation and weak digital infrastructure. The global digital divide must be rapidly addressed by all of us, including the private sector, which can drive the necessary innovation. That is why Estonia and the United Arab Emirates will cooperate to organize a global business summit, to involve the business sector in addressing the grave effects of the coronavirus disease. Digital technology and digital development can make societies more resilient to the outside shocks we are living through right now. That is why Estonia, together with Singapore, yesterday convened an international high-level meeting on the global digital divide and COVID-19. There, we also launched a Global Declaration on the Digital Response to COVID-19. That text remains open for co-sponsorship, and more than 30 countries have already joined it. I hope to welcome many more.
