The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.

I wish to make a few brief points. First, the
existence of other regional crises must not lead to less
energy and attention being devoted to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The lasting stabilization of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is essential to the future of the region. It
has not yet been definitively achieved. A great deal
remains to be done before the local officials and people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina can take charge of the
destiny of their country. Yet, time is pressing.
International assistance cannot remain forever at the
current level. It is now that we must consolidate our
achievements so that the enormous international
investment made in Bosnia and Herzegovina can pay
off. The coming few years will be decisive in obtaining
important progress in several key sectors: the return of
refugees and displaced persons; the consolidation of
core institutions; the pluralism of political life; and
economic reform.

Secondly, France remains strongly engaged in
Bosnia and Herzegovina over four years after the peace
accords signed in Paris. France remains one ofthe most
important contributors to the Stabilization Force and to
the International Police Task Force. France has also
undertaken to ensure throughout its forthcoming
presidency of the European Union that Bosnia and
Herzegovina fully retains its role in the Union's
strategy for the Balkans, bearing in mind, of course,
that this presupposes shared efforts. It bears recalling
yet again that the European Union and its member
States are by far the largest contributors in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Since 1991, the European Union has
provided over 2.5 billion euros to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is in a position to play a central role in
the future of that country on the basis of this financial
effort and because European perspectives are the
decisive lever in the evolution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

My third comment relates to UNMIBH and its
main component, the International Police Task Force.
This action is essential to establishing a genuine State
and a state of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Behind
the figures, which are impressive in themselves, just
given to us by Mr. Klein on the training of police
personnel and the recruitment of police officers from
minority groups, and behind the facts on the judiciary
system, we find both the reality ofthe past and the plan
for the future.

The reality of the past was that of a police force
that was too large and partial in the hands of the
majority group. It was also a situation ofjustice subject
to pressure. The plan for the future, which Mr. Klein
and UNMIBH are steadily turning into reality day by
day, is that every inhabitant of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will be able to go to a police station in complete
confidence, that he or she will be defended regardless
of origin and that he or she will obtain a fair trial. The
plan is for the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina to exist
on the ground through controls exercised over the
borders and for the judicial system of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to be reformed. Experience and know-
how acquired through the judicial system assessment
programme conducted by UNMIBH must be preserved
in the framework ofthe follow-up to the programme.

Having heard the statements of other speakers
and of Mr. Klein, I should like to express the opinion
of the delegation of France on this subject. We believe
that a satisfactory solution might be found by, for
example, conferring the follow-up of the operation on
the United Nations Development Programme.

In conclusion, France, like other members, would
like to reiterate its complete support for Jacques Klein
and UNMIBH, whose successful action deserves to be
commended.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Klein to respond
to the observations of speakers.

