Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the United Kingdom presidency
for convening today's informative meeting and the
briefers for their valuable briefings.

Police work in peacekeeping and peacebuilding is
relevant in terms of protecting the civilian population
and playing a leading role in restoring national security
institutions. The increase in the number of police
personnel deployed and the change in the nature of their
tasks is a necessary response to increasingly complex
realities and the need to strengthen the fundamentals
of their work, which we fully support. We also agree
that it is the responsibility of each State to protect its
civilians, but ifa State fails to do so, the United Nations
police presence can play a central role in supporting
national authorities to fulfil the task.

The presence of United Nations police in conflict
zones produces a feeling of security in the population
through the deterrent effect it has and through the
interaction it generates with the local population. This
dynamic allows it to act as an early-warning mechanism
in line with the Secretary-General's "Human Rights
First" initiative. It also facilitate the processes of
reconciliation and confidence-building between civil
society and the State, which is one of the objectives of
the security sector reform.

The protection of civilians must be at the core of
police training. Police units must be given the right
preparation and equipment for respecting human rights,
enforcing the rule of law and protecting the civilian
population, especially those in vulnerable situations,
such as women and children who have been subject to
sexual violence or gender-based crimes. In this vein, we
support the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy
and call for prosecuting and punishing any misconduct.

Greater participation of women police would
meet the needs and expectations of civilian women
and would facilitate the recovery of trust and reduce
impunity. Therefore, in line with resolutions 1325
(2000) and 2122 (2013), we would highlight the need
to increase the participation and leadership of women
in police contingents from both police-contributing
countries (PCCs) and from missions' host countries.
We encourage the PCCs to close the competency
gap that exists today so as to ensure greater female
participation. We also welcome with interest the
System's innovative initiatives aimed at mainstreaming
the gender perspective in police personnel, such as the
United Nations police manual on gender issues, the
Gender Toolkit, which was launched on 10 November,
and the creation of the role of the gender adviser.
Finally, within the framework of the Government
of Chile's International Cooperation Programme for
Uniformed Police, over 250 officers of the Haitian
National Police have been trained by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, contributing thereby to
vocational training both at the basic level and for officers
at the middle and senior ranks. A strong police training
is fundamental for the respect for human rights and
for the democratic development of any country. Police
units ultimately help to lay the foundations for the full
establishment of the rule of law, where reconciliation
and the promotion of development through economic
growth, poverty eradication and social and inclusive
development are keys to overcoming conflict and
consolidating peace.

We would like to close with a question related
to remarks made by our colleague from Spain. What
are the main constraints today on deploying a greater
number of women in police units in peacekeeping
operations and how they can these possible obstacles
be overcome?

