Mr. Bessho (Japan): First of all, I would like to
thank Poland for convening this very important open
debate early on in its presidency. I would also like to
take this opportunity to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for her hard work and
for her briefing, as well as Executive Director Henrietta
Fore for her briefing and her and the UNICEF team's
hard work. I am especially grateful to Ms. Kamara and
Mr. Awan for their powerful briefings, based on their
personal experience.

Children are vulnerable in conflict, both mentally
and physically. In conflict, they are deprived of
education. Those children who have suffered are at
greater risk of being drawn into conflict and violence
again later in life, which in turn undermines sustainable
peace and security. The international community and
the Security Council must pay special attention to the
issue of children and armed conflict.

Japan supports the Global Coalition for the
Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers and became a
member of the Group of Friends of Reintegration of Child
Soldiers in February. We praise the efforts of UNICEF
and civil society to meet the extensive, and sometimes
unpredictable, needs on the ground. We expect that the
forthcoming study of the expert Advisory Group of the
Global Coalition for the Reintegration of Former Child
Soldiers will reveal the specific needs and gaps so that
donors can respond more effectively.

Even when child soldiers are returned to their
communities, they may face significant barriers to their
reintegration into society, including social stigma and
economic hardship, which might ultimately lead them
back to armed groups. Japan has been working closely
with UNICEF in African and other regions not only to
support reintegration programmes, but also to provide

broader assistance to children in conflict, such as
strengthening national and community capacities for the
prevention of conflicts and violence affecting children.

Japan actively supports the Global Partnership
to End Violence against Children, as a path-finding
country and a board member. As the first responding
donor, Japan contributed $6 million last year to the
Partnership's fund to support conflict-affected children
in Nigeria and Uganda. We call on other Member States
to support its efforts.

Children's right to education must be protected
even in conflict. Attacks on schools as non-military
objectives violate international humanitarian law. We
urge all parties to conflict to abide by international
humanitarian law and to respect that right. Hospitals
are also indispensable for children. We once again urge
all parties to conflict to observe resolution 2286 (2016)
to protect hospitals in armed conflict.

In conclusion, Japan would like to make positive
contributions to helping children in armed conflict
with a View to ending violence and preventing
future conflicts.

