Mr. Djokic: The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
most energetically demands of the Security Council that
it take most resolute and urgent measures to end the
ruthless and senseless North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) air strikes and attacks by the Rapid Reaction
Force against Bosnian Serb military and civilian targets.
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot be achieved by
merciless bombardment of one of the parties to the
conflict, the Bosnian Serbs, in an attempt to make them
succumb to the will of the Western alliance. As has been
the position of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from
the beginning of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
peace can be attained only with full and equal respect of
the vital interests of all three peoples.

The NATO air strikes commenced as a retaliation
for the shelling of Sarajevo, for which the culprits have
never been clearly and unambiguously identified.
However, the scale, intensity and duration of the strikes
go far beyond mere retaliatory measures, and their clear
aim is to inflict serious injury on the Bosnian Serb
military capability, economic infrastructure and even
civilian facilities. The scope and intensity of the bombing
greatly exceed the mandate that was given to the
Secretary-General and NATO by relevant Security
Council resolutions with the aim of protecting the safe
areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The question must be raised: what possible moral
authority do NATO and the United Nations have to
pursue a relentless campaign of mass bombardment of the
Republic of Srpska, causing unprecedented material
damage and numerous civilian casualties?

The continuation of air and other attacks, with
simultaneous calls for negotiations, is unacceptable and
incomprehensible, when it is known that the leadership of
the Republic of Srpska has accepted the negotiations and
shown readiness to resume, together with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, the efforts aimed at finding a
solution acceptable to all parties to the conflict.
 

The continuation of NATO air strikes and the actions
of the United Nations Rapid Reaction Force are a direct
attack on the ongoing peace negotiations. It is absolutely
incomprehensible why NATO and the United Nations
pursue their ruthless air and ground campaign against the
Bosnian Serbs, while important breakthroughs have been
made at today's ministerial meeting in Geneva of the
Foreign Ministers of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, where basic principles
for the establishment of a just and lasting peace have been
adopted.

The continuation of the air strikes can only fuel the
ambitions of those parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina who
are in favour of pursuing a war option. By ruthlessly
attacking the Bosnian Serbs, NATO is in fact giving an
unambiguous signal to the Bosnian Muslims that it is
prepared to fight a war on their side, and to weaken the
Bosnian Serbs to such an extent that the Muslim army will
be in a position to achieve a significant military advantage.
This is certainly not a policy that can lead to peace, but can
only be conducive to an uncontrollable escalation of the
conflict and its spillover throughout the Balkan region and
beyond, with unforeseeable consequences.

By departing from the traditional principles of peace-
keeping, neutrality and impartiality, the United Nations and
NATO have set out on a slippery slope which can lead
them to further involvement on the side of the Bosnian
Muslims and full-scale war against the Bosnian Serbs.

At a time when a real chance for a just and lasting
peace, which would satisfy the Vital interests of all three
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina is at last within reach,
it is essential that this opportunity should not be missed and
that all measures be taken so that NATO air strikes which
threaten to undermine the entire peace process are
immediately stopped.

The conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina is having a
severely destabilizing and dangerous effect not only on the
Balkans, but also on the future of peace and security in
Europe as a whole. By deciding to side with the Bosnian
Muslims against the Bosnian Serbs, NATO has raised
serious questions about the future of security and
cooperation in Europe. Rightly, the Russian Federation has
expressed strong concerns about not having been consulted
about the air strikes, and has vigorously opposed the
decision of NATO to pursue them. We welcome such an
approach by the Russian Federation, since it is in full
compliance with the position that the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has advocated from the beginning of the crisis
in Bosnia and Herzegovina - namely, that a political
settlement is the only possible solution if the international
community truly seeks to achieve peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and stability in the entire territories of the
previous Yugoslavia.

NATO's credibility cannot be strengthened by
forcing the Bosnian Serbs into accepting solutions
contrary to their vital interests. Peace can be achieved
only through a painstaking and very difficult - but
attainable - political process, in which the vital interests
of all peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be
satisfied.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is ready to
make the greatest effort towards the achievement of
lasting peace in the Balkans. We pledge that we will do
our utmost to ensure that a balanced and equitable
compromise is achieved on the basis of the basic
principles which have been agreed upon in Geneva today.
However, if the cruel bombardment of the Bosnian Serbs
continues, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia cannot be
responsible for the tragic consequences that could ensue.

