Mr. Sandoval Cojull'in (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the convening of this open
debate on the working methods of the Council and the
concept note prepared for this meeting (S/2016/585, annex). We trust that our deliberations will not
only allow us to renew our commitment to ongoing
progress in improving the efficiency, transparency and
interactivity ofthe Security Council, but will also serve
as a solid foundation for the effective updating of the
note by the President S/2010/507.

We recognize the progress made in some practices
and in the strengthening of other measures included
in note S/2010/507 and successive notes of the
presidency, thanks to the commendable work of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Matters. However, taking into account
our own experience as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council for the period 2012-2013, we
believe that there is still room for improvement, and
we highlight three issues of current relevance to the
working methods of the Security Council.

First, the quest for information and understanding
regarding the Council's activities remains a
fundamental and legitimate one. Although there has
been an increase in the number of public meetings, the
ongoing convening of open debates that promote the
greater participation of non-members of the Council,
and, in recent years, the holding of numerous meetings
under the Arria Formula, we regret the increasingly
rare wrap-up sessions and the lack of regular contact
with the Peacebuilding Commission - an advisory
body of the Council that plays an important role in
preventing the recurrence of conflicts - and the Chairs
of its country-specific configurations, as well as other
United Nations bodies.

Secondly, the Council has in the past taken
decisions on the appointment of the Chairmen of
the subsidiary bodies in a balanced, transparent and
inclusive manner that has promoted change, because
there is the impression that closed consultations are
held on the process, especially with respect to newly
elected Council members. My delegation hopes that this
practice and trend will be strengthened in the future.
It is also necessary to ensure that the selection and
appointment processes for the various panels of expert
are more transparent and balanced in order to promote
the broadest possible geographical representation,
bearing in mind the guidance provided in presidential
note S/2006/997.

We also attach priority to ongoing improvement
ofthe interaction between the subsidiary bodies - the
Committees and informal working groups - with all
Member States. Inthatregard, wewelcome initiatives such
as the open formal consultations on the comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), held by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) in June.

Thirdly, I refer to the selection and appointment
process for the next Secretary-General, particularly
General Assembly resolution 69/321, which we believe
contributes to greater transparency and greater
inclusiveness in this process, with clear guidelines,
such as the joint letter of the President of the General
Assembly and the President of the Security Council,
in which they outline and explain the procedure. The
ongoing flow of information about the candidates and
the holding of informal dialogues and meetings with
candidates are also of enormous importance. All of
this will have promote the deeper involvement of our
membership, which I think is evident as a fundamental
aspect of our goal.

Since the issuance of presidential note
S/2010/507, the Council has adopted a dozen notes,
but their implementation often yield unsatisfactory or
contradictory results. To facilitate such follow-up, we
would welcome the proposal contained in the concept
note of working on a comprehensive document under
the format of a presidential note to update note 507 to
consolidate and compile all of the decisions taken on
working methods. We look forward to its publication
and dissemination to all Member States. We trust that
such a document would take into account the criticisms
and proposals made today and in previous debates,
wit the working methods of the Council being closely
linked to accountability to the broader membership of
the Organization. Past practice indicates that the elected
members are accountable to the regional groups and to
all Member States of the United Nations are those who
tend most often to improve working methods of the
Council. The best way to highlight the representative
and democratic nature of the Council is to strengthen
accountability standards and transparency. That, along
with the cooperation of permanent members, will lead
to greater synergy in the Council as it seeks to achieve
its common goal ofimproving its working methods.

