Mr. Baja (Philippines): My delegation, too,
welcomes this public meeting today, which gave us the
opportunity once again to listen as our colleague,
Ambassador Heraldo Munoz, Chairman of the
sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban,
provided us with a comprehensive briefing on what is
being done by the Committee, as well as on its future
plans in addressing international terrorism - one of
the serious global concerns that spares no country or
individual, as recent events in the Russian Federation
and Indonesia have shown. My delegation commends
the efforts and the activities of the Committee, as
highlighted by the personal commitment of
Ambassador Munoz in addressing the situation.

We also welcome the very informative report
submitted to the Committee and the Security Council
by the new Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team established pursuant to resolution
1526 (2004). It is important to look closely at the
recommendations that it has put forward based on its
analysis of the national reports, which have increased
to 130 submissions, thanks to the combined efforts of
the Committee and the Monitoring Team. We now have
a broader and more comprehensive basis from which to
draw patterns, trends and conclusions to further
strengthen the sanctions regime against Al Qaeda and
terrorists.
We also note the caveat expressed by both the
Chairman and the Monitoring Team report that there is
a lot more work to be done because of the mutations in
how the Al Qaeda terrorists are organized and operate,

which the Monitoring Team terms "current Al Qaeda
methodology".

The Council should take note of the information
from Ambassador Munoz that Al Qaeda is currently a
global network rather than an organization with a
structure and a hierarchy. Al Qaeda no longer needs
large sums of money to mount terror attacks, and
consequently it is able to finance such actions in less
detectable ways. Among the difficult-to-scrutinize
financing sources are proceeds from crime; diversions
from charitable donations, even inheritance sums;
counterfeit-currency trading; credit-card fraud; the
drug trade; and even an ancient financial system by
which many brokers can move cash from one office to
another based on trust.

Al Qaeda has become more flexible in staying
ahead of sanctions. We therefore support Ambassador
Mufioz's observation on the need to strengthen the
sanctions regime that the Council has been
implementing. That has become urgent as Al Qaeda
has decentralized into loose networks of affiliated
groups with the capacity to inspire terror attacks
through means not currently proscribed. In that
connection, submissions to the Council - particularly
the Lists - should be accurate and sufficiently
detailed to be useful. The suggestions just made by
Ambassador Mufioz deserve the Council's most serious
consideration; we fully support them.

We also welcome the very informative reports
submitted to the Committee and to the Security
Council by the sanctions regime. It is important to
immediately establish identifiable patterns through
intelligence and to adopt effective measures to deter
the plans of Al Qaeda. That should be a conscious
objective underlying all global counter-terrorism
efforts. International cooperation on all fronts -
multilateral, regional and bilateral - can complement
everyone's efforts and can have multiplier effects.

We also welcome the continuing collaboration
and coordination of the 1267 Committee with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). In that regard,
my delegation fully supports the visits on the ground
being conducted both by the Chairman and by the
Monitoring Team, as they provide practical insights on
evolving Al Qaeda operations, on specific problem
areas encountered by States in implementing the
sanctions regime and on what measures can be adopted
to enhance international cooperation and to support
national efforts in countering Al Qaeda operations.

The Philippines welcomed the recent visit of the
Monitoring Team to Manila and to other capitals in our
region, where a forthright exchange of experiences
with the operational implementing agencies resulted in
valuable information for further strengthening national
and international efforts against terrorism. The
Philippines stands fully committed in the global fight
against terrorism and will continue to share its
experiences in further refining measures against the
emerging new methodologies of Al Qaeda.

