Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation is grateful
to Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, Permanent
Representative of Spain, for his briefing on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) during the latest reporting period.

Today, in a special session, the Board of Governors
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
adopted a resolution on Iran, closing the issue related
to Iran's alleged military nuclear research, superseding
all previous resolutions on Iran, and establishing a clear
path towards the Board's full closure of its dossier on
Iran.

Iran and the IAEA have fully complied with
and thoroughly gone over the road map agreed on in
mid-July and designed to clarify issues pertaining to
Iran. The most important conclusion of that process
was that no signs of undeclared nuclear material or
activities were found in Iran. That is particularly
important in assessing Iran's compliance with its
nuclear non-proliferation obligations, as one of the
principal aims of the system of safeguards is to ensure
control over nuclear material. We believe that a new
chapter has begun in the relationship between the
Agency and Iran. In the future, cooperation between
Iran and the IAEA will be based on the Agency's
traditional frameworks - a comprehensive safeguards
agreement and its additional protocol, along with
voluntary commitments on the part of Iran to promoting
transparency within the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action. The tools at the Agency's disposal will enable
it to verify the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme.

The Russian Federation is pleased that the agreement
reached on a final settlement of the nuclear programme
situation is based on a formula proposed by Russia's
President, which involves the recognition of Iran's right
to the peaceful use of nuclear energy, including the
right to enrich uranium, and the simultaneous lifting of
all sanctions after all outstanding issues are closed and
the arrangements for Tehran's nuclear programme are
under strict international control. The solutions arrived
at during the negotiations are clear testimony to the
fact that any challenges to the nuclear non-proliferation
regime can and must be removed through diplomacy
and on the basis of international law. The same can

be said of the joint collective work regarding many
regional crises.
On the whole, the preparations for launching the
practical implementation of the Plan of Action are
going pretty well. In accordance with the report of
the Director General of the IAEA of 18 November
(see A/70/219), as well as our contacts in the Agency,
the Iranians are quite quickly bringing their nuclear
programme into compliance with the requirements of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. The IAEA
is ready to take action at any time to start verifying
Iran's compliance with its obligations under the Plan.
The Agency and Iran have already coordinated their
approach to applying safeguards in all areas of the
nuclear programme, and the IAEA is also carefully
monitoring the Iranians' efforts to bring the programme
into compliance.

In general, we believe that it is important to take
advantage of the opportunities that have emerged since
the adoption of the Plan of Action to engage Iran in
full-on economic cooperation, as well as in cooperation
aimed at addressing regional problems in the Middle
East. For its part, the Russian Federation will provide
practical cooperation in complying with the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action.

