Mr. Sahovie (Serbia and Montenegro): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of September, as well as to thank you for
convening this meeting. I would also like to thank Mr.
Annabi for his briefing.

In recent months the Security Council has held a
series of discussions that have mostly been devoted to
the escalation of violence and ethnically motivated
crimes in Kosovo and Metohija. The need for that was
obvious. In July, the Kosovo Force (KFOR) reported an
increased number of incidents, stating that the Serbian
population was the primary target of intimidation.
Regrettably, we witnessed even worse crimes in
August, including a bomb attack in the village of
Cernica on 31 August that killed Milomir Stakic and
wounded four other civilians. We view the further
deterioration of the security situation with extreme
concern, particularly bearing in mind the fact that
neither the perpetrators of the Gorazdevac atrocity of
13 August, the killers of the Serb fisherman Dragan
Tonic, who was killed on 11 August in Skulanovo, nor
the Cernica bombers, have been apprehended. We also
regret that those responsible for the 3 August murder of
UNMIK police officer Satish Menon have not been
found.

The new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Harri Holkeri, assumed his
responsibilities and clearly difficult tasks against that
background. He has yet to settle in Pristina, but we can
already discern his resolve to confront the existing
problems. We welcome Mr. Holkeri's priorities to
establish the rule of law, ensure basic rights and
freedoms, fight organized crime, build multi-ethnic
institutions and enhance economic development as
basic preconditions for lasting stability in the province.
In particular, my Government welcomes the new
Special Representative's commitment to promptly
address the security situation, especially violence
against the Serb community. We share his view that the
motive for the latest attacks was to send the message
that multi-ethnicity would not be allowed to take hold
in the province. We support Mr. Holkeri's position that
the international community must be resolute in its
stand that it will not be intimated from fulfilling the
mandate of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

It is encouraging that the international community
has demonstrated, at several high-level meetings during
the last few days, a common dedication to ending the
cycle of violence and extremism. In that regard, we are
looking forward to concrete measures against the
Albanian National Army (ANA), which in April was
proclaimed by UNMIK to be a terrorist organization, as
well as to the findings of the special UNMIK/KFOR
board set up last spring to coordinate action against
suspected extremist infiltration in the Kosovo
Protection Corps (KPC).

It is our sincere hope that that decisiveness with
regard to improving the security situation will boost
the thus far highly unsatisfactory pace in the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons. Perhaps it
was on the basis of renewed hope for minority
protection that the 200 remaining Serbs in Cernica -
the venue of the aforementioned attack on
31 August * decided to stay in the province. However,
we fear that, if crimes and terrorist acts continue with
impunity, any future decision by the Serb community
to leave Kosovo and Metohija permanently may be
irreversible.

My Government welcomes the renewed
engagement of the Contact Group on the issue of
Kosovo and Metohija. We find particularly important
the Contact Group's confirmation in Moscow of the
relevance of the principle of "standards before status"
and of the need to make the benchmarks concept
operational, as well as the emphasis on continuous
international control of the implementation of related
requirements. Serbia and Montenegro is looking
forward to the Contact Group's further activities. In
that context, we wish to establish regular dialogue with
the Group in order to continue to contribute to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) as well as,
more broadly, to the stabilization of the region.

The Security Council, the Contact Group and
Special Representative Holkeri are calling for an early
start of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. Serbia
and Montenegro stands fully ready to engage
constructively in all discussions of importance to the
daily lives of all citizens of Kosovo and Metohija,
regardless of their ethnicity. We expect that the talks,
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999), will
help to improve the security situation in the province,
enhance human and minority rights and, consequently,
step up the returns process. Mr. Holkeri's role in those
talks is extremely important, as is the support of the
Contact Group and the European Union in this process.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize that Serbia
and Montenegro has recently reconfirmed at the
highest parliamentary level its commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and its
fundamental aim of building a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo and Metohija, one in which all inhabitants can
have a peaceful and normal life based on substantial
autonomy and meaningful self- government.

