Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit,
for their insightful briefings. We also welcome the
delegation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
the Chamber.

At the outset, we would like to note that the
recent mission of the Council provided an opportunity
to receive first-hand information and a deeper
understanding of the situation on the ground, and
express support to the Government and people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We thank the
Congolese national authorities and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) team for hosting
the Council's delegation, as well as the Department of
Political Affairs, the Security Council Affairs Division,
the Department of Safety and Security, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and others for arranging
that visit so efficiently under difficult circumstances.

We pay tribute to the brave women and men of
MONUSCO who risk their lives in hazardous conditions.
It is one ofthe largest peacekeeping operations in history
and has been serving the host country with courage and
selflessness. We see Leila and Said's dedication and
loyalty to their duty, which have received international
recognition. They have complex mandates and have
given us many lessons to learn. We note and appreciate
the coordinated and important work they do. They have
a large and complex agenda, and we see the different
and unique ways in which they contribute.

As an observer at the African Union, we express our
solidarity and associate ourselves with the statements
of the African troika to be delivered today. I would like
to make the following observations.

On the security front, we note with regret the
renewed intercommunal violence and activities of
armed groups, which exacerbate the already dire
humanitarian situation, thereby leading to mass
displacement of innocent Congolese people. We
strongly condemn all attacks on the civilian population,
peacekeepers and humanitarian and health workers and
call on all local and foreign armed groups to lay down
their weapons. We commend the work of MONUSCO in
developing Mission-wide strategies to address the issue
of attacks by armed groups and thereby implement the
protection-through-projection strategy. The Mission's
comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians,
including the concept of operations of the Mission's
force and police components, becomes even more
important in preventing risks linked to violence
intended to impede the upcoming elections. We also
welcome MONUSCO'S continued support to the peace
processes on a provincial level, thereby addressing
the underlying causes of intercommunal violence by
advancing peace through awareness-raising campaigns
with the full engagement of local leaders, women
and youth.

On the counter-terrorism front, we would like to
recall that, during our visit, President Kabila Kabange,
Prime Minister Tshibala Nzenzhe and Vice-Prime
Minister Mova Sakanyi stressed the importance
of fighting terrorism and expressed regret that the
members of the Council had not included the issue
in their remarks. In particular, the Head of State
underlined that terrorism has threatened the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for 30 years now. Terrorists have
extended their tentacles into the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, South Africa, Mozambique, Somalia,
Ethiopia, Uganda and many other African countries.
President Kabila emphasized, "We are losing our
precious population, but we will continue to fight this
evil". Kazakhstan therefore calls on Member States
to support the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
addressing the challenge posed by terrorism. We should
recognize that this important country is a significant
partner in our global effort aimed at the overall goal of
achieving a world free of terrorism.

On the political front, we underline the progress
made by the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in preparing for elections according to
the electoral calendar. This nationally owned process
should be held with respect for the sovereignty,
political independence, territorial integrity and unity
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We reiterate
the importance of the implementation by all parties
of the political agreement of 31 December 2016. We
call on the authorities of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to continue implementing measures to
create conditions conducive to holding credible and
transparent elections with the meaningful participation
of women in the process. Further efforts must be made
by all key political actors to establish a constructive
and inclusive inter-Congolese dialogue to achieve
political progress and build confidence in the electoral
process. We commend the committed determination of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo Government to
assume full responsibility for funding the elections. We
therefore encourage all national authorities to continue
cooperating with the Independent National Electoral
Commission to provide the necessary resources.

We welcome the assurances of President Kabila,
who, during the seventy-third session of the General
Assembly (see A/73/PV.7) and during the Council's
visit said that the elections would be held on time, that
every necessary step will be taken to ensure peaceful
and credible elections and that he takes it very seriously.
In that regard, we underline that the support provided
by the United Nations and the African Union is of
crucial importance.

Although the elections are an important step in
stabilizing the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, they are only a part of the solution. In
that vein, we would like to stress the importance of
further security-sector reforms, together with the
decentralization and consolidation of State authority
and the socioeconomic development of the country.
We should realize that there is no development without
security, but also that there is no security without
development. We believe that in the foreseeable future,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
should have a designated deputy who would have
oversight over, and be responsible for, development
and the fulfilment of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). In that vein, we would like to stress the
importance of the threefold approach to addressing
conflicts, which is intended to be a global model. Its
components are as follows: building capacity for the
interlinkages between security and development while
promoting the SDGs; a revamped and innovative
regional approach; and the One United Nations
principle, based on the holistic modus operandi of our
Organization. At the same time, as noted by Special
Djinnit today and by Special Representative Zerrougui
during our visit, we realize that good political will is
needed to address the root causes.

On the humanitarian front, we note with regret that
the existing situation, with a large number of internally
displaced persons and refugees, against the backdrop
of the underfunded humanitarian response plan, has
been aggravated by the outbreak of the Ebola virus,
which has caused more than 100 human deaths. We
commend the efforts of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo authorities, with the coordinated support of
the United Nations and the African Union, to fight this
epidemic. However, efforts to combat the Ebola virus
are significantly hampered due to the unstable security
situation in the affected zones.

On implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, we positively note the
enhanced cooperation by the signatory countries on
security, political and economic matters, as well as the
fight against impunity through judicial cooperation.
Our delegation raised this matter during the Council's
meeting with Prime Minister Tshibala Nzenzhe. In that
regard, we welcome the outcomes of the ninth high-level
meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, held
on 8 October in Kampala. We encourage the signatory
countries to continue to increase their ownership of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
intensify their efforts to fully implement national and
regional commitments. Regional institutions should
also play a key role in the quest for lasting peace and
stability in the Great Lakes region. The Framework
remains a viable context and platform to help the
countries and institutions of the region to achieve peace
and stability in line with the objectives of the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.

Lastly, we once again express our gratitude for
the visit, which enabled us to see at first hand what is
happening in the country and what has been done to
achieve peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That is our absolute priority, and we will
continue to extend our support.

