Ms. Pillay: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to interact with the Security Council a
few days before the end of my term. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his very kind words and for his
support for my mandate, without which we would not
have been able to advance as we have.

Conflict-prevention is complex, but it can be
achieved. In many States, democratic institutions
de-escalate disputes long before they reach the boiling
point. Even after violence has broken out, international
actors can help broker and enforce peace. In my own
country, South Africa, the United Nations helped end
300 years of injustice when it declared apartheid a
crime against humanity and imposed sanctions, and
democratic institutions were installed to resolve future
disputes.

In Nepal, following almost a decade of armed
conflict, my Office's efforts included the deployment
of both short- and long-term strategies. They included
support for Constituent Assembly elections, capacity-
building for police and civil society and important
Government initiatives, such as addressing caste-based
discrimination.

Following the 2007 massacres in Guinea - a
country at high risk of violence and civil war - the work
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) demonstrated the
criticality of early engagement, notably in building
civil society's capacity to investigate and document
human rights Violations. There was coherent action
by national, regional and international actors, and the
Council established a commission of inquiry. Today
OHCHR's country office continues to support stronger
institutions, transitional justice and reconciliation.

In Colombia, the United Nations efforts to
promote human rights and our capacity-building for
democratic culture and institutions helped to establish
a climate of respectful dialogue. A transitional justice
process included compensation for victims and a truth
commission. We facilitated high-level governmental
recognition of indigenous authorities. Mediation helped
contain local disputes. One particular good practice that
merits highlighting is Colombia's unique early-warning
system to detect and prevent violations of human rights.

Human rights are always central to conflict-
prevention. Patterns of violations, including sexual
Violence, provide early warning of escalation. The
human-rights agenda is also a detailed road map
for ways to resolve disputes. My Office's years of
practical experience, including through human-rights
components of peacekeeping missions, demonstrate a
number of good practices that address both proximate
triggers of conflict and root causes. To emphasize
three, let me cite strengthening civil society actors,
increasing participation by women in decision-making
and dialogue and addressing institutional and individual
accountability for past Violations of human rights.

Yet, as the Secretary-General has pointed out,
the conflict in Syria is metastasizing outwards in
an uncontrollable process whose eventual limits we
cannot predict. Other complex and potentially highly
eruptive conflicts are under way in Afghanistan, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Iraq, Libya, Mali, the occupied Palestinian
territory, Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan and
Ukraine. Those crises hammer home the full cost ofthe
international community's failure to prevent conflict.
They combine massive bloodshed and devastation of
infrastructure with acutely destabilizing transnational
phenomena, including terrorism, the proliferation of
prohibited weaponry, organized crime and spoliation of
natural resources.

None of those crises erupted without warning. They
built up overyears - and sometimes decades - of human
rights grievances: deficient or corrupt governance and
judicial institutions, discrimination and exclusion,
inequities in development, the exploitation and denial
of economic and social rights and the repression of
civil society and public freedoms. Early detection
systems, such as the 51 special procedures experts of
the Human Rights Council, and systematic scrutiny by
treaty bodies repeatedly alerted us to those shortfalls.
Therefore, although the specifics of each crisis could
not necessarily be predicted, many of the human rights
Violations that were at their core were known. They
could have been addressed.

That was, in the first place, the duty of the relevant
States. But when Governments are unwilling or unable
to protect their people, it is the responsibility of the
international community and, singularly, the Security
Council, to intervene and to deploy the range of good
offices, support, inducements and coercion at its
disposal to defuse the triggers of conflict.

The Council's interest in human rights increased
markedly during my tenure. But despite repeated
briefings regarding escalating violations in multiple
crises by OHCHR and other human rights mechanisms,
there has not always been a firm and principled decision
by members of the Council to put an end to crises. Short-
term geopolitical considerations and national interests,
narrowly defined, have repeatedly taken precedence
over intolerable human suffering and grave breaches
of and long-term threats to international peace and
security. I firmly believe that greater responsiveness by
the Council would have saved hundreds of thousands
of lives.

A broader conception of national interest would
be more appropriate to a century in which a growing
number of challenges face humankind as a whole.
In those terms, the use of the veto to stop actions
intended to prevent or defuse conflict is a short-term
and ultimately counterproductive tactic. The collective
interest, defined clearly by the Charter of the United
Nations, is in the national interests of every State.

State sovereignty is often invoked to deflect
United Nations action to prevent serious human rights
Violations. But as I have often said to the representatives
of Governments: "You made the law; now you must
observe it". Sovereign States established the United
Nations and built the international human rights
framework precisely because they knew that human
rights violations caused conflict and undermined
sovereignty. Early United Nations action to address
human rights protects States by warding off the threat
of devastating violence.

The Council can take a number of innovative
approaches to prevent threats to international peace
and security. Within the Rights Up Front initiative,
the Secretary-General can be even more proactive in
alerting it to potential crises, including situations that
are not formally on its agenda. To further strengthen
early warning, the Council could also ask for more
regular and comprehensive human rights reporting by
protection actors. For example, my successor as High
Commissioner could provide an informal monthly
briefing.

The work done by commissions of inquiry to
establish clarity and prepare accountability should be
followed by Council implementation of many more of
their recommendations for follow-up. I trust that, in
future, the commissions too will benefit from regular,
official channels of communications with the Council.

Finally,the Councilcould adoptastanding consensus
on a menu of possible new responses to violations
alerts, such as rapid, flexible and resource-efficient
human rights monitoring missions, limited in time and
scope. Another innovative option could build on the
new Arms Trade Treaty, which requires arms exporters
and importers to confirm that weapons will not be used
to commit violations. States parties could agree that,
where there are concerns about human rights in States
that purchase arms, one condition of sale would be that
they accept a small human rights monitoring team with
deployment funded by the Treaty's trust fund.

The laws of the United Nations are most needed
when conflict looms, and the Council has the mandate
to address crises before they escalate into threats to
international peace and security.

It has been an honour to serve the United Nations.

