Mrs. Zappia (Italy): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and thank you for dedicating today's
open debate to the very important issue of working
methods. These are at the very heart of the increasing
demand to strengthen the institutions on which the
international system is based today. A more transparent
and legitimate Security Council is absolutely needed
if we want to foster the trust of public opinion in
the Organization and achieve the common goal of
strengthening multilateralism.

I also wish to commend your work, Mr. President, as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, as well as the work done
before you by Ambassador Bessho of Japan. Your work
is very important in improving the working methods of
the Security Council and in updating and implementing
revised presidential note 507 (S/2017/507, annex).

Finally, I thank the briefers for their
insightful presentations.

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered
today by the representative of New Zealand, on behalf
of a number of recently elected Council members from
all regional groups, and would like to make some
additional remarks in its national capacity.

Revised note 507 responds to the demand for
enhanced transparency, inclusiveness and interaction
of the Council with the rest of the United Nations
membership, but additional measures are needed.
Among these, it is paramount to ensure fair burden-
sharing and equal distribution of penholdership and
chairmanship of subsidiary bodies among permanent
and elected members. The Council is a collective
body, made up of a number of members that should act
together on an equal footing as much as possible. And
we believe that such fair and equal distribution of duties,
for example through the practice of co-penholdership,
is consistent with a more transparent, representative,
accountable, democratic and efficient Security Council.

We firmly believe that the elected 10 members
(E-10) of the Security Council play a crucial role in
the full implementation of revised note 507 and in
ensuring better working methods. During our term on
the Security Council in 2017, we saw how coordination
and concerted action on the part of its elected members
can be useful tools for overcoming stalemates in the
Council, fostering the participation of civil society,
especially women, and spotlighting cross-cutting issues
related to peace and security. Moreover, our split term
with the Netherlands proved that coordination between
outgoing and incoming members is key to ensuring a
smooth transition, in particular in the work of subsidiary
organs, since it enables newly elected Council members
to hit the ground running. We encourage the Council to
make use of all the tools at its disposal, and we would
like to stress the following.

First, as my friend the Permanent Representative
of Canada just said, we believe in closer cooperation
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), and we look forward to seeing the
Council regularly request, deliberate and draw on the
PBC's specific, strategic and targeted advice. Secondly,
in reviewing the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
due consideration should be given to the views of troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs), whose men and women are actually
risking their lives on the ground. A more inclusive
involvement of TCCs and PCCs when renewing
mandates is key to nurturing trust between these
countries and Council members. Thirdly, Italy is in
favour of inviting briefers from civil society, particularly
women, to Council meetings. Again, as my friend from
Canada just said, the participation of women, and
greater gender inclusivity and equality, allows Council
members to hear different voices and points of view
before deliberating. Fourthly, Council members should
promote more regular horizon-scanning meetings, with
a view to responding to crises before they erupt.

The aim of improving the Council's working
methods is to have a more transparent, accountable and
efficient Council. As such, it is inevitably intertwined
with the issue of comprehensive reform of the Security
Council, including its structure and composition. We
must strive for a modern Council that enjoys greater
authority and legitimacy and that is also more inclusive
and democratic. We should then earnestly debate
whether and how an expansion of veto powers would
make the Council more responsive to international
crises and more efficient, democratic, accountable and
transparent. In that respect, Italy is ready to engage with
the rest of the membership in a constructive dialogue
leading to reform through which elected members can
make a bigger contribution to the Council's work, as
well as act as a bridge between non-Council members
and their concerns.

