Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My delegation wishes
to join others in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am convinced that under your leadership the
work of the Security Council will be most productive. You
have our full confidence and support in carrying out the
responsibilities of the presidency for the month of May.

I should like to thank your predecessor, Ambassador
Somavia of Chile, for the wisdom and efficiency with
which he conducted the Council's business during the
month of April.

My delegation also expresses its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/l996/328) on the situation in Angola.

We note some positive developments since the last
extension of the UNAVEM. III mandate on 8 February,
including the near completion of the quartering of the
rapid reaction police, progress in the withdrawal of the
Angolan Armed Forces (FAA) from the quartering areas
and a relative calm in the military situation, with
diminishing cease-fire violations. However, the overall
progress to date in the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol falls far short of our expectations.

There are three vital tasks to be accomplished if the
peace process is to be assured of success: the timely
completion of the quartering of UNITA troops, the
integration of UNITA troops into the Angolan Armed
Forces and the national police, and the establishment of
the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation.
According to the new timetables agreed upon between
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi on 1 March in
Libreville, the first two tasks are to be completed by June
and the third by mid-July.

On the crucial front of quartering, progress has been
slow and uneven. Although the accelerated quartering of
UNITA troops in the past several days is a welcome
development, we regret UNIT A's failure to complete the
quartering of all its troops by today in compliance with
resolution 1045 (1996). The new deadline for the
completion of quartering is less than two months away,
and yet we are barely half way through. We share the
Secretary General's concern, expressed in paragraph 33 of
his report, that any further procrastination in the
quartering of UNITA troops could bring about the
collapse of the whole peace process. We call on
Mr. Savimbi to fulfil his commitment to complete the
quartering by June.

Progress is also long overdue in the negotiations on
the integration of UNITA troops into the FAA. Inasmuch
as the conclusion of these negotiations is crucial in
making the peace process irreversible, it is a testing
ground for the political will and commitment of the
Angolan parties to the peace process. Progress in this area
is essential to the establishment of the Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation. It will also provide
strong incentives to the quartering process. In this respect,
we call on both sides to rise above their narrow parochial
interests and work out necessary arrangements for the
formation of unified armed forces by 15 May, as agreed

 

in the Joint Commission's calendar of actions for May. We
look forward to the success of the good offices undertaken
by the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, to bring the Angolan
Government and UNITA to terms for the formation of the
unified armed forces.

The establishment of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation will come as the culmination of the
peace process. This involves a constitutional reform
providing for power-sharing arrangements, including the
description of the post to be assumed by Mr. Savimbi in the
new Government. Progress in this area will be meaningful
only when it is based on mutual confidence between the
Angolan parties. In this respect, we urge President Dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi to meet at the earliest opportunity
in Angola to resolve all outstanding issues.

We also attach great importance to road rehabilitation
and demining as a prerequisite for the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of Angola. UNAVEM. III deserves our
commendation and encouragement for the excellent job it
has done in this area, as referred to in paragraph 16 of the
Secretary General's report. We agree about the urgent need
to accelerate the demining efforts, and call for active
cooperation from the Angolan parties to this end.

The Angolan peace process stands at a critical juncture
now. In the coming days and weeks the political will and
commitment of the Angolan parties to carry forward the
peace process will be rigorously tested. UNAVEM. III is
currently the largest United Nations peace-keeping
operation in the world, with 7,200 troops, drawn from 36
Member States, including Korea. Given the commitment of
the United Nations, as symbolized by the level of resources
it has devoted to Angola, the Council cannot afford to let
the Angolan peace process stall.

In the expectation that the Government of Angola and
UNITA will honour their commitments under the Lusaka
Protocol and the Libreville agreement without delay, my
Government supports the extension of the UNAVEM. III
mandate until 11 July 1996. We therefore will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before the Council.

The international community can be helpful only when
the parties concerned try to help themselves by searching
for mutual reconciliation. It must be borne in mind that
lasting peace will remain elusive unless it is firmly rooted
in the political will and the good faith of the parties to
come to terms and make peace with each other.

Finally, my delegation pays tribute to the men and
women of UNAVEM. III for their sacrifice and
indispensable contribution to the consolidation of peace
and stability in Angola under extremely difficult
conditions.

