Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
expresses its thanks for the briefing presented by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan Salame. We take this
opportunity to convey our unconditional support
for the tireless discharge of his duties to bring about
a unified, peaceful and prosperous Libya. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his 24 August
report (S/2018/780), and express our gratitude to His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative
of Sweden, for his briefing in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
We wish to begin our statement by condemning the
escalation of violence we have seen starting last week
in Tripoli due to clashes among various armed groups.
We are pleased that, thanks to the great efforts of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
under Mr. Salame' and the meetings held with the parties
concerned, a cessation ofhostilities agreement has been
reached to put an end to the clashes, which have claimed
dozens of lives, injured many, caused significant
material damage and exacerbated the humanitarian
situation. Consequently, we call on all parties to respect
the agreement reached yesterday, 4 September, and to
find lasting, peaceful solutions to ensure the security
of the people of Libya and its institutions. Health and
humanitarian aid personnel must be granted access
in order to help the victims without risking their own
lives. We therefore urge Libyan authorities to cooperate
to that end.

We would be remiss if we did not express our
condolences and respect to the people of Libya for the
innocent lives lost during the clashes. We also wish
to stress that the perpetrators of such acts must be
inexorably brought to justice. Those events show the
critical importance of carrying out the comprehensive
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement and
the United Nations action plan for the country with a
view to definitively bringing the long transition period
to an end. Those instruments can hardly be implemented
if the country continues to be fragmented into different
factions, with various power centres, especially given
the significant role of armed groups acting with total
impunity and the influence of such groups in political
and socioeconomic sectors, as well as the uncontrolled,
illegal flow of weapons, despite the measures imposed
by the Council. The parties to the conflict must refrain
from taking actions that could exacerbate the already
complex situation.

All of that leads us to what has been repeated on
various occasions: Lybia's stability primarily requires
reconciliation through direct, frank and inclusive
dialogue among the parties. In that regard, we once
again commend the work of UNSMIL in particular, as
well as the African Union and the European Union, in
the fervent hope that the presidential and parliamentary
elections can be held later this year as planned and that
Libya can re-emerge and restore normality with a view
to securing a prosperous future. In order to achieve that,
the efforts to combat armed groups, smugglers, human
traffickers and terrorist organizations must be ramped
up, and the Government of National Accord given
even greater support so that it can regain full control
and the capacity it needs to govern in total autonomy
and sovereignty, and enabling the Army to be unified,
among many other measures.

In conclusion, we would once again like to highlight
and condemn another worrying issue, which is the
human rights violations that migrants and refugees
are enduring on a daily basis in detention centres in
Libya and at the hands of human-trafficking networks.
Since it is such a lucrative source of income for these
networks, the traffic in human beings bound to continue
until the situation is brought to an end. We therefore
call on the Council to act with urgency, proportionality
and energy to solve the problem, which continues of be
one of enormous concern for Equatorial Guinea. In the
face of these problems, we believe it is vital to rethink
the situation and take appropriate steps. We therefore
want to say that Equatorial Guinea will support all
well-founded, impartial and suitable proposals that can
help to end all acts that constitute violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law and are an
obstacle to the restoration of peace in Libya.

