Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would
first like to thank President Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals for their briefings and for
their comprehensive report (see S/2018/347). We also
wish to thank Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra,
Permanent Representative of Peru, for his leadership
of the Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

After 24 years of service, the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) completed
its mandate and closed its doors last December. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to express
its sincere gratitude to all those who worked for and
with the ICTY. In many aspects, the court was unique
and groundbreaking - unique in its contribution to
international criminal justice case law, in its prosecution
of sexual violence as a war crime and in convicting so
many people accused of atrocity crimes.

The closure of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) in 2015 and of the ICTY in 2017
mark the end of an era. We are now moving from the
early stages of justice in Rwanda and in the Balkans
to a more mature stage. However, much work remains
to be done. In that respect, we are grateful that the
Mechanism has now assumed the responsibilities
and all remaining functions from both the ICTY and
the ICTR.

Today, I will focus on three issues: first, the judicial
workload of the Mechanism; secondly, capacity-
building; and thirdly, the early release policy.

My first point is on the judicial workload of the
Mechanism, which is higher than anticipated. We note
with satisfaction that the three cases on the docket of
the Mechanism are nonetheless all ahead of schedule.
The working methods implemented by the Mechanism
have enabled the judges to expeditiously render
judgments in the shorter legal proceedings. We fully
support those efficient working methods and encourage
the Mechanism to continue along that path.

Turning to my second point, the capacity-building
and outreach activities of the Prosecutor, we fully
support the three priorities of the Prosecutor to,
complete all trials and appeals expeditiously, locate and
arrest the eight remaining fugitives and assist national
jurisdictions in prosecuting international crimes. We
would like to underscore the importance of the last
priority in particular.

With the closure of both Tribunals, for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, ensuring accountability
for war crimes in the countries involved now entirely
depends on national judicial authorities. It is of the
utmost importance that national judicial authorities
be assisted, supported and advised in prosecuting war
crimes. We encourage the Prosecutor to continue those
very important activities.

Turning to my third point, the early release policy,
we take note of the current discussion. In that regard,
we acknowledge and underscore the authority given
to the Mechanism's President by its statute in that
regard. The international legal order and the rule of
law require the international community to respect and
implement judicial decisions taken by the Mechanism
in accordance with the statute.

In conclusion, the Netherlands proudly hosted the
ICTY in The Hague and is proud to host the Mechanism
there as well, together with many other international
legal institutions. The quality of those international
legal institutions is determined by the quality of the
staff members and the quality of their leadership. In
our view, therefore, the prudent and careful following
of relevant decision-making procedures is crucial when
appointing those leading the institutions. That also
applies to the role of the Security Council in this regard.

Our Constitution obliges our Government to
promote and protect the international legal order, and
international criminal justice is a key element of that
endeavour. Let me once again commend Prosecutor
Brammertz and his team for all their hard work. To
President Meron, I should like to express my thanks
for his statement of two weeks ago before the Security
Council (see S/PV.8262); in particular, his personal note
moved my delegation and was quite compelling. We
share his concerns that international criminal justice
is still very much in its early stages, and therefore at a
highly vulnerable stage of development. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands remains determined to fight
impunity and to ensure that justice is done by victims
of international crimes worldwide. We will continue to
protect and promote the international legal order and to
do our utmost for international criminal justice.

