Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Feltman for his highly valuable briefing. I would also
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Spain,
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, for his work as
facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), and for his exhaustive report (S/2016/589),
which makes mention, inter alia, of the informal
Security Council meetings that were held at the expert
level in this new context. I would also like to thank the
Head of the Delegation of the European Union for the
briefing he made on behalf of the Joint Commission.

Egypt welcomes the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) and the adoption of resolution 2231
(2015), which take us one step further towards the
declaration of the Middle East as a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, which
could contribute to regional peace and security and
help to diminish tension at a very crucial juncture in
the Middle East, where we have seen so much conflict.
In this context, Egypt commends the international
relationships that led to the nuclear commitments made
by the Islamic Republic of Iran in resolution 2231
(2015). We encourage Iran to continue working in this
same vein.

Resolution 2231 (2015) touches not only on
Iran's nuclear commitments, but also on its ballistic
missile-launching activities and the transfer of
conventional weapons. The Council discussed Iran's
ballistic missile launches in March and was informed
of the seizure of weapons cargo suspected to have
been transferred from Iran in violation of resolution
2231 (2015). Such issues elicit a great deal of interest
in the countries of the region as they have serious
consequences for regional peace and stability.

Egypt appreciates the effort and commitment
the Secretary-General has shown in the drafting of a
balanced report on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015), which outlines these
incidents. We hope that future reports will contain clear
and precise recommendations to fill in any existing
gaps in the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015),
particularly with regard to measures to control ballistic-
missile launches and the transfer of nuclear weapons.

The Security Council is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
resolutions it adopts, including resolution 2231 (2015),
are one of the ways the Council expresses its will in
that regard. That is why divergence in views with
regard to technical aspects and the interpretation of
resolution 2231 (2015) should not overly absorb the
Council's attention, nor should they deter or derails the
Council from its mission to ensure international peace
and security.

Unquestionably, the launching of ballistic missiles
by Iran, which has been mentioned in many reports on
Iranian arms transfers in conflict zones in the Middle
East, is fully contrary to the purposes of resolution
2231 (2015). They can only contribute to the escalation
of conflict and to heightening tensions between Iran
and its neighbours.

The Security Council is obliged to send a clear
message to Iran and the countries of the region regarding
the key importance of regional peace and stability
and the security of all members of the international
community. Council members must also avoid getting
caught up in the technical details and manoeuvres in
the interpretation of resolutions. It must make every
effort to ensure peace and stability in the Middle East,
working in cooperation with the countries of the region
to build bridges and confidence among parties through
the complete commitment to and full implementation
of the Council's goals and resolutions.

