Germany has voted against the above-mentioned draft resolution (S/2020/658) presented by the Russian Federation. The Secretary-General asked many times for more humanitarian access in Syria, not less. He called for a renewal, for 12 months, of the two crossings in the north-west, Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam, and for more cross-line and more cross- border access to the north-east. After nine years of war, hundreds of thousands of the civilians in the north-west of Syria had no other choice than to flee the violence earlier this year further to the north. The Russian proposal, however, is aimed at stopping the mandate for the border crossing of Bab Al-Salam, limiting humanitarian access to a single border crossing in the north, Bab Al-Hawa. Although the size and capacity of the border crossings are different, they are both equally essential to provide assistance to 2.8 million people in need in north-western Syria. While the Bab Al-Hawa crossing is used to deliver aid to Idlib province, the Bab Al-Salam crossing reaches the region north of Aleppo, home to an additional 300,000 internally displaced persons since the last offensive. Both areas are separated by conflict lines. The offensive caused a massive displacement of people to a shrinking territory. But the numbers of those in need did not decrease; on the contrary, demands for food, shelter and health care increased to record levels. The co-penholders will further engage in efforts with all parties to come to consensus. This is an important responsibility of the Council. We hope we can find unity, in the interests of the Syrian people in need. We also reject the language proposed on sanctions. European Union sanctions are not targeted at the Syrian people; they are exclusively targeted at representatives of the authorities in Damascus. They were introduced because of the repressive policies of the Al-Assad regime against the civilian population of Syria and the regime's grave violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law. They do not affect the delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need, containing as they do specific provisions allowing for the provision of humanitarian aid, including the supply of medicines and medical equipment needed in order to respond to the coronavirus disease in Syria.
