Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, wish to thank Ms. Bensouda for her
briefing on the investigation into the situation in Libya
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). We support the
efforts of the Court to bring to justice the perpetrators
of the most serious crimes committed during the events
in Libya. They must not go unpunished.

We would be grateful to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for providing a more detailed explanation
of the adoption of diametrically opposed decisions
regarding the admissibility before the Court of the
cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi. The Court declared the Al-Qadhafi case
admissible, noting that the Libyan cases were unable
to guarantee due judicial process, yet only four months
later it came to the completely opposite conclusion in
the Al-Senussi case, stating that Libya wished to and
was able to conduct that judicial investigation.

We continue to harbour serious doubts about
the ability of the Libyan authorities to conduct a
national investigation at this stage, as reflected by the
information contained in section 4 of the report on
cases of death in detention centres and the ongoing
practice of torture in that country. In that context, we
note the absence of any progress in investigations by
the ICC of crimes committed by the rebels during the
Libyan conflict. The report fails to note any positive
developments in that regard. It is well-known that the
rebels committed atrocities both during and after the
armed conflict.

Unfortunately, according to various sources, armed
violence, clashes and lawlessness in Libya continue
to this day. The central authorities are clearly unable
to exert control over the whole country. Under such
circumstances, it is unclear how effective the work of
the national fact-finding and national reconciliation
commission can be and what its potential role could be
when it comes to bringing to justice rebels accused of
committing crimes. We believe that the ICC should take
up investigations into crimes committed by the rebels.

We reiterate our call to the Court not to confine
the investigation to just the inner-circle of the former
Libyan leader, and to deliver instead an objective
legal assessment of the actions of all parties to the
conflict and to post-conflict violence. Again, we urge
the Court to investigate cases of the disproportionate
and indiscriminate use of force during the NATO-led
operation, which led to casualties among the civilian
population.

Finally, we continue to be troubled by the absence
of information on developments and steps taken
regarding the detention in Zintan, in June 2012, of
a group of ICC officials. Such incidents have a very
negative impact on the cooperation of the Court with
States and undermines efforts to combat impunity.

