Mr. Wolfensohn: Let me start, Vice-President Gore,
by thanking you for your invitation to attend this meeting.
I believe it is the first time that a President of the World
Bank has ever attended a meeting of this body. It was a
dream that I did not think would be realized in my period
as President, so I am grateful for that, as I am, indeed, for
your putting on the agenda the issue of health and the issue
of development, in which you have been so steadfast in
your support of our institution.

I am also very grateful to Secretary-General Arman for
the leadership that he showed in bringing the World Bank
more closely in parallel and in partnership with other
institutions of the United Nations, and I am very happy to
be here with my colleagues from my the United Nations
Development Programme and the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).

I do not know a lot about the workings of the Security
Council. I have images of you ladies and gentlemen
meeting at midnight, having very important meetings, using
high diplomacy and power politics to solve very important
and pressing issues that face us: issues of conflict, issues of
chemical weapons, issues of nuclear challenges and issues
of security. The funny thing is that in Washington we think
that what we do every day in terms of addressing the
questions of development are actions which lead to the very
same issue of security and peace. We work every day
looking at the conditions of our planet and think in terms
of the 6 billion people who now inhabit our globe, of the
3 billion people who live on less than $2 per day, of the 1.2
billion that live on less than $1 per day, and we think of
the next 25 years, when that 6 billion will grow to 8 billion.

We wonder what sort of a world it will be.

Without being a social scientist or an Ambassador, I
know that if people are well fed, have opportunity, are
well-governed and have a sense of security for their
children, they are less likely to fight and get into problems
than if they live in a period where they have no
governance, where the sinews of governance do not give
them security and where there is little hope.

We are worried about the next 25 years, and I would
suggest that this is a subject directly relevant to the
deliberations of this Council.

If it is true that poverty eradication and development
are the counterpart of security, then nowhere is this more
important than in Africa. In sub-Saharan Africa we have
500 million people, of whom more than half live in
poverty. It is there, as the Secretary-General commented,
the greater part of conflict and wars exist today. These
are considerations that this Council has before it. If,
therefore, Africa is at the centre of the agenda, which
indeed it is this month - and I congratulate Ambassador
Holbrooke on this initiative - then surely the question of
AIDS comes to the top of the list as an issue which can
affect security, development and poverty.

What we are seeing is that in today's world we are
rolling back some of the gains that have been made in
Africa over the last 40 years. The numbers are very
compelling. Under African leadership, we gained more
than 20 years in life expectancy. In many countries this
gain will be lost by the year 2010. The statistics have
already been provided by previous speakers. But just
imagine that in Botswana, Namibia, Zambia and
Zimbabwe, 25 per cent of the people between 15 and 19
years of age are HIV-positive. Just imagine that in
Zambia and Zimbabwe there is a greater chance that a
child born today will die of AIDS than will live free of it.
These are stunning statistics.

The fact that a third of teenage girls in many African
countries are subject to the scourge of AIDS is not
something that can lead to a sense of security in a
community. In a number of countries, we are losing
teachers faster than we can replace them. We are losing
judges, lawyers, government officials and military
personnel. This problem is more effective than war itself
in terms of destabilizing countries. Unless we act, this
will continue, and there will surely be continued
instability in the continent.

AIDS is not just a health issue. AIDS is not just a
development issue. It is also an issue that affects the
peace and security of people in the continent of Africa
and throughout the world. It is certainly a subject that
merits consideration by this body.

The world looks to the Security Council to highlight
important issues and looks to the United Nations to give
leadership. In order to solve these global problems, we
need to bring together not just the United Nations, but
also the private sector, civil society, the faiths,
organizations such as ours and regional institutions. The
focus on the priorities can be given by this body.

 

I am honoured to be here, but in coming I want to
assure you, Mr. President, that we look forward to a
partnership with the United Nations and recognition by this
Council. Your successors, who will be dealing with issues
of security, are going to be looking at the causes. I tell you
this: poverty and development are the root cause of most of
the conflicts, and it is essential for this body to take action
in anticipation of a world that, without such action, will be
a world in conflict.

I look forward to working with the Council in the
months and years ahead on this issue of AIDS in Africa
and on the general issue of poverty and development.

