Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation has participated in
good faith in all the consultations, multilateral and
bilateral, designed to bring the positions of Security
Council members closer on the extension ofthe mandate
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) to investigate instances of chemical weapons
used in Syria. Any attempt to present things differently
amounts to nothing but intentional disinformation.

We note the initiative of our Japanese colleagues,
which they presented with the intention of helping to
find a way out of the situation. But we cannot support
their proposal for a short technical extension of the
JIM's mandate. We informed the members of the
Council ofthat decision and explained our reasons. The
draft resolution (S/20l7/970) was nevertheless put to the
vote. This step has nothing to do with anxiety about the
fate of the Mechanism, since everyone knows that it is
winding up its work today. As far as we are concerned,
no extension of the JIM's mandate is possible unless
we fix the fundamental shortcomings in its work. Any
other possibility can be excluded since the Mechanism
leadership - already covered with shame thanks to its
fictitious investigation of the episode of sarin use in
Khan Shaykhun - has signed on to the unsubstantiated
accusations that have been made against Syria.

I do not really know whether those who have been
condemning Russia so vehemently today have actually
read the report or our comments on it. Japan's draft
resolution has presented the Secretary-General with the
impossible task of submitting proposals that reflect the
Views of the members of the Security Council. As our
heated discussion has emphasized, in many respects
they are diametrically opposed.

We cannot consider the subject of extending the
JIM. in isolation from the general context. Yesterday's
Security Council meeting, which was politically
loaded in ways that had very little to do with chemical
weapons in Syria, left a very unpleasant aftertaste.
We are even more alarmed about what is going on
in the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. The United States delegation introduced
a draft resolution (S/2017/962) that essentially paves
the way for giving Syria an ultimatum. What are
they trying to achieve? Destruction of the results of
the unprecedented collective efforts to accomplish
Syria's chemical demilitarization that Russia and the
United States launched? Have they thought about the
consequences of the steps they have taken in New York
and The Hague for a political settlement in Syria? What
is going on now in the Security Council in New York,
and what they came up with in The Hague, are links in
a single chain.

Opinions have been voiced that a failure on the
part of the Security Council to come to a decision on
extending the JIM. might reflect badly on the Council's
authority and dignity. We suggest looking at it from
the other direction. Will it really add to the Security
Council's authority if we extend the life of a body
that for the past two years has been rubber-stamping
unsubstantiated accusations against Syria, as ifnothing
had happened? Is that worth making the Security
Council an accomplice in a grandiose fraud? Did it
look good when, at the April meeting convened after
the American air strike on the Shayrat airbase (see S/PV.7922), many delegations either acted as if nothing
had happened or flat-out supported an act of aggression
against a sovereign State?

There is absolutely no basis for assuming that
ending the work of the JIM. signals the emergence
of some kind of new challenges to the regime of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
whose implementation Russia views with the greatest
possible feeling of responsibility. That has been our
historical role, and we cherish it. The non-proliferation
regime depends on international instruments that have
nothing to do with the JIM. But what really needs
attention is the growing threat of chemical terrorism in
the Middle East.

What has been going on here today is like a bad
play. Russia is blamed for shutting down the JIM. The
people claiming that seem to have short memories.
Have they forgotten that yesterday it was they who shut
it down by voting against the draft resolution submitted
by Russia, China and Bolivia (S/20l7/968)? Yesterday,
when a vote was taken (see S/PV.8105) on the Russian-
Chinese draft resolution submitted by Bolivia, the
Council had a good opportunity to give the Mechanism
a new chance by improving and strengthening it. But
the effort was blocked - effectively vetoed by three
permanent members of the Council. Do not bother
trying to lay the responsibility on Russia now. It was
a conscious choice on the part of those whose priority
clearly has nothing to do with ensuring an objective
investigation of chemical crimes in the region but is
all about keeping the pressure on Syria and having
confrontations with Russia.

There is no need to create drama out of the end of
the JIM's work. There is nothing preventing Council
members from continuing to discuss the question of
improving this instrument with a view to its possible
resumption of its work in the future. But for that it
is essential to come to a common understanding of
the importance of eliminating the JIM's systemic
shortcomings, which have ruined it. Our draft resolution
remains on the table. If those who are concerned
about renewing its activities really want it, they can
get involved in meaningful work on its text and stop
dealing in political propaganda.

