Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): I, too, would like to
join previous speakers in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, for his comprehensive briefing. It adds
new elements and new information to the report of the
Security Council mission. We take great pleasure in
seeing Mr. Vieira de Mello at this gathering.

I would also like to use this opportunity to thank
Mr. Vieira de Mello for the hospitality accorded to the
Security Council mission in East Timor throughout its
visit and for his tremendous personal contribution and
efforts in making the mission a success.

I want also to pay tribute to the leader of the
mission, Ambassador Andjaba, for his discrete but
highly efficient leadership of the mission.

During the visit, the members of the mission
noted with satisfaction that Mr. Vieira de Mello is
doing a great job efficiently and effectively heading the
outpost of the Security Council in East Timor. We wish
to pay a special tribute to the work of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), which has made remarkable progress in
implementing its mandate. We are encouraged by the
significant success of UNTAET in laying the
foundations for a smooth transition to independence
and for the future statehood of East Timor.

My delegation notes with satisfaction the
acceleration of the process of Timorization of the
Administration. We are glad to know that a number of
Timorese District or Deputy District Administrators
have already been appointed, while legislative
responsibility is now exercised through the all-
Timorese National Council and executive power by a
Transitional Cabinet comprising five Timorese and four
internationals. It is particularly important, in our view,
that Sergio Vieira de Mello has established a close
relationship with East Timorese political elite.

We believe that the establishment of an East
Timorese defence force would be a logical step on the
road to independence.

Of course, there are difficulties, as has already
been mentioned, in particular in the establishment of a
fully functional judicial system, which remains
seriously under-resourced. In this respect, we commend
the efforts of the Special Representative to find a way
out of this predicament.

We are pleased to note that the overall security
situation in East Timor has become relatively stable. In
this regard, the efforts of UNTAET in addressing the
security threat posed by the infiltration of militias from
West Timor are highly commendable. It would not be
an exaggeration to say that the return of refugees from
West Timor to East Timor remains a serious problem
faced by UNTAET. The number of refugees in the
camps in West Timor is still very high, estimated at
120,000. The situation in the camps in West Timor, in
particular the depressing living conditions, remains a
cause of great concern. We think that, in the present
situation, it is important to ensure the safe return of
international humanitarian organizations and agencies
to West Timor. Unfortunately, the repatriation and
relocation of refugees is complicated by the activity of
the militias, which continue to intimidate and to spread
misinformation in the camps.

It is clear that the recent problems of the refugee
crisis and the security threat posed by the presence of
militias are closely interrelated and mixed up in a mass
of contradictions, which need to be resolved. The
solution to these problems will pave the way to the
settlement of other key issues facing UNTAET, in
particular reconciliation and ensuring stable political
and economic development for East Timor. We are
convinced that, in the circumstances, the Security
Council, UNTAET and the Government of Indonesia
should continue giving priority to these matters by
coordinating and complementing each other's efforts. I
would like to note the good relationship of the Special
Representative with the Government of Indonesia,
which facilitates fruitful dialogue.

We are encouraged by the measures taken by the
Indonesian Government to assist the refugees to return
to East Timor and to resettle those who want to stay in
Indonesia. We positively note the decisive steps taken
by the Government of Indonesia towards putting an end
to the militias' activities and towards their
disarmament and disbandment, as well as the efforts of
Indonesia to bring to justice the perpetrators of serious
crimes committed in East Timor. The arrest of militia
leader Guterres and those charged with perpetrating the
tragedy in Atambua is a positive development. We
welcome the recent adoption of Indonesian legislation
for the establishment of a human rights tribunal. Our
meetings with the Coordinating Minister for Political,
Social and Security Affairs, Mr. Yudhoyono, and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Shihab, reaffirmed
their understanding that it was in the interest of
Indonesia to settle these problems as soon as possible.

In conclusion, let me assure you, Sir, and the
Special Representative that my country remains a
strong supporter of UNTAET activities. We are also
ready to continue our support for the peacekeeping
efforts of the United Nations in the region by extending
Ukraine's participation in UNTAET.

