Ms. Haq: First of all, I want to thank and convey
my sincere appreciation to all the members of the
Council for all their expressions of support for the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT), for acknowledging the work done by
UNMIT, and for their strong words in support of the
continued progress of the people of Timor-Leste
towards peace and stability. I specifically would like to
thank members of the Council who expressed their
agreement concerning the jointly owned planning and
implementation mechanism, and I fully acknowledge
the strong emphasis that was made by some members
of the Council that it must be established jointly, with a
strong emphasis on the national ownership of this
process. We feel that an effective transition strategy
will lay the foundations necessary to ensure the success
of post-peacekeeping efforts as Timor-Leste moves
into the peacebuilding arena.

I would also like to take note of all the
observations that were made with respect to the
reconfiguration of UNMIT police, the expressions of
caution taken against hasty handovers, which we fully
appreciate, and the need for a sufficient presence in all
the districts and units to emphasize monitoring,
training and mentoring and the continued need for
capacity-building. In this context, many representatives
particularly mentioned the 2012 elections as the test of
the stability and effectiveness of the Policia Nacional
de Timor-Leste (PNTL).

While everyone, I think, commented very
favourably on the resumption of primary policing
responsibilities, we also take note of some the concerns
expressed with respect to the preparation of the PNTL
in laying the groundwork for longer-term development.
I can assure the Council that we will continue to work
with the authorities in Timor-Leste in a concerted
manner on the remaining units and districts.

There was also a reference to the delineation of
roles between the military and the police. This kind of
sector-wide reform is a complex process. It takes up a
lot of time; it does not really have an end-point, but I
think that the commitment to the current and ensuing
legislation from the national security package must
continue. We will obviously address the continuing
needs of this operationalization of the laws and the
issues of delineation contained therein.

Many speakers raised concerns about impunity
and, as we have indicated, we certainly share this
concern. Primarily, as many have said, perceptions of
impunity can undermine public confidence in the rule
of law. I should point out that this can happen because
of institutional or individual capacity challenges - for
example, the difficulties that citizens have in accessing
justice because of linguistic difficulties, the need for
more trained court actors and the lack of infrastructure.
Again, we must address this comprehensively.

Many members of the Council have spoken about
socio-economic development, emphasizing the need for
employment and taking into account the social
instability that can be caused by large numbers of
unemployed young people.

I also note with gratitude the continued strong
indications of future bilateral support to Timor-Leste.
That is crucial as we enter the transitional phase and
we will continue to consult closely, obviously, and
coordinate closely with the bilateral partners.

Finally, much emphasis has been placed on the
continued culture of dialogue and reconciliation, and I
can assure members of the Council that that part of the
Mission's mandate will remain very much at the
forefront.

Let me thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council for your continued support and
32
guidance. I think that this keen interest will be evident
on the ground in the Council's upcoming visit. We
welcome that visit, and we would like to thank the
Government of Japan for its role in organizing it.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Japan for its role as Chair of the core group. I would
also like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Portugal and South Africa, two very active members of
the core group, on their election to the Security
Council. We certainly know that Timor-Leste will
benefit from that important membership.

Finally, let me thank you very much,
Mr. President, for your leadership and for the
tremendous support that you have brought to bear on
the work that UNMIT continues to do in Timor-Leste.
We continue to appreciate and seek the wise counsel
and guidance of this body.

