Mrs. Mladineo (Croatia): Let me join others in
welcoming the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and in
thanking him for his briefing to the Council.

We also thank Ambassador Khalilzad for his
statement on the activities of the Multinational Force in
Iraq (MNF-I).

Mr. De Mistura's mission is a demanding one,
and he has our full support. We remain confident that
he will successfully advance the objectives set out in
resolution 1770 (2007). We also believe that the United
Nations is uniquely placed to extend assistance to the
Government of Iraq in consolidating Government
institutions, promoting political dialogue and national
reconciliation, and engaging the neighbouring
countries. That said, I would like to express our
appreciation for the efforts of Mr. De Mistura's
predecessor, Mr. Qazi.

As Croatia joins the Council debate on Iraq, the
security indicators are encouraging, testifying to a
significant drop in violence. We welcome the combined
effort of the Iraqi security forces and MNF-I and hope
that this positive trend is continued and expanded.
However, as the Secretary-General's report notes, the
recent string of violent attacks is a sobering reminder
of the precarious security situation in the country. Over
the past years, Iraq has suffered a massive human toll.
Croatia deplores attacks against civilians. Among the
multiple challenges Iraq is facing, improving the
security and human rights situation should remain a
priority.

While continuing violence impedes nation-
building, the reverse is equally true: without serious
advances in the political process, recent improvements
in the security situation might be lost. We share the
assessment in the report of the Secretary-General that
the pace of the political process has not shown the
needed degree of progress, and we appeal to the Iraqi
leaders to engage genuinely on core political issues.

The constitutional revision process, legislation on
hydrocarbon resources and the implementation of
article 140 of the constitution remain the main
challenges for moving forward. We note with
satisfaction the recent adoption of the long awaited
Justice and Accountability Law and hope it will be
used to advance national reconciliation. It is equally
important to continue the positive trends in regional
cooperation. The developing dynamic of the expanded
neighbours conference is reassuring, and we salute the
outcome of the expanded ministerial meeting of
neighbouring States held in Istanbul last November.
The stabilization of Iraq is largely dependent on the
constructive engagement of those countries which
share borders with Iraq, and continued dialogue is of
utmost importance.

The growing humanitarian crisis is a matter of
grave concern. In addition to the fact that the number
of refugees and displaced persons is increasing, the
continuing violence puts the goal of meeting their basic
food needs at risk. We salute the efforts of United
Nations agencies in the field, notably the operations of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, UNICEF, the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Food
Programme and pay tribute to neighbouring countries
which have extended their help.

The challenges faced by Iraq do not respect
borders and generate risks not only to neighbouring
countries, but also to the wider region and beyond. We
believe that success in Iraq requires collective effort
and focused commitment. We agree with Mr. De Mistura
that the United Nations is ready for an energetic, centre-
stage role in Iraq. UNAMI deserves our full and
continuing support. We commend the efforts of the
United Nations personnel who continue to carry out
their duties and to work on expanding the United
Nations presence under dangerous circumstances.

