Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): Allow me at the outset to
express on behalf of my delegation our appreciation and
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his progress report on
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR) as well as for his latest visit to Rwanda, which
has reflected the international community's concern and its
interest in assisting the people of Rwanda to grapple with
the aftermath of the tragic events that befell their country
last year.

We note with satisfaction that the security situation
in the country has improved considerably since last June.
Working relations between the Government of Rwanda
and UNAMIR has also improved. As a consequence, the
restrictions on UNAMIR's freedom of movement have
been lifted and the Mission is now in a better position to
carry out its mandate successfully.

On the political level, we welcome the strenuous
efforts of the Rwandese Government to promote law and
order in the country and to encourage national
reconciliation through fostering confidence-building
measures and the safety and voluntary return of the
refugees. We welcome, in particular, the Rwandan
Government's attitude towards the refugee delegations
who are visiting the country to see for themselves the
current situation in Rwanda and who will share their
impressions with the refugees in the camps. We hope that
the favourable impression with which they leave will
dispel the refugees' fears and speed up their repatriation.

However, there are clearly a number of obstacles
which should be overcome if the process of national
reconciliation is to bear fruit. This includes the
overcrowding in the Rwandan prisons, the inadequacy of
the judicial system, and the tension on the borders with
some neighbouring countries. But most dangerous of all
are the continuing reports that elements of the former
Government army and militia are regrouping, training and
rearming themselves with a View to a violent return to
Rwanda. My delegation is of the view that the
international community should continue its efforts aimed
at preventing the recurrence of last year's tragic events in
Rwanda.

In this connection, we welcome the resolution we
have just adopted suspending until September 1996 the
restrictions on arms sales or supply imposed under
resolution 918 (1994), with a View to lifting it totally
thereafter. We believe that in view of the new realities on
the ground and the change in the circumstances which
prompted the imposition of those restrictions, this action
on the part of the Council is fully justified.

Moreover, the Government of Rwanda, like any
other sovereign Government, has every right to exercise
its inherent right of self-defence against any elements
which pose a threat to its territorial integrity and security.
We consider the aims of the Rwandan Government to be
noble, and any deviation from those principles will
complicate the actions of this Council in the future.W e
deem it appropriate that these restrictions remain on the

 
non-governmental forces so that this measure can
accomplish its dual purpose.

On the other hand, we have seen a deterioration of
security in the border areas between Rwanda and Zaire. The
Council needs to keep a close watch on arms movements in
that part of Africa. That is why we believe that the question
of the registration of weapons is very important, as
indicated in paragraph 11 of the resolution. My delegation
commends the Government of Rwanda for giving its
acceptance. My delegation also concurs with paragraph 10,
which addresses the movement of weapons to neighbouring
countries or to people not in the service of the Government
of Rwanda.

We know very well that the justice system in Rwanda
needs the help of the international community. This is an
area which cannot be established efficiently overnight. At
the same time, many detainees are languishing in jails
which are in very, very bad shape. Here, too, Rwanda
needs the urgent help of the international community. But,
more than that, we need Rwanda's commitment and will to
offer fair treatment to all its people and in trying to
promote reconciliation among its people.

Finally, we hope that the support of our Council for
the Rwandan call to lift the arms embargo will be taken as
a gesture of the Council's trust and confidence in the
efforts already demonstrated by the Rwanda Government.

