Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): Mr. President, let
me take this opportunity to congratulate you on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December. There can be no doubt that under
your wise guidance, this month's work will be successful.
At the same time, [wish to compliment your predecessor,
Ambassador Qin Huasun of China, for his exemplary
leadership of the Council in November.

Italy fully shares the Secretary-General's assessment,
contained in his report of 20 November 1997 [5/1997/911],
that over the past five years, the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) has successfully helped
prevent the spillover of conflicts from elsewhere in the
region into the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
UNPREDEP sets an important precedent in the preventive
deployment of United Nations forces, and has been a
success story whose results should not be wasted or
jeopardized.

The United Nations mission has promoted dialogue

among

the various political forces and ethnic

communities, provided humanitarian assistance to the
local population, and enhanced social integration and
institution building. The operation is making a decisive
contribution to the stabilization of the political situation
in the country, sheltering it from the dangers of increased
tensions that could stem from continued instability in the
region.

However, we also agree with the Secretary-General
that peace and stability in the country continue to depend
largely on developments in other parts of the region.
While the Secretary-General's report underlines an
improvement in the situation in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, we cannot ignore the elements of
precariousness that continue to exist.

Italy has also noted the request of the Foreign
Minister of the host Government, Mr. Blagoj Handziski,
for a lZ-month extension of the UNPREDEP mandate,
and was ready to support it. In his letter to the Secretary-
General [8/1997/838, annex], Mr. Handziski expressed
his Government's concern over the continued sources of
destabilization in the region, and in particular the
situation in Kosovo and in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Italy agrees with these assessments. While the
situation in Albania has greatly improved in the past few
months, thanks also to the prompt response of the
international community, and especially the Security
Council, which rapidly authorized the Italian-led
multinational protection force in the country, there can be
no doubt that tensions persist in the region.

In our View, these circumstances would make any
withdrawal of UNPREDEP forces at this stage
premature, and risk sending the wrong signal. We should
not forget that the original purpose of deploying a United
Nations mission in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia was to prevent it from being destabilized by
conflicts elsewhere in the area. Therefore, the situation
in the country should not only be considered by itself, but
also in the broader context of regional developments.

This is why we welcome the reconnnendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report, and have
sponsored today's draft resolution to extend the mandate
of UNPREDEP, in its present configuration, for nine
months. In this respect, as part of the Coordinating and
Consultative Process and of the Contact Group, my
delegation would like to praise the spirit of flexibility and
Security Council 3839th meeting
Fiftyvsecond year 4 December 1997

compromise that has prevailed, thus allowing this
extension.

In fact, this nine-month period appears to be the
minimum requirement for ensuring that, once the
UNPREDEP operation terminates, proper successor
arrangements will be put in place to guarantee the
international community's ongoing commitment to the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Italy stands by
this commitment.

