Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I would
also like to welcome Senator Biden here among us, and
I want to welcome Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, the Special
Representative and Coordinator of the United Nations
Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to thank
him for his detailed and enlightening presentation. We
are gratified that the report ofthe Secretary-General on
the activities of the United Nations mission reflects
that significant progress has been achieved in different
fields during this recent period.

The positive evolution of the situation throughout
the Balkans, as well as the tangible progress made in
the principal areas of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), allow us to approach this issue with
guarded optimism for the future ofthe region.

I want to congratulate UNMIBH on the plan of
work it has just prepared. The six main programmes
faithfully reflect the concern of the international
community regarding the implementation of the
Mission's mandate. In this respect it is worth
emphasizing the need to involve all the parties in the
development and implementation of this plan of work.
The flexible and evolving nature of the document
makes it possible to adjust the plan as necessary, on the
basis of how the situation develops. It will also make it
possible to assess, in accordance with the pre-
established criteria, the progress that has been made, in
order to optimize results. We support the UNMIBH
programme, including the opinion of the Mission
regarding the reduction in the personnel of the
International Police Task Force.

The reform and restructuring of the police are
essential in order to overcome fear and make it
possible to build a multi-ethnic society. In this context,
we support the efforts of UNMIBH to raise the norms

S/PV.4245

 

of professional competence of the police and to modify
its ethnic composition, so that it better reflects the
multi-ethnic nature of Bosnian society. We also support
the plan for establishing a single chain of command in
the police organization chart, thus limiting political and
partisan interference and promoting full respect for the
law. We also want to express our concern at the
magnitude of the scourge of organized crime. We call
for the taking of all necessary measures in order to put
an end to these activities.

The independence and the impartiality of the
judicial system are of primary importance to
establishing confidence among the three Bosnian
communities and to promoting national reconciliation.
In our view, the reform of the judicial system should
lead to the independence of judges, the protection of
witnesses and the unified, integral and non-
discriminatory application of legislation. In this
connection we welcome the establishment of the
Independent Judicial Commission charged with
reforming the judicial system, coordinating
international aid and designing specific programmes
for the training ofjudges.

While we are gratified by the return of so many
refugees and displaced persons, we must emphasize the
lack of financial resources available to UNMIBH so
that it could respond to the needs of refugees and
displaced persons - in particular by continuing to
rebuild damaged housing. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees estimated
that, as of last August, 18,000 housing units would
have to be rebuilt in order to continue the repatriation
process. We also encourage UNMIBH to persevere in
the strict application of property laws and to continue
to ensure the security of the repatriated persons.

I would like, lastly, to reaffirm our support for the
remarkable work that has been done by the United
Nations agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
programmes begun by these agencies will certainly
have beneficial consequences for the overall process.
In this respect, I would like to place special emphasis
on the initiative of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization to promote
dialogue and interfaith tolerance, involving the leaders
of the four major religious communities in the
preparation of a project to reconstruct historic religious
sites.

The inauguration of the commemorative
monument and the permanent burial of the victims of
Srebrenica will remain forever engraved in the memory
of all Bosnians as a painful reminder of the past. It will
be evidence of a new national reconciliation and a
symbol of the triumph of reason over folly and of love
over hatred for future generations.

In conclusion, may I pay tribute to all of the
personnel of UNMIBH for their continuing dedication
to the cause of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

