Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month and to thank Ambassador Heller
and his team for their excellent presidency during the
month of April. I also thank Ms. Landgren for her
briefing and in particular for the information that she
provided on recent developments in Nepal.

Those developments are worrisome. The current
crisis between the Government and the Army, which
has led to the resignation of Prime Minister Prachanda,
is a subject of concern, and the risk posed to the entire
peace process is not negligible. This is even more
regrettable because we had recently seen some limited
but real progress in the peace process - progress
referred to in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/221). In that context, we believe that it is even
more important that the Security Council send a signal
to the Nepalese parties calling on them for compromise
and cooperation to move the peace process forward. In
that connection, we support the draft presidential
statement submitted by the delegation of the United
Kingdom.

We have taken note of the official Nepalese
statements that the conditions are right for the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) to complete its
mandate in June. We wish that that were so, but it
seems a bit unrealistic to us, given the progress in the
process of demobilizing Maoist ex-combatants and the
current political crisis. Thus, the Nepalese parties
should be aware that UNMIN will not remain in Nepal
forever. Those parties have requested United Nations
support for the peace process, but they must shoulder
their responsibility to move the process forward, in
particular with regard to the reintegration of Maoist
ex-combatants.

We continue to hope that the Government's
commitment to finally release the minors held in
Maoist camps will become a reality as soon as
possible. The obstruction of that situation cannot be
tolerated, as a solution should be technically feasible in
the near future.

Finally, we remain prepared to support
maintaining a lighter United Nations presence to
support the peace process, in one way or another, if the
Nepalese Government considers it useful.

