The President: I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Viet Nam. At the outset, I would like to thank the two briefers for their briefings and updates. Viet Nam notes with deep concern the complicated humanitarian situation in Yemen. Attacks continue, causing severe casualties among civilians and destroying civilian infrastructure. The delivery of humanitarian aid is impeded. In that regard, we call on all parties concerned to exercise restraint and facilitate the humanitarian work of the United Nations and its relevant partners so that international assistance can reach the Yemeni people in need in a timely manner. We welcome the signing of the Stockholm and Riyadh agreements and stress the importance of their full implementation. That would contribute to de-escalation and thereby create favourable conditions for all parties concerned to engage in constructive dialogue with a view to achieving a comprehensive and sustainable political solution to the situation in Yemen, in accordance with international law, including the Charter of the United Nations and relevant Security Council resolutions, and with due respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yemen. To that end, we note with appreciation some recent progress over the past few months, including a decrease in acts of hostility in Al-Hudaydah governorate and southern Yemen, the indirect talks between Saudi Arabia and the Houthis in Oman and the release of detainees by Saudi Arabia and the Houthis. We join other delegations in calling on the parties concerned to show more political will and build mutual trust by implementing confidence-building measures. We highly appreciate and support the efforts made by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for Yemen. In that regard, we commend the adoption of resolution 2505 (2020) on Monday, renewing the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA), as well as the work ofthe Redeployment Coordination Committee to support the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, including substantive monitoring of the ceasefire and the redeployment of forces from the city and port of Al-Hudaydah and elsewhere. It is also critically important that the safety of UNMHA and its personnel be ensured so that the Mission can effectively carry out its mandate. I now resume my functions as President of the Security Council. I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
