Mr. Benomar: The political transition in Yemen
has recently entered its sixth month since the signing
of the transition agreement on 23 November 2011 in
Riyadh. The Yemeni sides have made much progress in
implementing the agreement and resolution 2014 (2011).
The formation of the Government of national unity, the
beginning of the restructuring of the armed forces and
the holding of presidential elections in February, with
overwhelming public support, secured a peaceful transfer
of power and marked the successful completion of the
first phase of Yemen's transition. Those steps, combined
with the recent launch of initial preparations for an
all-inclusive national dialogue conference, indicate that
Yemen's transition remains largely on track.

Since assuming office, President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour has shown strong leadership
and determination to lead the country through the
transition. The President has continued to take important
steps to advance the transition. His efforts have received
the overwhelming support and goodwill of the Yemenis.
In that context, he began the process of reform of the
military and the security services by issuing several
decrees announcing the appointment of commanders
to new positions. The Military Affairs Committee
established under the transition agreement has made
considerable progress in demilitarizing urban areas
despite many difficulties. Most checkpoints and battle
positions in Sana'a and Taiz have been removed.

That said, the transition of Yemen is taking place
against a backdrop of serious security concerns, an
unprecedented humanitarian crisis and many unresolved
conflicts. The timeline for the transition is very tight,
and there is no time to lose. One of Yemen's key
challenges is to assert the authority of the State in an
environment that is dominated by a multitude of armed
non-State actors competing for power. Al-Qaida, in
particular, continues to pose a major threat. However,
President Mansour's efforts to combat its advance in the
south and elsewhere are beginning to bear fruit.

During my eleventh good offices mission to
Yemen, from 18 to 30 April, new tensions arose as a
result of President Mansour's decisions to replace
the Commander of the Air Force, Mohammed Saleh
Al-Ahmar, a half-brother of former President Saleh,
and the Commander of the Presidential Guard, Tariq
Saleh, former President Saleh's nephew. Their refusal
to follow the President's instructions to move to other
positions created a dangerous situation.

During the mission, I worked very closely with
President Mansour and met former President Saleh and
his son, Ahmed Ali, Commander of the Republican
Guard, several times to help defuse the stand-off.
Finally, we reached an agreement to allow for the
handover to take place, and I personally witnessed the
handover ceremony of both the Air Force Command and
the Third Battalion.

However, I regret that, after my departure and as
of today, open defiance and a stand-off continue to
prevent the Colonel appointed by the President from
leading the Third Battalion. It should be noted that
the Third Battalion is one of the best equipped and
resourced military units in Yemen and is located next
to the presidential compound in the heart of the capital,
Sana'a.

Such developments demonstrate that the underlying
causes of tensions remain in place. Obstructionist
moves to impede President Mansour's reorganization
and control of the military and security forces could
derail Yemen's fragile transition process and result in
serious instability. All efforts must be made to keep the
transition on track.

The planned national dialogue conference could
be an essential step towards that end. If it is well
prepared and gains legitimacy, in the eyes of all Yemeni
constituencies, as a forum for shaping the framework of
Yemen's future, it could become an important vehicle
for democratic empowerment and for creating a positive
political dynamic in the country towards greater stability

and security.

The main parameters for the national dialogue
process are outlined in the transition agreement. On the
basis of consultations with all national constituencies,
we have identified a number of key principles in relation
to the national dialogue that are accepted by all.

First, it must be fully inclusive, which means that all
relevant segments of Yemeni society must be represented,
including political parties, the Southern Movement, the
Houthis and civil society representatives, including
youth and women's groups. Secondly, the process must
be genuinely participatory, which is to say that all those
included in the process must have a say in its design and
conduct, and must be assured that their views will be
heard. Thirdly, the dialogue process must be transparent,
meaning that key decisions on its timeline, membership,
agenda and methods of work should be publicly shared.
And finally, the dialogue has to generate results, meaning
that its outcomes must be fully implemented.

On 6 May, President Mansour issued a decree
appointing a contact committee for the national dialogue
process. The committee is tasked with facilitating the
formation of a preparatory committee for the national
dialogue by 30 June. That committee's appointment is
a welcome first step in launching the process on time.
The main task of the preparatory committee will be to
develop and agree on a concrete plan for conducting a
national dialogue conference, including agreement on
the format, membership criteria, participation and rules
of procedure. The outcome of that conference will feed
into the constitution-making process that is to conclude
in late 2013, enabling general elections to take place in
February 2014.

To be successful, the national dialogue process must
be designed and driven by the Yemenis themselves.
While that will require strong international support, its
footprint should be light. Based on consultations with
Yemeni actors, the United Nations will provide support
in four key areas: first, with political facilitation to help
stakeholders resolve disputes as they arise; secondly, with
technical support to the secretariats of the preparatory
committee and the national dialogue conference; thirdly,
with capacity-building of key constituencies, including
young people, women and internally displaced persons,
to ensure that they can participate effectively in the
Conference; and fourthly, with a public information and
awareness campaign to ensure that the public is properly
informed and included in the discussions taking place

throughout the process.

My Office will lead United Nations efforts in
support of the national dialogue, in close cooperation
with the United Nations country team. To that end,
a $2 million project initiative, to be funded from the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund, will cover support
needs during the dialogue's preparatory phase. A small
team of political advisers, who will work closely with
the country team, has also been deployed to Sana'a
to assist with the preparatory process. The success or
failure of the national dialogue is likely to make or
break Yemen's transition. Helping to ensure its success
will therefore be the top United Nations priority in
Yemen in the coming months, and we look forward to
working closely with other international actors who can
offer support for that process.

Yemen's security situation remains a source of
major concern. Military restructuring and steps towards
a unified command will take time and sustained effort.
In the meantime, the Government's overall security
capacity remains limited. In the North, the Houthis
continue to assert their control in Sa'ada and parts of
the governorates of Hajjah, Amran and Al-Jouf. In the
southern province of Abyan, Yemeni security forces
have stepped up their campaign against Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) and Ansar Al-Sharia with
air and navy support, with some recent success. Loder
has reportedly been retaken by the Yemeni army, and
significant inroads have been made in Jaar and Zinjibar,
while Shukra remains under the control of Ansar
Al-Sharia.

However, AQAP and Ansar Al-Sharia have
extended their reach into areas not previously associated
with their activities. Last week's terrorist bombing in
Sana'a - which targeted a military parade, killing some
96 soldiers and wounding more than 300 others - and
the recently foiled airliner bomb plot are reminders
that AQAP remains the most lethal Al-Qaida affiliate,
intent on striking both Western and regional targets. In
areas under its control, Ansar Al-Sharia has established
governance structures that provide social services
and justice administration in a region that has long
complained of discrimination and neglect by the central
Government.

Separatist sentiments in the South have been on
the rise. The Hirak, or Southern Movement, began
in late 2006 as a rights-based movement demanding
equality, non-discrimination and a change in relations
between North and South, all within a unitary State.
That movement was met with repression, and a few
years later groups within the Hirak began to advocate
the South's independence.

Other security issues remain. Incidents of abduction,
assassination and hostage-taking have increased in the
past few weeks. On the streets of Sana'a and throughout
the country, the presence of armed forces and militia
remains a reality. Major weapons and other military
capabilities can be redeployed in a matter of hours.
Furthermore, oil and gas pipelines and electricity lines
continue to be attacked frequently. Many of those attacks
are politically motivated, while others are criminal acts
committed in the context of the lawlessness that prevails
in parts of the country. Such attacks and sabotage cost
the State an average loss of revenue from the national
budget of around $250 million a month, or $3 billion a
year. That loss of revenue is a crime against the Yemeni
people. It adds more misery to the poor and vulnerable
groups. Yemen remains the poorest country in the Arab
world, with a fiscal deficit of around $2 billion, or 7 per
cent of gross domestic product.

The current scale of the humanitarian crisis in Yemen
is unprecedented, and the figures are much bleaker than
previously reported. Ten million people, almost half
of the country's entire population, are food-insecure,
with half of those - 5 million people i severely
food-insecure and in need of immediate assistance.
Almost one million children under the age of five suffer
from malnutrition. Ongoing fighting has displaced more
than half a million Yemenis within the country. Yemen
is also hosting 219,000 refugees and continues to record
a high influx.

To address the growing humanitarian needs in
Yemen, the humanitarian response from the United
Nations has been significantly expanded in 2012, but
delivering assistance still poses a number of challenges.
Key among them are capacity, security and funding.
Both the Yemeni Government and the international
community must prioritize this acute humanitarian
crisis. The Yemen humanitarian response plan, for
$455 million, is currently only 43 per cent funded. Since
the original appeal, however, the number of people in
acute humanitarian need has increased, and the financial
requirements are being revised. Substantially scaled up
support from the international donor community will
be needed to meet those increased needs. Members of
the Security Council should play a more active role in
bringing the humanitarian crisis in Yemen to the world's
attention.

A good development is that the international
community is now committing to scaling up its support.
The ministerial meeting of the Group of Friends of
Yemen, hosted by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in
Riyadh on 23 May, was aimed at providing a framework
and momentum for supporting Yemen's political,
economic and security reform plans in line with specific
timelines.

Other urgent issues also demand our attention.
The fate of those who were detained during the recent
conflict by Government security forces and armed
opposition groups has not been addressed, despite the
best efforts of the Government of National Unity. Those
who still hold individuals in custody must account for
them, allow access to them and grant their rapid release.
We are also mindful of the need to address the many
injustices of the past. Those who committed human
rights violations should be held to account.

I commend those in the Government who have
worked hard to generate a credible law on transitional
justice, a law that is the outcome of public consultations.
Unfortunately, in a cabinet meeting today, ministers
from the ex-ruling party, the General Peoples' Congress,
have again failed to endorse the draft of that law. As
stipulated in the transition agreement, the draft should
now be submitted to the Prime Minister and the President
for their decision.

In April, the Council of Ministers adopted a
decision to set up an independent national human rights
institution and requested that the Ministry of Human
Rights follow up the decision and prepare the necessary
draft legislation. This is a positive step and will require
considerable support from the United Nations and
international donors.

President Mansour and the Government of national
unity, led by Prime Minister Basendwah, are steadily
making progress in moving the country forward and
realizing the young people's aspirations to change.
They deserve the Council's continuing support. While
demonstrations continue to take place, youth, civil
society, women's groups and emerging political parties
have shifted their focus from contestation to preparatory
efforts and initiatives for the national dialogue process
and participation in the political process.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that, while Yemen's
transition remains largely on track, it cannot take place
under the shadow of continued military threats. If
legitimate governance is to take hold, the Yemeni people
must be able to see that those who hold legitimate
authority are in a position to exercise their powers
effectively, and those who encourage sabotage and
obstruction from behind the scenes must know that they
are being observed, that they will be held accountable
and that international patience is starting to wear thin.

Resolution 2014 (2011) is clear in this regard in that
it commits all Yemeni sides to play a full and constructive
role in implementing the transition agreement. Those
who do not live up to this commitment should be
prepared to be held to account by the Yemeni people and
the Security Council.

The Secretary-General remains concerned about
efforts to undermine Yemen's transition. He has asked
me to continue to exercise his good offices, working
closely with members of the Security Council, the Gulf
Cooperation Council and other international partners
to facilitate the effective implementation of Yemen's
transition agreement as a model for peaceful change that
could offer valuable lessons for other situations in the
region.

