Ms. Winter: I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to the Council for its decision to convene
this important briefing on the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. My presence before the Council today as
President of the Special Court comes at a critical
juncture in the final stages of the Court's mandate.
Therefore, allow me to be direct and straightforward as
I first provide a brief update on the status of our legal
proceedings before discussing the Court's
achievements and its impact on the citizens of Sierra
2
Leone, as well as its residual issues and remaining
challenges.

Over the past six years, the Prosecution has
issued and the Chambers have confirmed indictments
against 13 persons. Eleven individuals were arrested
and transferred to the Special Court. Two died while in
custody, one was killed in Liberia prior to being
apprehended, and the whereabouts of another remain
unknown. To date, we have concluded proceedings
against eight of the remaining nine indictees in first
instance.

The Special Court combined its proceedings into
four main cases. Three of the trials took place in
Freetown, against the leaders of the Civil Defence
Forces (CDF), the Armed Forces Revolutionary
Council (AFRC) and the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF). The fourth trial - the prosecution of Charles
Taylor, ex-President of the Republic of Liberia - is
now being held in The Hague for security reasons.

The Special Court completed all three trials in
Freetown, including the appeals proceedings in the
CDF and AFRC cases. Those cases resulted in the
conviction and sentencing of all five individuals.
Currently, the Appeals Chamber is adjudicating the
appeals in the RUF case, and it will deliver its
judgement in October of this year. Upon delivery of the
RUF appeals judgement, the Special Court will have
completed all of the judicial proceedings conducted in
Freetown. In our final trial, the Taylor trial, the
prosecution closed its case in February this year, and
the defence started the presentation of its evidence this
week. As Council members may have seen on the
news, Charles Taylor is currently on the witness stand,
testifying in his own defence.

According to the updated completion strategy, the
Special Court predicts that the trial judgement will be
delivered in the Taylor case in July 2010 and the
sentencing judgement, if necessary, one month later.
We project that in February 2011, upon delivery of the
appeals judgement in the Taylor case, we will have
completed all of the Special Court's judicial activities.

It is not easy to fully predict the duration of trials.
Judges sitting in a court of law have control over a
court's proceedings but cannot violate the rights of the
parties to be heard. Nonetheless, it should be noted that
the Appeals Chamber has consistently adhered to the
allocated time frame set out in the completion strategy.
I am rather proud to mention that the Appeals Chamber
09-40569
at the Special Court has never taken longer than five
months to conclude any appeal. As such, let me
reassure the Council of the Special Court's continued
commitment to achieving the aforementioned
milestones in a timely and thorough fashion.

For those reasons in particular, the Special Court
is considered to be an exemplary model of
international justice. Since its inception, it has
achieved many firsts and set many precedents in the
development of international criminal law. It handed
down the first decision on the non-applicability of
national amnesty for international prosecution. It first
adjudicated the limitations of immunity of a head of
State vis-a-vis an international criminal court, and it is
the first court in history to establish as crimes against
humanity the forcible recruitment and use of child
soldiers, attacks against United Nations peacekeepers
and the use of forced marriages, and to convict those
responsible accordingly.

However, the Special Court's impact on Sierra
Leone extends well beyond the findings in its cases.
Through specific and sustained efforts, the Special
Court has transferred expertise to Siena Leoneans Via a
number of programmes, including capacity-building
and training on police investigations, case
management, courtroom interpretation, archiving,
witness protection and detention standards. Further, the
passage into law of three gender bills by the Sierra
Leone Parliament is a direct consequence of the
Court's work on gender issues. All three laws will
greatly improve the lives of women in Sierra Leone.

The Court's Outreach Section, known as its
crown jewel, has made our legal proceedings a part of
Sierra Leone's national discourse and heritage. Over
the years, the Court has conducted over 10,000 events,
including town hall meetings, radio programmes and
training sessions at schools, Villages and cities across
Sierra Leone and throughout Liberia and Guinea, as
well.

Additionally, the Special Court is assisting the
Government of Siena Leone, wherever possible, in its
efforts to ensure the sustainability of the Court site
beyond the lifespan of the Court. Several potential uses
of the site identified by the Government include, but
are not limited to, a regional training centre for the rule
of law and a memorial component for commemorating
the Victims of the war.
09-40569

Though much has been accomplished, much still
needs to be achieved. To maintain international
standards and successfully fulfil its original mandate,
the Special Court is still bound by a number of legal
obligations that will not terminate after the completion
of trials and appeals. Together with its Management
Committee, the Special Court has thus worked to
determine a suitable arrangement to provide for these
obligations, known as residual issues. A small
successor body, whose structure will be kept to a bare
minimum, will likely need to be established to manage
and perform such residual functions, including the
enforcement of sentences, maintenance of the Special
Court's archives, witness protection and assistance, and
the possible trial or transfer of the case of the one
indictee at large.

Although a stand-alone residual mechanism will
have to be created in the short term, in the long term
sharing an administrative stage with another institution
should be considered, particularly as many of the
residual functions that will be performed by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia are
similar to those of the Special Court. That would help
to ensure the sustainability of the successor body in an
efficient and cost-effective manner.

Assistance given by the Security Council will
continue to be as important in the future as it has been
in the past. Much of the Special Court's
aforementioned success emerged from the generous
support of the Security Council on numerous
occasions. I would like to express particular gratitude
for the Council's adoption of resolution 1688 (2006),
which requested all States to cooperate in the transfer
of Charles Taylor to the Netherlands; the adoption of
resolution 1626 (2005), which extended the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to
include the protection of the Court's premises by a
contingent of Mongolian troops; and the adoption of
resolution 1750 (2007), mandating UNMIL to provide
support to the Special Court for activities conducted in
Liberia with the consent of the Liberian Government.
Thus, in order to successfully complete its mandate in
the coming months, the Special Court continues to rely
on the indispensable support of the Security Council
and all Member States. Today more than ever before,
this request is urgent.

As members of the Council know, the Special
Court is currently funded by voluntary contributions
3
from interested States. Despite efforts by the Court to
contain costs and operate as efficiently as possible, the
financial situation of the Court is most serious. In
March 2009, the Secretary-General wrote to Member
States to inform them of his grave concern regarding
our funding situation and to seek their urgent support.
Based on current available funds, the Court will
experience a funding shortfall by the first week of
August 2009 - a very short time from now. This
shortfall poses the real possibility of disrupting our
work, which would have disastrous consequences for
the Council's extensive peacebuilding efforts in Sierra
Leone and Liberia. A disruption in the proceedings
would send the wrong message to the international
community, jeopardizing the fight against impunity and
potentially calling into question our collective
commitment to international justice. In total, the Court
will need approximately $30 million to complete its
mandate successfully.

I would also like to recall that, in the words of
resolution 1829 (2008), the Security Council
recognizes that "further arrangements will be necessary
to address residual matters". Because the necessary
residual mechanisms must last as long as victims and
witnesses need protection and until every sentence has
been served, it will be a great and ongoing challenge to
maintain the mechanism in the long term based purely
on voluntary contributions. It is also important to note
that fundraising has proven to be a time-consuming and
costly endeavour.

There is much work to be accomplished over the
next 18 months. Most importantly, we must conclude
the final case in Sierra Leone, after which the facilities
and operations in Freetown will be kept at a minimum
provided that we can transfer in a timely manner the
convicted persons to an enforcing State. To accomplish
that endeavour and assist the host country, the
establishment of a trust fund could be envisaged.

We must complete the trial of Charles Taylor in
The Hague, which is so critical to preserving the
fragile peace and stability in West Africa. Without the
adequate funds, it will be very difficult to retain
competent Court personnel who might depart for
better-paid and longer-lasting employment, to the
detriment of an efficiently run Trial Chamber. Lastly,
the Special Court must set up a residual mechanism -
the first of its kind - that will be of use to other
international courts when they reach their final stages,
thus saving significant costs to the international
community.

The Special Court is an institution that the
Council can be proud of. The Court's groundbreaking
jurisprudence and its impact on the justice system in
Sierra Leone are exemplary achievements. I am as
confident as I am hopeful that the international
community will allow our effective and competent
Court to finalize its mandate successfully. To show that
it is not only me who believes that the Special Court
does effective and competent work, allow me to read
out a letter that I received a few days ago:

"In New York
"Dear Gentlemen and Ladies:

"Please accept this small donation to help
with the work of your court. It is vitally important
you keep up your important work. Thank you for
your efforts and please continue to do your work.
Thank you.

"Enclosed is $20 to help. I know it is a
small amount, but maybe if the world
Governments do not fund your work, individuals
will."

Is that not a nice letter? I will keep it with me, bring it
to Sierra Leone, together with the $20-bill, and put it in
a frame to show our people that they are not alone.

Let me conclude by once again expressing my
gratitude to the Security Council and Member States
for the support that the Special Court has received from
the United Nations since its inception. On behalf of the
judges and staff of the Special Court, I also wish to
convey our utmost gratitude to the Management
Committee of the Special Court, as well as to the
United Nations Office of Legal Affairs for the
invaluable help and advice it has imparted to the
Special Court at all times.

