Mr. Van den Berg (Netherlands): At the outset,
Mr. President, I extend my sincere condolences,
through you, to the Russian people and to the
Government of the Russian Federation on the tragic
loss of lives in the two air crashes that occurred
yesterday.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania, Turkey and Croatia, the countries of the
stabilization and association process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia
and Montenegro and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the European Free Trade Association
countries Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, members
of the European Economic Area align themselves with
this statement.

The European Union welcomes the decision
announced by the Joint Electoral Management Body to
hold presidential elections in Afghanistan in October
2004. Those elections are a key requirement under the
Bonn Agreement of December 2001 and represent a
new milestone in the process of constructing a
democratic, stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
Furthermore, the Joint Electoral Management Body has
announced that the elections for the lower house of
parliament and the local elections will be held in spring
2005.

The European Union welcomes the fact that an
encouraging number of presidential candidates have
put forward their candidacy. This is an important
landmark on the path towards democracy. The
European Union understands that technical and
logistical reasons made it impossible to hold both sets
of elections concurrently this autumn. It is now
important to use the remaining months to ensure that
successful preparations continue apace and that all
conditions are met for free and fair elections according
to the timetable set by the Joint Electoral Management
Body.

In that context, the European Union wishes to
command the Joint Electoral Management Body's
tremendous achievement with the registration of nearly
all eligible voters in Afghanistan and welcomes the fact
that, among those registered voters, 41 per cent are
women. The European Union is supporting and
assisting the Afghan Government in the preparation of
elections, inter alia through financial assistance and the
Democracy and Election Support Mission.

The European Union condemns the violence
against election workers, which has resulted in several
casualties. Similarly, the European Union is also
gravely concerned about the deplorable murders and
attacks directed against international humanitarian
personnel and those working for the reconstruction of
Afghanistan. The high levels of insecurity in several
areas of Afghanistan are a reminder of the need to
provide security during the elections, to rebuild the
Afghan army and to intensify the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. The
commitment and engagement of the Afghan
Transitional Authority in this regard is crucial.

Counter-narcotics is another important area. The
European Union welcomes the recent seizures by the
Afghan Special Narcotics Force and urges the Afghan
Government and the international community to work
together to tackle the problem, which affects almost
every area of Afghanistan's development and security.

Afghanistan has made enormous progress in the
past years. Many challenges remain to be overcome,
and, although several of those may seem daunting, the
European Union believes that the people of
Afghanistan have the courage and the determination to
overcome them. Continued international engagement
and support is also crucial, and the European Union
will remain committed to a secure, stable, free,
prosperous and democratic Afghanistan.

