The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Boutros Assaker,
Acting Secretary-General of the Lebanese Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Emigrants.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Assaker
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic, Mr. Farouk Al-
Shara', and invite him to take a seat at the Council
table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Shara'
(Syrian Arab Republic) took a seat at the Council
table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/662, which contains a letter dated
20 October 2005 from the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the United Nations
International Independent Investigation Commission.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2005/684, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

At this time, language versions of the draft
resolution are not available owing to a systemwide
computer malfunction. Language versions will be
provided as soon as this problem has been corrected.

I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to document 8/2005/651, which contains a
letter dated 14 October 2005 from the representative of
Lebanon addressed to the Secretary-General.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1636 (2005).

I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council wishing to make statements following the
voting.

I invite Mr. Philippe Douste-Blazy, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of France, to take the floor.


