Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): The underlying
tension in Eastern Slavonia has been a constant source of
preoccupation for the Security Council as it has had the
potential to escalate the conflict in the former Yugoslavia
to a new level of violence, destruction and human
suffering. The delegation of Indonesia therefore welcomes
the signing, on 12 November 1995, of the Basic
Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja
and Western Sirmium between the Government of the
Republic of Croatia and the local Serb representatives.
We are especially grateful to the United Nations mediator,
Mr. T horvald Stoltenberg, and the United States
Ambassador, Mr. Peter Galbraith, for their tireless efforts,
which culminated in the signing of the Agreement.

The Basic Agreement constitutes a significant and
crucial step towards establishing a framework for the
comprehensive political settlement of a crisis that has
inflicted such enormous pain and hardship on countless
innocent and defenceless people. Indeed, we believe that
the achievement of the Basic Agreement was not an
insignificant factor in moving the Dayton peace talks
forward, leading to the initialling, on 21 November 1995,
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

We believe that strict adherence to the provisions of
the Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium will extinguish what has
previously been one of the most serious potential
flash-points in the territories of the former Yugoslavia. In
this respect, the Security Council's formal support for the
Basic Agreement reflects its intense determination to
ensure that the Agreement is fully implemented by the
parties concerned.

In that regard, my delegation would like to reaffirm
the importance that it attaches to full cooperation between
the Government of the Republic of Croatia and the local
Serb party, on the basis of the Agreement, to their
refraining from any military activities or any measures
that might impede implementation of the transitional
arrangements contained in the Agreement, and to their
cooperating fully with the United Nations Confidence
Restoration Operation in Croatia.

Under the terms of the Basic Agreement, the
Security Council is requested to establish a Transitional
Administration and to authorize an international force. We
welcome the confidence that the parties concerned have
demonstrated by entrusting to the Council the task of
working out the details of the projects to which I have

 

referred, and we anticipate intensive work by the Council
on this matter.

On this occasion, we would like simply to reiterate the
views that my delegation has already expressed relating to
the need for transparency, consultation and consensus in the
Security Council's consideration of the various issues that
stem from the Basic Agreement.

In View of these considerations, my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution now before the
Council.

