Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): At the outset, let me remind
the members of the Security Council that the Polish
delegation associates itself with the statement delivered
today by the delegation of Italy on behalf of the presidency
of the European Union. Let me, however, take this
opportunity to comment briefly on certain issues under
consideration by the Security Council.

After years of destructive struggle, marked by the
unspeakable suffering of so many people, a real chance to
end the conflict on the territory of the former Yugoslavia is
finally in sight. The appropriate conclusions have been
drawn from this bitter lesson of history.

Having authorized the multinational Implementation
Force (IFOR) to deal with the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Security Council now turns to another
area of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia: the situation
in Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium. With
regard to the situation there, we hope that the will displayed
by the parties to the Basic Agreement will last and will
contribute to peace and stability.

The Polish delegation notes with satisfaction that the
underlying idea of the Basic Agreement is the peaceful
settlement of the conflict. Poland has always advocated a
peaceful solution of the conflict in this area. May I recall
at this point the participation of Polish soldiers in the
United Nations peace-keeping operation in Croatia, which
is being brought to an end today. We believe that their
efforts, along with the work of their fellow peace-keepers,
were instrumental in reaching the point where a new
operation has been made feasible. In the future too,
Poland will try to find the means to support a new peace-
keeping operation.

My delegation attaches equal importance to the
military and the civilian components of the new peace-
keeping operation. Draft resolution S/1996/23, on which
the Security Council will soon take action, defines
mandates for both of these components with sufficient
clarity and in the necessary detail.

In the View of the Polish delegation, it is worth
stressing that the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (UNTAES) alone will not be in a position to
achieve the final solution of the conflict in the area unless
both sides to the conflict cooperate with each other and
with the peace-keeping forces. This cooperation will be
crucial for virtually every aspect of the implementation of
the Basic Agreement. Let me emphasize in this regard the
importance of disarmament, as stipulated in the Dayton
Agreement as well as in the draft resolution. With regard
to the civilian part of the mandate, I would like to point
out the significance of the harmonious reintegration of
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium into the
Republic of Croatia. The economic development of
Eastern Slavonia will greatly contribute to the
achievement of this goal, as well as to normalization in
the region.

We are pleased to note that the results of the recent
Visit of the Croatian Foreign Minister to Belgrade have
created a better environment for advancing the economic
reconstruction of Eastern Slavonia and of the whole area.

I would like briefly to address another important
issue that the region is facing today, namely the future of
refugees and displaced persons. We endorse what the
Italian presidency of the European Union had to say on
this question in its statement. In addition, Poland would

 
like to call upon all States on whose territories these people
have taken refuge to provide them with all necessary
assistance and support to facilitate their return in safety to
their homes.

The human rights question continues to be of
fundamental importance to the future of the whole region,
including Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium.
The close cooperation of UNTAES with the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia is, in the view of our
delegation, a prerequisite for the success of the operation as
well as for the peaceful settlement of the conflict.

Finally, the security and safety of the new peace-
keeping operation is, as usual, at the centre of our attention.
In our View, the provisions of the draft resolution provide
the peace-keepers with the guarantees they need to
discharge their duties.

In the light of what I have said, Poland will vote in
favour of the two draft resolutions before the Security
Council today.

