Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. We are very
happy to see you presiding over this debate today and
to give non-members of the Council an opportunity to
share our views.

Although the debate that you have convened
today is an important one, Mr. President, I would like
to begin by recording our reservations to elements of
the appendix that you have circulated in the working
paper contained in document S/2001/185. That
appendix contains certain views that are held by
individual Member States - and not by the entire
membership of the United Nations - and that carry no
consensus support in either the General Assembly or in
the Security Council. Those views do not in any way
constructively contribute to the important questions
that you have raised, Mr. President. Moreover, their
inclusion threatens to detract from the main issues that
we must address. We would have preferred that the
appendix had been omitted in the first place. In our
view, the Security Council is not a debating club, and it
must not be reduced to one. Its main functions are to
maintain international peace and security, and that
should remain its central focus.

This function of the Council is clearly spelled out
in the Charter, which carefully delineates the scope of
work of its various organs. Peace remains the essential
feature of the Security Council's responsibilities. Those
responsibilities include conflict prevention, dispute
resolution, peace-making, conflict management,
peacekeeping and peace-building. These are the pillars
on which the Security Council's edifice is built.
Ignoring any one of those pillars enormously weakens
its standing. Adding on new areas of interest that are
not included in its Charter responsibilities reduces its
effectiveness. I hope you will agree with me that by not
implementing its own resolutions, the Council
undermines its own credibility. Addressing symptoms
and not root causes becomes an exercise in futility.
Holding international peace and security hostage to
national interests does a disservice to both this body
and to the United Nations as a whole. The unrealistic
and self-defeating approach of leaving disputes to be
dealt with at the bilateral and regional levels raises for
us the question of why we must have a Security
Council in the first place.

Indeed, the Security Council has clearly
neglected its key obligations. Some of those have only
been honoured in their selective applications, and
others in their complete omission. That is why we are
still burdened with "forgotten" conflicts - the
unfinished business of the Council - that are still
consistently ignored. The issue of Jammu and Kashmir
is a reminder of one of the oldest outstanding disputes
before this Council. It is also the only dispute that the
Council has chosen not to revisit since the early 1950s.
Since then, in spite of two wars and a struggle that has
cost the lives of tens of thousands of Kashmiris and
turned the region into a nuclear flashpoint, the Security
Council continues to ignore the problem.

The Council has an obligation to address the
Kashmir issue with a view to resolving it in accordance
with its own resolutions and the aspirations of the
people of J ammu and Kashmir. What the oppressed and
long-suffering people of Kashmir yearn for is the
realization of their legitimate right to self-
determination as laid down in the resolutions of this
very body. This is for us the litmus test not only of the
Council's effectiveness, but also ofits raison d'etre.

We, of course, also appreciate the efforts the
Council has been making to try to be more interactive
with non-members. We are pleased to note that the
Council itself has taken a number of positive steps in
that direction. We welcome in particular the steps taken
by the Council to promote greater cooperation between
it and troop-contributing countries. While we laud such
measures, we feel that more progress is needed to
ensure increased accessibility to, and transparency in,
the Council. The tremendous gap that exists between
the Council's actual obligations and its real
achievements needs to be narrowed.

What is required from the Council are not
idealistic debates or holistic pronouncements, but
political will and concerted action. However, too often
global objectives of international peace and security
are held hostage to the dictates of the national interests
of a few. In many cases in the Council, the lack of
political will is itself a political decision, and inaction
the most politically expedient option. This is
unacceptable. If there is any need at all for reform in
the Security Council, it is to address that alarming
practice.

Any reform of the Council must therefore
strengthen the inclusive and participatory character of
the Organization, in keeping with the principle of the
sovereign equality of States. It must be aimed at
reducing the anomalies of the past, not at accentuating
them or at creating distortions.

The Security Council must carefully weigh its
actions so as to mitigate any adverse impact on
humanitarian situations. We must learn from history,
not repeat it.

There is no justification for the creation of new
centres of privilege at the expense of the rest of the
membership. The veto remains the primary obstacle to
a truly democratic Security Council. What little
justification may have existed for such a mechanism at
the end of Second World War is clearly no longer valid.
The veto is not only obsolete, it is also contrary to
contemporary trends - one need only recall the
resounding, spontaneous applause that the President of
Venezuela received in the General Assembly Hall
during the Millennium Summit when he called for the
democratization of the Security Council and the
elimination of the veto. That was an expression of the
general will of the membership of the Organization.

We firmly believe that the current global trends to
promote democracy, participation, transparency and
accountability should also form the basis for the reform
of the Security Council.

