Ms. Power (United States of America): The
renewal of violence in South Sudan earlier this month
was horrifying, but sadly not unexpected. It was
horrifying because, as we all know, in only a few days
300 men, women and children were reportedly killed,
tens of thousands were displaced, and 4,500 metric
tons of humanitarian aid - food that would have fed
220,000 people in dire need for a full month - was
looted. Yet the renewal of the conflict in Juba was also
foreseeable because of the inability of South Sudan's
leaders to work together and put the interests of the
people of South Sudan ahead of their own.

The Heads of State and Government of
Intergovernmental Authority on Development Plus,
South Sudan's neighbours and their partners, are now
calling for the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) to have an enhanced capacity - particularly
in Juba - in response to the deteriorating security
situation there. The African Union Assembly has
endorsed this decision; the Peace and Security Council
has as well. And they are all recommending that
regional forces contribute to UNMISS. We all need
to support them. The United States believes that the
region's proposal offers a basis for re-establishing
a secure environment in Juba, which is critical if the
parties are to make progress on implementing the peace
agreement they signed onto almost a year ago, as well
as to ensure the unfettered delivery of humanitarian aid
to those who are at grave risk of famine.

Of course, the proposal - as many Council
members have noted - merits thorough review, and
translating its purpose into a mandate for UNMISS
must be done with great care and in consultation with
the troop-contributing countries and all members of
the Council. We have to get this right. But it also must
be done with great urgency. Let us not be fooled into
believing that time is on our side. It is not. Events in
recent weeks have demonstrated how quickly violence
can reignite and how devastating are the human
consequences when it does. I want to stress this also for
Council members here today - we have just received
very disturbing reports of significant violence in the
Equatorias in South Sudan, and all of us need to be on
alert, I think, this weekend, because events could spiral
rapidly out of control yet again. Every report of a spike
in violence, of course, costs human lives and leaves an
indelible and searing mark on those affected by it.

Just to give one example, on 18 July a young woman
was reportedly grabbed only meters away from the gate
to the United Nations camp in Juba where she had taken
shelter after being displaced by the violence. She told a
reporter from The Guardian that the five men in uniform
gave her a choice. She said, "I could choose the one who
would rape me, or they all would". The woman said, "I
begged them to kill me instead". Unfortunataely, she
told the reporter, the men dragged her to the side of the
road and raped her in broad daylight. UNMISS as it is
currently configured, has proven unable - and in some
cases unwilling - to prevent horrors like this. We must
work together urgently to fix that.

No one has more of a stake in finding a way out
of this conflict and in bringing justice than the people
of South Sudan, who have already endured such
tremendous suffering in the short history of their
nation, and of course their neighbours, who have been
clear about what this situation requires. Let us be
motivated by the pain of South Sudanese civilians and
by the initiative shown by the region, and let us work
with a tremendous sense of urgency and will to protect
civilians and create the conditions critical to bringing
an end to this ghastly conflict in South Sudan.

The draft resolution before us offers additional
time for the regional leaders to meet and engage the
Government of South Sudan, and it offers us additional
time to find a way forward before we proceed with
mandating this new force within UNMISS.
