The Secretary-General: I thank the United
Kingdom presidency for convening this important
debate.
Before I begin, allow me to pay tribute to an
outstanding United Nations leader who joins us for the
last time as High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navi Pillay. As the Secretary-General - and I
believe Council members as well - I have benefitted
from her honest views and unvarnished reports on the
terrible human rights abuses we confront in our world.
High Commissioner Pillay tells it like she sees it. When
people face discrimination and human rights abuses,
they know Navi Pillay is their advocate. Where others
may wish to avoid certain issues, Navi Pillay speaks
forthrightly, without fear. I am sure the Council joins
me in wishing her well in her next chapter. I have no
doubt that she will remain a key voice on the issues
facing the Security Council and humankind. I am very
proud and grateful to have worked with her during the
past six years. I am sure she will remain an outstanding
leader and honorary ambassador of the United Nations
in defending human rights. I wish her all the best.

As Secretary-General, one of my core priorities is
to improve the Organization's ability to act early and
act preventively. We know that, if we do not address
emerging crises, they risk becoming bigger and costlier
for all. Today's debate takes place as the world is
gripped by multiple Violent conflicts. That highlights
the enormity of the challenge of prevention, and the
need to re-examine and refine our approach.

This year, we mark the one hundredth anniversary of
the start of the First World War, which left an estimated
17 million dead. It was called the war to end all wars.
Yet in the same generation, a second World War would
claim another 60 million lives. The United Nations rose
from the ashes of that devastation with a mission to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
We can take heart, even at this bleak moment, that
over the past quarter century wars between States have
become rare.

Yet we cannot speak of positive trends when we
look at Syria, Iraq, Gaza, South Sudan, the Central
African Republic, Ukraine and elsewhere. Conflicts
continue to exact an unacceptable toll. Events around
the world today clearly demonstrate the changing
nature and complexity of contemporary conflict. Many
countries face repeated cycles of turmoil. Civil wars
are no longer contained by national borders. Complex
threat environments tend to emerge in contexts of state
fragility, extreme poverty, weak institutions, a lack of
unifying leadership, porous borders and marginalized
populations. Terrorism and organized crime fuel
violence and instability. Distinctions between terrorists,
armed opposition and criminal enterprises are blurring.
Such evolving patterns of violence pose a major
challenge to our prevention work. Are our common
tools fit for the purpose? What must we do better?
How can we anticipate what lies ahead? The Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, has a
unique responsibility.

Hard-won experience has taught us a number of
lessons about what works in prevention - allow me to
highlight five points.

First, being present early is essential. I speak not
just about early warning, but also about early action:
quickly mobilizing effective and unified diplomatic
action to defuse tensions in order to urge restraint
and to open up space for dialogue before perspectives
become hardened and more hostile. In recent cases,
the United Nations has played an important role in
providing parties with a ladder to climb down from
polarized positions.

It is said that no news is good news. In many cases
the opposite is true - good news is no news. Because
of their very success, such cases do not make the
headlines. But they nevertheless demand our attention
and resources. It takes our collective leadership and
courage to address seemingly far-off, simmering
problems, particularly when one may never get proof of
the value of that investment. We surely have plenty of
proof of the cost of not doing so.

Secondly, we must hone our skills. Conflict-
prevention and mediation are complex and increasingly
specialized fields. We have made strides in building
up expertise that is high-quality, rapidly deployable
and in great demand - in contexts as varied as peace
negotiations, constitutional reforms, electoral processes
and national dialogues.

Thirdly, partnerships are crucial. We can succeed
only if we build coalitions. I am encouraged by the
number of new peace and security initiatives that have
grown out of our strategic partnerships with regional
and subregional organizations in the Sahel, the Great
Lakes region, the Central African Republic and
elsewhere.

Fourthly, we must learn from collective mistakes.
My Rights up Front initiative places human rights
considerations at the very centre of United Nations
efforts in the field, at Headquarters and in our discourse
with Member States. It seeks to ensure that we avoid
the systemic failures of the past and recognize that
human rights violations are early-warning signals of
mass atrocities.
Fifthly, perhaps most important, comes leverage.
The Secretary-General can draw on the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and use the power
of persuasion. Those are powerful tools in their own
right, and they reflect a shared understanding among
Member States. But to be effective they require that
the international community be closely aligned,
empowering the Secretary-General to speak on behalf
of a common voice.

When Member States join forces, we can achieve
much. The Council's consensus on removing chemical
weapons from Syria is one recent case in point. Even
modest United Nations actions can have an important
impact when we have the Security Council's united
support - speaking with one voice - for early
engagement. However, when consensus is limited
or when our actions come late and address only the
lowest common denominator, the consequences can be
measured in terrible loss of life, grave human suffering
and tremendous loss of credibility for the Council and
our institution.

No more important challenge stands before us than
improving our ability to reach stronger and earlier
consensus. It is time for a new era of collaboration,
cooperation and action from the Security Council.
There are millions of people around the world hoping
for, and counting on, decisive joint action by the one
and only global body entrusted with the obligation to
maintain international peace and security.

