At the outset, I would like to commend the State Secretary of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany, Mr. Miguel Berger, for his able leadership of this meeting. I also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing and tireless efforts. Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council reaffirmed - in its resolutions 242 (1967), 476 (1980) and 478 (1980) - the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force. That prior determination is further reiterated in the Council's more recent resolution 2334 (2016). Through that seminal resolution, the Security Council made it clear that Israel's establishment of settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, has no legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation under international law and a major obstacle to the achievement of a two-State solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. The Security Council and the international community underlined that no changes to the 4 June 1967 lines will be recognized, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties through negotiations. It is regrettable and scandalous that Israel, the occupying Power, persists in blatantly disregarding all such legal obligations and all repeated calls by the international community to end its illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory and its aggressive policies and practices against the Palestinian people. Despite its serious violations of international law, the decades-long impunity enjoyed by Israel, the occupying Power, constitutes one of the major reasons behind Israel's challenge to the universal legal system, translated by its continuing occupation, settlement policies, aggressive and racist practices and, recently, by its imminent threats and declarations on the implementation of its long-planned illegal de facto annexation of Palestinian land. The international community should stand firm in upholding international law, including the relevant Security Council resolutions, and in strongly rejecting and preventing any such unilateral illegal move, which would constitute an existential threat to international peace and security and to fundamental Palestinian rights. Given the looming threat of annexation, Tunisia strongly calls upon the Security Council and the entire international community to remain steadfast and engaged in stopping further grave violations of international law, thus preserving the credibility of the entire multilateral system and the prospects for peace. We continue to believe that the Middle East Quartet, with the support of the Security Council and other international actors, can meet the challenge of preserving the two-State solution and relaunching the peace process based on the internationally endorsed terms of reference and parameters, thus preventing a new cycle of violence and instability in the region. According to the World Health Organization, the number of people testing positive for coronavirus disease continues to surge in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Tunisia highly values the humanitarian community's efforts to help the Palestinian Authority respond to the pandemic. However, we remain concerned about the likely further increase in cases over the coming weeks. We therefore call upon the international community to increase its assistance to the State of Palestine, including in support of economic recovery efforts. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East is also facing increased demand for services due to the current global crisis. Additional funds are urgently needed to ensure the continuity of the Agency's essential services. To that end, Tunisia recently announced a symbolic contribution to the Agency's budget in solidarity with Palestine refugees. In the same vein, Tunisia remains seriously concerned about the dire humanitarian and economic situation in Gaza, exacerbated by the continuing cruel and inhuman blockade by Israel. In his latest report (S/2020/555) on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), the Secretary-General urged Israel to ease the restrictions on the movement of goods and people to and from Gaza, reaffirming that only by fully lifting the debilitating closures, in line with resolution 1860 (2009), could we hope to sustainably resolve the humanitarian crisis. In conclusion, we urge the international community to intensify collective endeavours to re-engage the parties in negotiations based on the internationally endorsed terms of reference and parameters in order to put an end to the occupation of Palestinian territory as of 4 June 1967, including East Jerusalem, ensure the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, put an end to its long suffering and guarantee security, peace and prosperity for all the peoples of the region. The international peace conference proposed by President Mahmoud Abbas should be fully promoted since it could constitute a new start towards a more stable and peaceful Middle East.
