Let me begin by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her update. My delegation recognizes that challenges persist on the journey to stability and prosperity in Iraq, but with the determination of all stakeholders and the support of the international community, including the United Nations, Iraq is on the right path. I would now like to underscore the following points. First, free, fair and credible elections, along with reform efforts, are non-negotiable. Indonesia welcomes the serious preparations to hold credible elections and the affirmation of that prospect by Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi. This must be a collective effort by all stakeholders, including the Government, the Independent High Electoral Commission, the judiciary, parliamentarians and the technical assistance of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). We further underline the continuation of the Government's reform agenda, in the determination to fulfil the demands and expectations of the people and improve basic services. However, we recognize that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) impinges on the Government's efforts on many fronts. We hope that the support of UNAMI will make a difference in the days ahead. Secondly, maintaining stability and security is a prerequisite for sustainable development. We are concerned that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant continues to launch violent attacks against civilians and diplomatic premises. It must be clear to all that investment and sustainable development will flourish only in a stable and secure country. Another critical element in the pursuit of a stable and secure Iraq is the support of all countries, regionally and globally. In this regard, Indonesia calls for greater cooperation in countering terrorism, in accordance with international law and with full respect for Iraqi sovereignty and territorial integrity. Indonesia reaffirms its support to the Government in reforming the security sector and establishing stronger ties with its regional and strategic partners. Iraq's spirit of good neighbourliness should be reciprocated by its neighbours, as another hotspot in the Middle East will benefit no one. Thirdly, progress on the issue of missing Kuwaiti nationals and archives should continue. We are delighted that, despite the challenge to the Tripartite Mechanism posed by COVID-19, progress has been made, as the repatriation of human remains by the Government of Iraq to the Government of Kuwait on 16 September attests. Indonesia commends the efforts made by the Government of Iraq and continued cooperation between both countries on this issue. The roles of UNAMI and International Committee of the Red Cross are also significant and should be commended. We hope that the Kuwaiti forensic team can complete the identification of human remains to bring closure to the families of the missing. We are confident that, with the determination of all, greater progress will be achieved. In conclusion, the Security Council is united in supporting the people of Iraq and all stakeholders in achieving their long-awaited dream of a stable, secure and prosperous Iraq. This will be of advantage not only to Iraq, but to the region and rest of the world. Today is Indonesia's last meeting in the Security Council on the situation in Iraq. I therefore take this opportunity to encourage greater efforts and success on this issue in future. I pledge Indonesia's unwavering support to Iraqi unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and to the Iraqi people, Government and UNAMI.
