Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Colombia for its initiative in holding this
open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding, and Foreign
Minister Holguin Cuellar for presiding over today's
meeting. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon; Ambassador Gasana and Ambassador
Momen, the Permanent Representatives of Rwanda and
Bangladesh, respectively; and Mr. Von Amsberg of the
World Bank for their presence.

China greatly appreciates the remarkable
achievements of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) last year. As the first entity within the United
Nations system in charge of coordinating post-conflict
peacebuilding, the PBC has made efforts to implement
its mandate, pursuant to the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, and has played an
important role in advancing peacebuilding in countries
emerging from conflict. At the same time, since
peacebuilding is a long-term, complex and arduous
task, the PBC confronts many challenges in its work. I
would like to make the following four comments.

First, the PBC and all relevant parties should
fully respect the national ownership of the countries
concerned. Post-conflict States bear primary
responsibility for building peace in their own countries.
In helping such countries to build peace, the Commission
should respect their will and try to help them strengthen
national capacity-building, including by enhancing
their capacity in the areas of civil administration and
national governance. The PBC should also proactively
strengthen its partnership with the countries on its
agenda in a constructive manner.

Secondly, the Commission should help
post-conflict countries mobilize the necessary
resources in accordance with their national situation
and specific priorities. The priorities of post-conflict
peacebuilding are stabilizing the security situation,
promoting political reconciliation, and strengthening
the development of democracy. At the same time, root
problems that threaten peace and security, particularly
issues of social and economic development, should
also be tackled. The PBC should act as an important
platform to help coordinate international assistance
and mobilization of resources. We also hope that the
Peacebuilding Fund will be able to provide greater
support for the work of post-conflict peacebuilding.

Thirdly, the Commission should enhance its
coordination and cooperation with the chief United
Nations entities, international financial institutions and
regional organizations. We hope that it will build on its
coordination and coherence with such major organs of
the United Nations as the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
in an effort to explore effective means of assisting
post-conflict countries in building peace. The unique
advantages in the field of peacebuilding possessed by
such financial institutions as the World Bank and by
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union, should be tapped further in order to
achieve more concrete results in peacebuilding among
countries emerging from conflict.

Last, but not least, we believe that the PBC should
continue to strive to improve its working methods
and enhance efficiency. Peacebuilding covers a broad
area and involves complex and burdensome tasks.
The PBC should continue to improve its internal
institution-building, and actively collect experiences
and best practices. At the same time, it should put more
emphasis on results achieved in the field in specific
countries, including using such resources as various
United Nations projects, funds and peacekeeping
missions, while strengthening coordination and
cooperation and avoiding duplication.

