The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

I should briefly like to offer my support for the
assessments made by Mr. Oshima. I shall not repeat
what he and my colleagues have said. We reiterate our
support for the work of Mr. Oshima and his colleagues
in developing concrete steps and instruments and in
implementing existing decisions on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We are prepared to consider
the ideas we have heard today.

At the same time, I would emphasize that,
regardless of any new instrument we may develop and
or of how we may stress the need for compliance with
international humanitarian law, none of this makes any
sense unless we pay specific attention to each
particular conflict. We must not merely pay lip service,
but give specific consideration to specific
circumstances.

We have heard today about situations in which
the civilian population needs specific protection and
attention. We believe that the United Nations has
gained useful experience in this area, including in
Angola, Afghanistan, Indonesia and the Balkans. The
need fully to respect international humanitarian law in
Iraq was also alluded to today. We trust that the
appointment of a special representative of the
Secretary-General in Iraq will promote such respect.
Of course, I would concur with those who have
noted the tragic situation of the civilian population in
the Palestinian territories and the need to offer them
protection. We know that a number of ideas have
already been proposed in this regard, including by the
Secretary-General.

The final point I would make is that civilians
particularly suffer not only in armed conflict, but also
from terrorism. This issue is within the purview of the
Security Council. Terrorism represents an assault
specifically against civilians. Although we all agree
that, in armed conflict, the belligerents themselves are
primarily responsible for taking measures to avoid
harming the civilian population, terrorists, of course,
cannot be appealed to in this respect because they view
civilians as their main targets. Therefore, we can be
nothing but merciless in the fight against terrorism.
There is no other way. Of course, we must do our
utmost to protect innocent civilians in that fight.

We note that this issue is under consideration by
the United Nations. We would point to the resolution
adopted by the General Assembly last year, at the
initiative of Mexico, on protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism.
Russia, for its part, has proposed the development of a
code for human rights protection that was discussed at
the most recent session of the Commission on Human
Rights at the initiative of our Minister for Foreign
Affairs. The basic thrust of this initiative was reflected
in decisions adopted at the session.

In conclusion, I reiterate our willingness to work
with our colleagues in the Secretariat to work to
improve existing instruments for the protection of
civilian populations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I call on Mr. Oshima for some final comments.

