Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): 1 would like to join
previous speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his
comprehensive briefing.

My delegation also thanks the representative of
the United States, who spoke on behalf of the
Multinational Force.

Ongoing violence in Iraq continues to pose
serious challenges to the Government and people of
Iraq in their efforts to achieve progress in
reconstruction and nation-building. After years of
hardship, the Iraqi people deserve peace, stability and
progress. Considering the significance of security and
stability for making progress in the political and socio-
economic sectors, my delegation has little doubt that
the Government of Iraq recognizes the importance of
enhanced efforts, in cooperation with international
forces, to find viable solution to the security concerns
in the country.

Since conflict in Iraq has been unfolding across
ethnic, sectarian and political lines, Indonesia holds the
view that responsibility for restoring security and
stability lies not only with the Iraqi Government, but
also with all factions in the country. In this regard,
Indonesia welcomes the ceasefire by some factions that
led to the decrease in violence during September 2007.

The key to sustainable peace in Iraq is unity.
Continued high levels of displacement and political
gridlock have reduced the opportunity for concord. My
delegation therefore believes that the people of Iraq
should stand side-by-side at all levels, set aside all
ethnic, religious and political differences and work
together in order to respond to the challenges that
continue to confront the country. Genuine commitment
by all factions to political dialogue and reconciliation
is needed more now than ever.
The international community should leave no
stone unturned in promoting conditions conducive to
such reconciliation. In that regard, my delegation
commends the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in maintaining contacts with
political, religious and tribal leaders to encourage an
inclusive political process aimed at bolstering security
improvements in Iraq.

The International Compact with Iraq, which is
premised on a reciprocal relationship between
peacebuilding and economic prosperity, remains an
important framework for international partnership with
Iraq. The Compact will require institutional support in
order to be effective. Accordingly, my delegation
welcomes the establishment of the Compact secretariat
as an agency of the Government of Iraq operating with
the support of the United Nations to facilitate the
implementation of the Compact.

The reaffirmation of support expressed by
delegations in the September high-level meeting on
Iraq reflects the continuing solidarity of the
international community with Iraq. In our View, such a
reaffirmation should help to strengthen the
commitment of Iraqis to the goals of the Compact.

The continuing violence in Iraq has brought about
serious humanitarian consequences. It has caused not
only displacement, but also restriction of movement
and limitation of access for humanitarian operations.
We are troubled by reports of the increase in the
number of Iraqi refugees and internally displaced
persons. The condition faced by Iraqi children is also a
source of particular concern.

With 4.2 million Iraqis being displaced,
humanitarian assistance becomes a daunting but
essential task. In this regard, Indonesia welcomes the
launch of a joint appeal by a number of United Nations
specialized agencies in September 2007 to address the
urgent health needs of Iraqi refugees in neighbouring
countries.

Coordination is essential in implementing well-
targeted humanitarian aid for the Iraqi displaced
persons and refugees. Accordingly, Indonesia believes
that the United Nations can play a key role in
supporting the Iraqi Government and host
neighbouring countries to coordinate their
humanitarian activities.

Support from countries in the region remains
instrumental in building the capacity of the Iraqi
Government to respond to various challenges. The
continued implementation of the outcome of the Sharm
el-Sheikh conference, including its working groups, is

of paramount importance. We also attach great
importance to the next expanded meeting of Iraq's
neighbours to be convened in Turkey next month.

International partnership and support are key for
Iraq as it faces the innumerable challenges ahead. The
role and contribution of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) is particularly pertinent in
helping the Iraqis achieve their goals. My delegation
recognizes the increasing responsibility of UNAMI as
tasked by Security Council resolution 1770 (2007),
which my delegation fully supported. We, however,
underline the importance to ensure a balance between
the expansion of tasks and availability of adequate
resources. This will eventually assure the success of
the Mission.

While taking into account the security challenges,
the deployment of UNAMI to new areas will increase
access for the Iraqis to international assistance. In this
regard, my delegation welcomes the dispatch of a
UNAMI team to explore the possibility of deploying
staff to a new location in Basra.

Finally, I wish to reiterate Indonesia's full
support for UNAMI and its work in Iraq.

