Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First ofall, I would like to thank the delegation
of Kuwait for its excellent leadership of the Council for
the month of June. I would also like to congratulate
Peru on its assumption of the presidency for this month
and wish it every success.

I also welcome the new Permanent Representative
of France, Mr. Nicolas de Riviere, and to wish him
every success. He has our support and cooperation.

We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for the idea
of holding an open debate on combating terrorism and
organized crime. We thank Mr. Fedotov, Ms. Coninsx
and Ms. Makarenko for their useful contributions to
our discussion.

The Security Council has already highlighted
the close link between terrorism and transnational
organized crime, illegal trafficking in drugs, arms
and persons, and money-laundering in resolution
1373 (2001). Our delegation has always supported and
continues to support the resolve to raise this issue in the
Security Council and to maintain its expert assessment
of the matter.

Terrorists and organized criminals increase their
potential by pooling resources and knowledge, making
it more difficult for law enforcement and intelligence
bodies to combat them. Furthermore, terrorism and
organized criminals are constantly shifting and
looking at new ways of working. They adjust to new
circumstances and change their motivations and tactics.
We are particularly concerned by the radicalization
of members of organized criminal groups and their
transition to terrorism. We need to pay special attention
to that when we organize our work on how to combat
terrorism ideology.

At the same time, the international community has
developed a number of mechanisms and instruments
for international cooperation in the area of criminal
proceedings, such as extradition, mutual legal assistance
or transfer of criminal proceedings, the transfer of the
convicted, the freezing and confiscation of assets and
law enforcement cooperation. Anyone who is involved
in terrorist activities, including their funding, must
be brought to account. In that regard, we call on all
States to fulfil their international obligations, including
on the basis of the principle of extradite or prosecute,
as contained in the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

We support the strengthening of interaction and
coordination among the specialized entities of the
Secretariat and regional organizations in countering
the nexus between terrorism and organized crime. The
specialized technical cooperation programmes of the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Office on Drugs
and Crime are very good examples of such work. We see
potential in the development by regional organizations
of security policies and strategies and in the creation of
more effective cooperation and assistance mechanisms
to fight terrorism and organized crime.

The examples of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and Al-Qaida show that the intensity of terrorist
activity is directly dependent on the level of its funding.
A sufficient material basis enables terrorists to prepare
and conduct terrorist acts, recruit new members
and actively counteract the work of law enforcement
agencies. The terrorist presence in Syria and Iraq
would be suppressed much faster if terrorists did not
receive large-scale and sustained supplies of weapons
and ammunition. We underscore that illegal trafficking
in small arms and light weapons is a serious crime.

We believe that it is important to scale up our efforts
in countering drug trafficking. In a number of States
where the situation is already difficult, circumstances
are aggravated by the continued merging of drug
trafficking and the terrorist underground, inter alia,
to launder criminal proceeds. Human trafficking also
remains a serious challenge in various parts of the
world, and its proceeds frequently end up in the hands
of terrorists. We consider it necessary to continue to
study the interaction between terrorist organizations
and international crime. The potential of criminal
groups makes it much easier for terrorists to conduct
subversive activities globally. We therefore think that it
is a very good idea and appropriate that Peru prepare a
relevant draft resolution on this issue.

