Mrs. Albright (United States of America): The United
States supports the establishment of a rapid-reaction force
within the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR),
and we will materially support its deployment and its
operations. UNPROFOR must be able to defend itself if it
is to implement its mandate in full. It is vital that
UNPROFOR remain, and be effective, in Bosnia.

As the events of recent weeks have demonstrated so
vividly, UN PROFOR is vulnerable, and, as a consequence,
its mission is vulnerable. We were outraged at the seizure
of hostages, and we call for the unconditional release of
those still being held. We are determined to take steps to
prevent such incidents of illegality and obstruction from
happening again. The brave men and women of
UNPROFOR and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) are performing difficult humanitarian tasks
amidst great danger; they are striving to keep alive the
possibility of a negotiated end to this conflict without
further bloodshed; they deserve protection. We are
supporting the deployment of a rapid-reaction force for
the purpose of providing that protection and to make
UNPROFOR better able to carry out its mandate on
behalf of the international community and the Bosnian
people.
We have no illusions about the difficulties
UNPROFOR faces, even as its defensive capabilities are
enhanced. The responsibility for allowing UNPROFOR to
operate safely and effectively falls squarely on those
parties who would interfere with its operations. But
despite interference, and despite the unsatisfactory nature
of the current situation, my Government still believes that
the continued presence of UNPROFOR provides the best
opportunity to keep this conflict from spreading and the
best chance for avoiding further destruction and civilian
deaths.

I have spoken of the responsibility of the parties, in
the plural, but I am not speaking here of moral
equivalence. The Bosnian Serbs are the party that has
taken United Nations personnel hostage in gross violation
of international law. It is the Bosnian Serbs who have
committed the greatest violence against non-military
targets. It is the Bosnian Serbs who have been guilty most
frequently of obstructing the delivery of humanitarian
supplies. And it is the Bosnian Serbs who have
consistently rejected the Contact Group plan.

My Government supports establishment of the rapid
reaction force, but we cannot do so honestly without
confronting squarely the substantial funding implications
that such a decision entails. My Government requested a
modification to the draft resolution because we strongly
believe that the costs of the rapid reaction force should
not be financed through the assessment process. We vote
in favour of this draft resolution on the clear
understanding that by doing so we are not incurring any
direct financial obligation. To put the matter simply, in a
time of serious budgetary cutbacks we are not now
prepared to pay the lion's share of the cost of expanding
this Force.

As Members of the Council know, the issue of
financing United Nations peace-keeping operations on a
satisfactory and timely basis is troublesome. The primary

 

reason is UNPROFOR, which is the largest and most
complex peace-keeping force the United Nations has ever
mounted. Its size and expense affects the United Nations
ability to budget for its other peace-keeping operations.
Furthermore, the normal peace-keeping assessment regime,
created for a very different set of circumstances, may no
longer be adequate to the task of supporting UNPROFOR.
To rationalize the entire process, my Government believes
that we must re-examine urgently the way in which
UNPROFOR is funded. Indeed, nothing in this draft
resolution precludes consideration by the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and
the Fifth Committee of a voluntary payment mechanism for
the rapid reaction force.

When the rapid reaction force for Bosnia was first
proposed, it was our understanding that it would be
financed outside normal peace-keeping assessment
procedures, and we so informed our Congress and our
public. In the British, French and Dutch proposal annexed
to the Secretary-General's letter of 9 June, we learned that
our allies sought payment through normal peace-keeping
assessments. We have been struggling with that request
ever since.

Although we are voting in favour of this draft
resolution today, we want to make it very clear that we are
not endorsing that passage in the annex to the
Secretary-General's letter of 9 June that proposes payment
through normal United Nations peace-keeping assessments.
There are other methods to finance a force of this kind. The
normal peace-keeping method stated in the annex is an
expression of intent by the British, French and Dutch
Governments; it does not represent my Government's
position; and the draft resolution makes it clear that the
Council has yet to decide how this force will be funded.

Because we do support the early deployment of the
force, we will need to work out suitable financing in the
days ahead. In doing so, we should bear in mind, my
Government believes, the extraordinary funding
requirements of UNPROFOR, particularly in comparison
with any other single peace-keeping operation or even all
others combined. For that reason, we simply cannot conduct
business as usual when it comes to expanding this mission.

We are prepared to discuss the options with an open
mind. Perhaps participating nations could take the lead in
paying their own way and forgoing reimbursement. Perhaps
a voluntary fund could be established to help cover some of
the costs. These and other ideas are worth exploring. What
is important is doing so seriously and soon.

In summary, then, my Government supports
deployment of a rapid reaction force for the purpose of
defending UNPROFOR personnel and enabling the peace-
keeping mission to fulfil its mandate in a more robust and
successful fashion. But, because of the enormous cost of
UNPROFOR and the current budgetary situation in
Washington, the United States cannot agree to funding the
rapid deployment force through the normal United
Nations peace-keeping assessment process. Nevertheless,
we stand ready to consider all reasonable alternatives.

