Ms. Cheng-Hopkins: Today I have the honour to
update the Council on behalf of the Secretary-General
on two peacebuilding agendas for action that stem
from, first, the 2009 report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) and last year's progress report
(S/2010/386*), and secondly, the 2010 report on
women's participation in peacebuilding (8/2010/466).
As requested by this Council last year, I am providing
an oral briefing today, but next year we will prepare a
written report.

Before I begin, I would like to pay tribute to this
year's Nobel Peace Prize laureates - President Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf and Leymah Gbowee of Liberia and
Tawakkul Karman of Yemen. We draw inspiration from
them and echo the Nobel Committee's recognition of
their "non-violent struggle for the safety of women and
for women's rights to full participation in
peacebuilding work".

It is two years since the report on peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict was issued. The
Council will recall that the report's agenda aims to
improve the United Nations system's support to
national peacebuilding efforts in the critical first two
years following the end of the main conflict and that it
was developed with the understanding that a
coordinated United Nations approach to peacebuilding
2
is required, given the multitude of actors who play a
role in those efforts.

Let me start with the areas where progress has
been made, beginning with our efforts to create more
cohesive United Nations senior leadership teams and to
respond more rapidly to leadership gaps.

First, a collaborative approach is now in place
that supports the eventual selection of complementary
leadership teams. Secondly, since 2009 more than
20 senior United Nations officials have been quickly
dispatched to the field as temporary senior leaders in
the immediate post-conflict period. Such arrangements
have become standard practice for the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, and they help to minimize the loss of
strategic momentum during critical periods.

The seamless leadership model used in Libya is
also an example of good practice. The senior official
leading the pre-assessment phase was subsequently
appointed Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. That approach allowed Special Representative
Martin to hit the ground running and to initiate the
mission planning process, as he was already deeply
familiar with the issues and the national actors on the
ground.

However, there are also extremely challenging
crisis response and peacebuilding needs in countries
that do not benefit from a Security Council-mandated
mission. Relatively calm countries that suddenly
become volatile require the same sense of urgency and
attention, and sometimes circumstances will require a
quick adjustment to the United Nations leadership.

The 2009 report also emphasized the need to
strengthen support for capacity development from the
outset. That will be reflected in the upcoming review
of the integrated mission planning guidelines in 2012,
which will contain guidance on how to ensure that
national perspectives and capacities are taken into
account from the outset of each planning process.

We can also report progress in galvanizing the
United Nations system and Member States around the
common goal of improved civilian expertise in
peacebuilding operations. Under-Secretary-General
Susana Malcorra has been leading and chairing a
steering committee that oversees the system-wide
follow-up to the independent 2011 civilian capacity
report (see S/2011/85). The Secretary-General has
11-57138
prioritized its recommendations, focusing on national
capacity, partnerships, accountability and agility. One
of the most urgent priorities is to explore modalities to
broaden the scope for deploying personnel provided by
Governments and other entities, particularly those from
the global South, so that specialized expertise can more
easily be made available to United Nations field
presences in key gap areas.

We are also continuing our internal efforts to
clarify roles and responsibilities within the United
Nations system for core peacebuilding functions. Since
2009, the Secretary-General's Policy Committee has
completed six reviews on the following areas: first, the
reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons; secondly, security sector reform; thirdly,
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration;
fourthly, mine action; fifthly, mediation; and sixthly,
electoral assistance.

The reviews have addressed some key challenges,
exposed others and set a forward agenda for additional
work. They have also revealed that the constructive
and consistent engagement of Member States,
including on how they mandate and fund us, is a sine
qua non for effective delivery in the field.

Regarding partnership with the World Bank, its
World Development Report 2011 on conflict, security
and development has created a new impetus for
collaboration. We are truly hopeful that the Bank's new
fragile-States hub in Nairobi will link up more
effectively with United Nations peacebuilding efforts
in the field, including in the countries on the agenda of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

The Secretary-General's 2010 progress report
(S/2010/386*) stressed the importance of two emerging
peacebuilding issues: first, organized crime and drug
trafficking, and secondly, natural resource
management.

Natural resources in fragile States are often
powerful drivers of conflict, not, unfortunately, of
peace, prosperity, growth and job creation. In that
respect, let me mention that, as part of the Stakeholders
Event of the Peacebuilding Fund on 22 November, my
office will host a round-table discussion with private
sector representatives from the mining and minerals
sector, post-conflict Government representatives, non-
governmental organization activists and other experts
on ways to support the use of natural resources for
economic recovery in post-conflict countries. I am
11-57138
pleased to announce that Ms. Clare Lockhart - who,
with Mr. Ashraf Ghani, co-authored Fixing Failed
States - has agreed to provide the keynote address.

The other new issue on the agenda is drug
trafficking and organized crime. This issue has risen to
the peacebuilding agenda, as it undermines
peacebuilding efforts and poses a direct threat to
security and stability. The Council's recent discussions
on Afghanistan, Somalia and West Africa reflect that
alarming trend.

Earlier this year, the Secretary-General
established a task force on transnational organized
crime to bring the United Nations system's capacities
together around that common concern. The West Africa
Coast Initiative - WASI - is one positive example of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs working together to
support the Economic Community of West African
States and the efforts of national Governments in the
region.

The report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict also reinforced the importance of
innovative approaches to funding for peacebuilding. In
that regard, I am pleased that countries of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development are finalizing new guidelines for
transition financing. In addition, the upcoming High-
Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in Busan, Republic
of Korea, will discuss the usefulness of transition
compacts as accountability tools among donors,
conflict-affected States and the United Nations.

The Peacebuilding Fund continues to demonstrate
value-added, especially in responding very quickly to
peacebuilding opportunities as they arise, with recent
allocations to Kyrgyzstan, Cote d'Ivoire, the Sudan and
South Sudan.

I should like to say a word about the
Peacebuilding Commission. The very timely and
relevant review of the peacebuilding architecture last
year has generated significant momentum that has
reinvigorated the PBC's working methods and focused
it on improving impact in the field. Work is also
progressing in developing benchmarks or indicators for
countries, when the time is right, to transition out of
the PBC agenda.
3

I will now turn to the Secretary-General's
September 2010 report on women's participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466). I wish to highlight that the
almost perfect working relationship between the
Peacebuilding Support Office and UN-Women has
made the preparation of this update almost effortless,
as are all our other joint endeavours. As will be
recalled, the rationale behind this agenda is to ensure
that women are central to peacebuilding - not merely
to secure women's rights, but because it is good
peacebuilding practice. Quite simply, ignoring the role
of women exposes us to a greater chance of failure.
This agenda focuses on seven critical areas that, if
implemented, would ensure that women have the
opportunity to play a crucial role in making peace
sustainable.

The first area of progress is in mediation and
political dialogue; gender expertise is provided more
systematically to ongoing conflict resolution processes
and through the inclusion of specialized gender
expertise in mediation rosters.

Secondly, I am pleased to report that there is
broad agreement among the United Nations, the
European Union and the World Bank on the importance
of integrating gender into post-conflict needs
assessments.

The third area of progress is in the rule of law.
Examples include the provision of legal support and
referral services to women in Burundi, the Central
African Republic, Iraq and Somalia, and mobile court
systems to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
With regard to sexual and gender-based violence,
special courts have been established in Liberia and
specialized expertise provided to commissions of
inquiry in C6te d'Ivoire and Libya, while training to
prevent and investigate sexual and gender-based crimes
is being rolled out in Member States and in United
Nations missions.

The PBF-funded, United Nations Development
Programme-implemented project in Sierra Leone,
supporting the All Political Parties Women's
Association in order to increase solidarity among
women across party lines and to encourage political
coalitions around issues of interest to women is
impressive and progressive. Unfortunately, initiatives
such as these are still rare. The United Nations
electoral technical assistance includes a focus on
assessing the potential application of temporary special
measures or quotas for women in public office, and
more will be done to improve women's representation.

I will now turn to areas where change needs to be
accelerated. First, we need to do better in
comprehensively engaging and targeting women in
economic recovery efforts. We also need more women
mediators in peace processes, including from the
United Nations, which did not appoint any women
special envoys or chief mediators last year.

Last but not least is our common commitment to
allocating 15 per cent of United Nations-managed
peacebuilding funds to projects that further gender
equality and women's empowerment as their principal
objective. The Peacebuilding Fund is doing its part to
catalyse more innovative approaches, and recently
launched a SSS-million gender promotion initiative.

Let me reiterate that these two agendas for action
in peacebuilding initiatives were devised as tools to
improve our combined support to nationally led efforts.
The agenda for peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict is having a promising impact on
the ground. Of course, we cannot compare the United
Nations to the private sector, but surely many of these
initiatives are increasing our effectiveness and creating
a more businesslike approach.

History demonstrates that peacebuilding takes at
least a generation to become sustainable. With these
new tools and a culture shift in place, we may be able
to help post-conflict countries beat the odds.

