Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate Ambassador Djani and his team on a very
successful presidency and their great achievements.
At the same time, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council during the month of June. I am sure
that you will lead the work of the Council with great
skill, smooth diplomacy and your vast experience.

(spoke in Arabic)
I wish you all the best.
(spoke in English)

First, I would like to thank Special Representative
Mr. Francois Lounceny Fall for his comprehensive
briefing and efforts in the region.

I would like to focus my statement on three
critical issues: first, the security situation; secondly,
humanitarian aspects and human rights challenges;
and, thirdly, the role of regional organizations.

The security situation in the region remains fragile.
As electoral processes remain an important factor for
stability in Central Africa, we commend some positive
developments towards the consolidation of democratic
governance. We underscore that if such consolidation
is to be sustainable, women should engage their
experience and competencies in any peace dialogue and
negotiations taking place in the region. Nevertheless, we
further encourage the authorities of the countries of the
region to continue building trust among all stakeholders
and to enable inclusive dialogue as a precondition for
the establishment of a stable and constructive political
environment. In that context, we praise the important
work carried out by the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) in terms of good offices,
mediation and preventive diplomacy.

At the same time, Poland condemns the persistent
acts ofviolence committed by armed and terrorist groups
in the Lake Chad basin, the Central African Republic
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
continue to destabilize the whole region. We emphasize
that further the support of international partners to
the Multinational Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad
basin and the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of Lord's Resistance Army is necessary.

Poland is concerned about the fact that institutional
fragility, poverty and environmental degradation,
exacerbated by climate change, continue to contribute
to humanitarian crises and economic downturn. We are
also deeplyworriedaboutreportsregardinghumanrights
violations, including killings, forced disappearances,
arbitrary arrests and detentions, restrictions on the
freedom of association, expression and movement, as
well as sexual and gender-based violence. Poland is
particularly concerned about the situation in Cameroon
and Burundi in that regard. We call upon the authorities
of those countries to take immediate steps to prevent
further human rights violations and abuses and to
ensure respect for fundamental freedoms, including the
right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
for all citizens.

Poland highly appreciates all the efforts of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in the region, especially the recent
visit of Commissioner Bachelet to Yaounde. We call
on the Cameroonian Government to allow the Office
to conduct a human rights assessment mission and
urge the authorities of the countries of the region
to cooperate with all United Nations human rights
mechanisms. Furthermore, we reiterate the obligations
of all stakeholders on the ground to fully comply with
their responsibilities under international humanitarian
law and human rights law. We also emphasize the
importance of allowing full access for humanitarian
workers to vulnerable communities.

Poland recognizes the strategic role of regional
organizations in reducing tensions on the ground. We
hope that the African Union, the Economic Community
of Central African States, the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community, the Lake Chad
Basin Commission and other subregional institutions
will show even greater determination in supporting
peace processes in the region. In that context, Poland
recognizes the leading role of UNOCA in enhancing
the coordination and coherence of measures taken, as
well as in fostering synergies among all United Nations
entities in the Central Africa.

I would like to conclude by expressing our full
support to the Special Representative Fall.

