Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): As
this is the first formal meeting of the year, I join others
in wishing you every success in the chair and in
thanking Ambassador Tafrov for the manner in which
he conducted our business in December.

I would like to fully associate myself with the
remarks that will be made in due course by the Irish
ambassador on behalf of the European Union.

Your briefing, Mr. Chairman, and the work of the
Monitoring Group are very welcome. Both outlined the
significant progress made by the Committee in limiting
Al Qaeda and the Taliban's ability to carry out terrorist
attacks. But they also highlight the difficulties that
Member States face in implementing the measures and,
consequently, these measures" overall effectiveness. So
it is encouraging, therefore, to hear you report on your
visits, which have actually provided, face to face, a
direct stimulus. That proactive approach is invaluable,
not only in fact-finding, but also in encouraging
Member States to implement the sanctions. It
demonstrates that the Committee is here to help with
implementation and that it should not be feared or
ignored, as it sometimes may be.

I would like to briefly touch on four aspects.

First, I would like to mention the role of the
Committee as a catalyst to encourage implementation.
The Committee is faced with a huge task. It cannot and
should not do this alone. The international community
has many sources of assistance that can be used to help
Member States implement the measures. The proposal
for the Committee to enhance its cooperation with
Interpol on the consolidated list is a good example.
Other organizations can help in different ways.
Because of their nature, regional organizations have a
close relationship with their members and can do much
to encourage implementation, especially if a lack of
political will exists in some areas. International
organizations that have developed codes and standards
can help States to adopt them and, at the same time, the
Committee should continue to directly help Member
States with implementation.

Secondly, the provision of technical assistance is
a key element in the fight against Al Qaeda. The
Committee needs to be proactive in working with the
international community to facilitate such technical
assistance. Requests by Member States for assistance
with needs identified by the Monitoring Group should
be matched with potential donors. Again, it is a big
task, but one where the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
for example, has made good progress and would be in a
position, we think, to help the Al Qaeda and Taliban
Sanctions Committee develop similar methods.

Thirdly, we need to develop best practice for the
implementation of measures. Mr. Chairman, I think you
mentioned that a State has promised to send an
addendum to its report outlining the actions it took to
freeze given properties, which is a good example. With
the help of the appropriate international organizations,
perhaps some best practice could be developed to cover
other areas, such as freezing other non-cash economic
assets dealing with terrorist funding being channelled
through charities or alternative remittance systems. All
these are ways in which we could share the best of
good practice.

Fourthly, if I could just touch on an issue raised
in the consolidated list, the report suggests that the lack
of names being put forward owes something to the
perceived stigma of acknowledging that Al Qaeda or
the Taliban might be present within the territory of a
given country. Given the evidence that the Al Qaeda
and Taliban network is truly world-wide, knows no
borders and has no nationality, the Committee should
be absolutely clear on this point: there is no stigma
attached to acknowledging the existence of this threat.
Rather, acknowledging this is a sign that the State is
serious about its commitment to fight terrorism. The
State should partake in this effort and recognize what is
happening on its territory.

Looking forward, this work, which is a matter for
what I term the sister Committee on counter-terrorism,
must be key priorities for the Council this year. We
look forward to seeing a more detailed written
assessment of Member States' implementation and the
measures taken in due course. We also look forward to
renewing the Committee's mandate and improving the
sanctions through the new resolutions to be discussed
by the Council in due time.

