Mr. Kuchyinski (Ukraine): We would also like to
join previous speakers in commending the
Representative ofthe Secretary-General, Mr. Sy, for his
briefing, which provides a comprehensive analysis of
the situation in the Central African Republic and
identifies the progress and challenges of the peace-
building process in the country. We strongly support
the activities of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA), and we would like to express our
appreciation to Mr. Sy for his continued efforts, as the
Head of BONUCA, in support of the country's
stabilization process.

We warmly welcome the Minister for the
Promotion of Civic Responsibility in charge of
relations with the Parliament of the Central African
Republic, Mr. Mezode, and we look forward to the
statement he will be making later this morning. We are
also pleased to note the comprehensive statement made
by the Minister for Foreign Relations and Regional
Cooperation of Mauritius.

We underscore the importance of the fact that
representatives of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank are
participating in today's debate, as the role of these
institutions in the process of economic recovery and
development ofthe Central African Republic cannot be
overestimated.

We welcome the presence of the Permanent
Observer for the International Organization of la
Francophonie to the United Nations, Mr. Bouabid, who
is taking part in the Council's meeting this morning.
We would like to commend the organization on its
valuable contribution to the post-conflict peace-
building process in the Central African Republic.

Our discussions today on the challenges of post-
conflict peace-building in the Central African Republic
are a logical extension of the recent deliberations of the
Council on the situation in Guinea-Bissau. After the
successful completion of the transition from a United
Nations peacekeeping operation to a post-conflict
peace-building presence in the Central African
Republic, the country focused on a wide range of post-
conflict challenges related to the consolidation of peace
and stability. We are pleased to note that the
Government of the Central African Republic has made
significant progress in the disarmament and
restructuring of the defence and security forces.

We also welcome the number of positive
developments that have taken place in the human rights
situation in the Central African Republic. In this
context, we welcome the activities of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in the Central
African Republic (BONUCA) aimed at promoting
awareness of human rights issues in the country. Much
remains to be done in this respect, and the assistance of
the international community is of particular
importance.

In the light of the discussions that the Council
held last week, we would like to note with satisfaction
the recent decision of the President of the Central
African Republic on the creation of an HIV/AIDS
treatment centre. We were also pleased to hear from the
representative of the World Bank, Mr. Karlsson, that
the problem of HIV/AIDS has been given high priority
in the Bank's strategy in the country.

The regional context of the situation in the
Central African Republic continues to be a source of
serious concern. The conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which resulted in a large
number of refugees and an oil crisis in the Central
African Republic, has severe implications for the
humanitarian, economic, social and security situation
in the country.

The economic sector in the Central African
Republic remains very fragile and is in need of long-
term solutions. In this respect, we welcome the
decision by the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund on the provision of financial assistance
to support economic recovery in the country.

Indeed, the realization of political, social and
economic strategies in the Central African Republic
requires a consistent and coordinated approach by the
international community. At the same time, the primary
role in strengthening the spirit of national
reconciliation, and the main responsibility for peace
and stability in the country, rests with the Government
and the people of the Central African Republic. It is
therefore important that the parties engage in a
constructive political dialogue towards national
reconciliation.

We believe that the presidential statement that we
are about to adopt will send a strong signal of support
and encouragement to the Government and people of
the Central African Republic to consolidate the
progress made towards the restoration of stability and
the promotion of sustainable peace and development.

