Mr. Ngoubeyou (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, on behalf of Cameroon and its head of
State, His Excellency Mr. Paul Biya, I wish to reiterate
to the American people and Government our sincere
condolences following the tragic death of seven
astronauts on 1 February 2003 in the mid-flight
explosion of the space shuttle Columbia. We
particularly extend our sympathy to their bereaved and
distressed families here in the United States, in Israel
and in India. The conquest of space is one of the most
important peaceful adventures in the history of all
humankind. Therefore, the terrible catastrophe of
Saturday affects us all very much.

With respect to the question before the Council
today, I would first like to offer you, Sir, the sincere
congratulations of Cameroon upon your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. You may rest assured of my delegation's
complete cooperation and support. I would also like to
express my appreciation to France for its particularly
dynamic and productive presidency.

My country wishes to express its appreciation to
the President of the United States, who, in his concern
to act and consult with the United Nations, in his
statement of 28 January 2003 requested the convening
of this meeting of the Security Council. He decided to
entrust Secretary of State Colin Powell, to whom we
have just listened attentively, with presenting to the
Security Council - and hence to the United Nations
and the international community - "information and
intelligence about Iraq's illegal weapons programme".

The information is certainly troubling, at the
least. We take note of it. It is now up to us to make the
best use of that information, in the spirit of the process
set out in Council resolution 1441 (2002) of 8
November 2002. The elements of information that have
just been presented are useful, for they can facilitate, in
particular, the inspection work now under way. In these
conditions, would it not be appropriate to give the
inspectors time to make use of this information?

The Security Council is meeting once again on
the issue of Iraq. To date, the Iraqi crisis is the situation
of highest profile in the annals of the Security Council,
so attentive are international public opinion and the
peoples of the entire world to the development and
evolution of this situation.

This is undoubtedly the first time since the Cuban
missile crisis that the peoples of the entire world are
assessing the two possible options in a crisis of this
seriousness: a diplomatic and therefore peaceful
settlement, or a war bringing in its wake the grave
consequences that such an action holds for Iraq, the
Middle East and the world.

I am well aware that our Council does not
deliberate or adopt resolutions under pressure from
public opinion, even global opinion. But how can we
ignore today the fact that the disarmament of Iraq is a
divisive question revealing that there are two schools.
There are those - who are many - who advocate a
peaceful settlement and a rejection of the use of arms.
And there are those who advocate a military solution
and who could be reinforced by the conduct of the Iraqi
authorities, who, despite the seriousness of the
situation, are so little inclined towards active,
complete, sincere and unambiguous cooperation with
the inspection missions.

Both groups certainly assess the role and the
mission that belongs to the Security Council. The
Council is today considered to be a decisive player
from whom the world expects a solution. Therefore,
Cameroon, like other members of the Security Council
and Member States of the United Nations, can only
recommend the continuation and implementation of
forceful, robust and decisive action to compel the Iraqi
authorities to conform to the spirit and the letter of
resolution 1441 (2002) - to cooperate fully with the
inspection teams.

Cameroon welcomes the attention, the interest
and the commitment of the United States with regard to
the eradication of all weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq. The preservation of international peace and
security, which underlies its determination, is an
eminently noble and generous objective. And because
we understand the matter thus, we are convinced that
the United States - for the defence of its own interests
and of those of the international community - will
base its action in the spirit of the San Francisco
Conference, which founded the United Nations. We are
convinced that it, imbued with that spirit, will assume
all of its responsibilities under the current
circumstances, within the framework of, and in
accordance with, the provisions of the Charter and of
Security Council resolutions.

Let us not forget: what we are dealing with is the
maintenance of international peace and security. In that
area, the central role entrusted to the Security Council
by the Charter must be reaffirmed, preserved and
respected. Indeed, it is up to the Council, in cohesion
and in unity, to decide one way or the other.

As I said at the beginning of my statement,
Cameroon understands and shares the concerns and the
apprehensions of the United States, as well as its
determination to disarm Iraq of weapons of mass
destruction. Today, my country wishes above all to
reaffirm that, for the United States as well as for the
rest of the international community, war is not
inevitable. Let us give the inspectors the time to utilize,
to study and to verify the elements of information that
have been presented to us. Cameroon believes that the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) must, as they have
requested, continue their delicate mission with greater
commitment and in a more robust way, using the most
productive technological means.

Within the framework of that mission, Iraq and its
authorities must comply, without restriction or delay,
with all the obligations imposed on it in the Security
Council. We call upon and urge the Iraqi authorities to
consider the current context in a responsible way, to
realistically interpret what is being said, prepared and
done with regard to Iraq. Once again, we call upon Iraq
to cooperate fully and actively with UNMOVIC and
with the IAEA. That is in Iraq's interest, and it is in the
Iraqi people's interest.

Because Iraq has violated many Council
resolutions in the past, today it is up to Iraq to show
compliance with them; it is up to Iraq to provide proof
of its firm will to cooperate, to declare the state of its
military-industrial infrastructure. It is up to the
inspectors to verify the truth of that declaration. May
those who yesterday were able to convince Iraq resume
that endeavour today, because tomorrow it may be too
late.

The disarmament of Iraq must not appear to be a
confrontation between that country and the United
States. Iraq's disarmament is of interest and of concern
to the entire international community. It is therefore a
matter between the Security Council - hence the
United Nations - and Iraq. International law,
multilateral diplomacy and collective action in the
United Nations must be made to prevail within and in
the framework of the United Nations. Moreover, the
authorities appointed by the Security Council to gather
information that will enable it to decide must be able to
work calmly, free of media pressure and of heated
discourse that feeds confusion and suspicion.

Finally, we appeal to every Member of the United
Nations that might have information, documents or
testimony about the possible presence of weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq to follow the example of the
United States and to provide such information to the
Security Council, which will be obliged to examine it
and to take it into account in its future deliberations on
the implementation of resolution 1441 (2002).

At this critical time, when our time is becoming
shorter, Cameroon welcomes the departure for Baghdad
of Mr. Hans Blix and Mr. Mohammed ElBaradei on 8

February. But we wonder - under the grave
circumstances that prevail, in which peace hangs in the
balance - whether the time has not come for the

Council to ask the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
Nobel Peace Prize laureate, to go to Iraq to speak with
President Saddam Hussain on urgent ways and means
to speed a peaceful resolution of this burning and
crucial situation. The present situation, fraught with
dangers for peace, calls on all of us. We must not await
the inevitable before acting. Let us anticipate; let us
act, today, here and now.

