Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Today's open debate on threats to international peace
and security caused by terrorist acts is not just one
more Security Council debate to review the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). Rather, it is of
particular importance, as this is the first time we are
taking up this important topic since the adoption on
8 October of resolution 1566 (2004).

I should like at the outset to say that Spain
entirely supports the statement that will be made by the
representative of the Netherlands on behalf of the
European Union.

I would like to express my country's appreciation
for the work carried out by the Russian Federation in
the chairmanship of the CTC. Spain bore that
responsibility until April 2004, and we are well aware
of the difficulties and tremendous workload it involves.
Accordingly, we reiterate our support for Ambassador
Denisov and the entire team from the Permanent
Mission of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations.

Let me turn to the question of technical
assistance, which should be one of the pillars of our
work. Effective systems must be in place to enable us
to get concrete, practical and visible results. While
much remains to be done, we must acknowledge the
accomplishments to date of the current CTC Chairman
and of the Executive Director, Mr. Ruperez, whom we
would particularly like to thank for his contribution to
today's debate. It is also necessary to intensify
cooperation between the CTC and international,
regional and subregional organizations. We praise the
Chairman for the way in which he has handled the
difficulties that arose with regard to preparations for
the fourth special meeting between the CT C and such
organizations. We hope that the meeting will take place
as soon as possible so that the special meetings can
continue to be held on schedule. We would also like to
welcome the information just presented by the
representative of Germany on cooperation between the
CTC and Interpol.

With regard to the work of the CTC itself, we
would like to emphasize that it is experiencing a
sensitive period of transition. The adoption of
resolution 1535 (2004), which set up the Executive
Directorate, represented decisive progress towards
providing the CTC, and thus the Security Council, with
an effective tool to implement the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001). For it to be fully implemented,
however, an entire compendium of measures,
particularly financial and budgetary measures, must be
adopted, and we hope that they will soon be adopted by
the General Assembly.

Emphasis must also be given to the new
mechanism of CTC visits to Member States, under the
conditions stipulated in resolution 1535 (2004). Those
visits should make it possible to assess the degree to
which resolution 1373 (2001) has been implemented by
Member States and should provide a basis for
determining what technical assistance approaches
could help solve problems that are detected.

One of the fundamental criteria for the work of
the CTC is transparency, and today's debate is one of
its most important expressions. That principle should
be strengthened not only by continuing the
Committee's open briefings for all Member States, but
also by studying other ways to help strengthen the
universal commitment to combating terrorism. In this
connection, the Security Council working group
recently established to consider recommendations on
practical counter-terrorism measures should operate in
the most open and participatory way possible.

Just as all acts of terrorism are criminal and
unjustifiable, whatever may be their motive and
whoever may have committed them, all victims of
terrorist acts deserve equal consideration. Concern for
victims must be at the core of our conduct, not only in
the CTC and the Security Council, but also in the
United Nations as a whole. Accordingly we are pleased
that resolution 1566 (2004) expressly includes the
possibility of setting up an international fund to
compensate victims of terrorist acts and their families
and the possibility that that fund could be financed, at
least in part, with assets confiscated from terrorist
organizations and their members and sponsors.

Also, we must not forget that in this struggle

shared by all, respect for international law - in
particular international human rights standards, the
rights of refugees and human rights - is not only

imperative in the fight against terrorism, but also
comprises the most efficient tool to be used by the
international community to reaffirm its legitimacy in
the face of the terrorist threat.

I should like to emphasize that my country has
learned to fight terrorism with methods including the
rule of law, the strengthening of democracy and full
respect for human rights. I can assure the Council that
Spain will always be on the front line with the United
Nations to help eradicate the scourge that afflicts us all
by means of multilateral action that is firmly based
upon international legality.

