Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time that I take the floor under your
presidency, Mr. President, I would like to extend my
heartfelt congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November.

My delegation would also like to thank all the
members of the Council that have never ceased to
uphold respect for the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations in addressing the situation
in Burundi here in the Council. We are very grateful
for that. We regret the fact that, for three years now,
certain delegations remain unwilling to acknowledge
the progress we have made. We hope that their stance
will change in line with the pace of the situation on
the ground.

I would also like to thank my colleague Ambassador
Jiirg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for his constructive
contribution at this meeting, and we renew our full
cooperation with him. I cannot help but thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General. Mr. Michel Kafando,
for his briefing and for the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/1028), even though I do not agree with all of its
content - indeed, there is a wide gap between what the
report describes and the real situation on the ground
in Burundi.

The purpose of my briefing is to share with the
members of the Council the new developments since
the previous meeting on the situation in Burundi, held
on 9 August (see S/PV.8325).

At the political level, preparations for the 2020
elections are continuing normally and in a relaxed
and peaceful atmosphere. The Kayanza road map
for peaceful elections in 2020 and the Independent
National Electoral Commission are already in place. As
far as financing is concerned, Burundians themselves
are mobilizing the necessary resources to finance that
major electoral event. The fact that the financing for the
2020 elections is virtually complete serves to highlight
the will of the Burundian people to take full ownership
of the electoral process - their own electoral process.

As for the creation of an environment conducive
to the successful holding of the 2020 elections,
everything will be done to guarantee that the elections
are democratic, credible, inclusive and peaceful, which
will in turn ensure the political and economic stability
of our country. Since the beginning of 2018, the
Government of Burundi has made a number of concrete
gestures of goodwill towards the general easing of
tensions in the country. The announcement by the Head
of State to not stand for re-election in 2020 - even
though he has the right to do so - is a commendable
gesture of high political and democratic value. The
release at the beginning of the year of more than 2,000
prisoners, including the insurgents of 2015, is also part
of the ongoing momentum of reconciliation, social
cohesion and political tolerance in the country. Both
a moral virtue and a political principle, tolerance is
also a conduit for peace that we must foster, maintain,
strengthen and perpetuate in Burundi.

With regard to the inter-Burundian dialogue
towards democratic, transparent, inclusive and peaceful
elections in 2020, my delegation would like to recall that
using dialogue as a tool for achieving consensus-based
solutions to problems is a culture that is woven into
the daily lives of Burundians. Last month, facilitator
Benjamin William Mkapa concluded the last round
of the East African Community-led inter-Burundian
dialogue, which took place in Arusha. We are very
grateful to him for the efforts he made for the past
nearly three years to support Burundi in its peace- and
democracy-building process. I would like to take this
opportunity to remind the Council, for all intents and
purposes, that the key mandate of the Special Envoy
was to support the dialogue process, which was just
concluded on 29 October.

Our projections indicate that, by and large, the year
2019 will focus on planning for the 2020 elections and
on implementing Burundi's national development plan.
In the spirit of national ownership, which is the guiding
principle of peacebuilding, political consultations
towards the holding of free, transparent and inclusive
elections in 2020 will continue in Burundi in an open
and constructive manner that gives a voice to all of
the stakeholders involved. In that regard, Burundi
encourages the political actors still in exile who were
not involved in the failed coup of 13 May 2015 to return
to participate in the 2020 elections and contribute to the
ongoing efforts towards socioeconomic development
in the country. There is no doubt whatsoever that the
successful outcome of the 2020 electoral process will
mark a new and glorious chapter in the history of our
country and turn the dark page on 2015 once and for all.

On the security front, as the Council is aware,
the situation in Burundi is calm, stable and fully
under control. That is the truth - I am not spreading
propaganda. By and large, all the subregional and
regional organizations whose high-level delegations
recently visited Burundi to inquire about the real
situation in the country found that things had returned
to normal. The 2015 crisis is over. It is behind us,
even though there are challenges with regard to
socioeconomic development that still need to be
addressed. Some partners that are still hesitant should
have the courage to accept the return to normal, turn
the page on 2015 and look to the country's future from
a vision- and approach-based perspective.

With regard to the freedom of expression, my
delegation would like to inform the Council that Burundi
has a very rich tradition of freedom of expression and
a very active civil society. That is reflected by the
more than 20 local public and private radio stations,
five community radio stations, 10 radio-television
broadcasters, 17 local news and communication
agencies, 24 public and private newspapers, 26 websites,
eight web television channels, four magazines and 12
professional press associations and bodies that operate
in our country. In addition to our local private radio
stations, four foreign radio stations are also authorized
to broadcast freely in our country. Even the number of
people employed in the media sector increased to 122
in 2018, as compared to 94 in 2015, for a substantial
increase of 28 media sector workers in three years. To
the delegations that were asking questions concerning
the freedom of expression, we hope that this paragraph
gave them their answers.

With regard to civil society, the Government
has already approved more than 6,500 non-profit
organizations, more than 100 of which have been
approved since January 2016 alone. I would also remind
the Council that 15 non-profit organizations that had
been under investigation since the failed coup d'etat
of 13 May 2015 were allowed to reopen. The approval
in accordance with national law of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) is continuing at a reasonable
pace. Thirty-eight NGOs have already been approved
and are operating as I speak. Several other foreign
NGOs that have seen their agendas grow significantly
are expected to resume their activities shortly.

As for the return of refugees, since 2016 about
250,000 refugees have returned home. That figure
includes the 55,495 refugees who have returned to
the country since the August 2017 Burundi-Tanzania-
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) tripartite agreement. The voluntary
return of refugees, who are coming home mainly from
Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, is at a pace of more than 1,000 people
returning per week. Nevertheless, my delegation would
also like to reiterate its legitimate request to UNHCR
and Burundi's friends in the region to intervene in
certain host countries - we all know very well which
ones they are - that are holding hostage our fellow
compatriots in exile by creating artificial barriers to
prevent their voluntary return home; and, above all
to ensure that refugee camps maintain their civilian
character in accordance with the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees. UNHCR must ensure
that refugee camps are not forcibly transformed into
military or paramilitary training camps.

With regard to protecting human rights, the
Government of Burundi attaches great importance to
human rights issues. We have adopted a zero-tolerance
policy with regard to human rights violations and we
are currently working to implement it. We adhere with
conviction to the principles of objectivity, universality,
non-selectivity and the non-politicization of human
rights. We recognize that isolated cases of human rights
violations can occur, just as they can in other countries.
For those reasons, in addition to its independent
national commission on human rights, the Government
has set up judicial commissions ofinquiry to shed light
on certain human rights violations alleged to have
occurred since the beginning of the insurgency in 2015.

Nevertheless, the Council will agree with me that
promoting human rights is a long and arduous process
that is sometimes fraught with difficulties. It is an ideal
that we all strive to achieve. No nation has perfected
it, even after more than a century of democracy. For
Burundi, a democracy that is barely 13 years old,
there is still a long way to go, but the willingness to
succeed is there and it is tangible. The Independent
National Human Rights Commission is operational and
contributes enormously to improving the human rights
situation in our country.

With regard to the socioeconomic situation, the
Government of Burundi has just adopted a national
development plan for 2018-2027. The national plan is
a reference document that sets out the main directions
to lead us towards the sustainable development
that we wish to see by the year 2030. In view of the
challenges presented by that new development plan,
the Government of Burundi launches a fervent appeal
to all bilateral and multilateral partners to support our
country in implementing the national development
plan in a spirit of mutually beneficial and, above all,
respectful cooperation.

With respect to cooperation on the three pillars of
United Nations work, the human rights pillar remains
the weak element in the good cooperation. Burundi
believes that the discordant and tense relations between
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in Geneva and Burundi are
counterproductive for both parties. Disproportionate
pressure based on politically biased reports has never
contributed to the promotion of human rights anywhere
in the world. For us, dialogue and mutually respectful
cooperation are the only appropriate way to find
solutions to issues that require coordinated responses
between Geneva and Bujumbura. It is a two-way road,
where each user must strive to avoid head-on collisions
by respecting, of course, the code of conduct, which in
this particular case is the Charter of the United Nations.

Concerning the development pillar, Burundi
appreciates the work of the United Nations country
team, which continues to support the country in its
socioeconomic development efforts. The United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for the period from
2019 to 2023 was developed and adopted by mutual
agreement of the Government and the United Nations
country team in Bujumbura. Today, the UNDAF is now
the main tool for strategic integration and for the United
Nations response to our national priorities. That United
Nations presence to address development is very useful
to Burundi. However, any presence of a political nature
is inappropriate. Determining the political future of
Burundi is exclusively a national matter.

With regard to the peace and security pillar,
Burundi is proud to actively and successfully participate
alongside other countries in United Nations and
African Union peacekeeping missions. More than 6,000
Burundian men and women are deployed in various
peacekeeping operations, mainly in the Central African
Republic and Somalia. The excellent work of our brave
soldiers in peace missions, who have willingly chosen
to sacrifice their lives to save those of others far from
their native land and in particularly hostile conditions,
must be duly appreciated.

I cannot conclude my remarks without once again
reiterating our appeal to the Security Council to have
the courage to remove Burundi from its agenda. The
current political and security situation in the country
is calm and stable. It is far from posing a threat to
international peace and security, which is the Council's
area of competence. To justify keeping Burundi on the
Council's agenda because of the holding of elections in
2020 would mean including on the agenda more than 20
other countries that will have elections in the same year
as Burundi. The elections therefore are not grounds to
justify the Council remaining seized of the situation in
Burundi.

The convening of inappropriate meetings on
Burundi on the basis of an obsolete resolution that no
longer fits the reality on the ground could become a
destabilizing factor for the country. Most Member
States, some of which are members of the Council,
disregard the real reasons behind the disproportionate
hounding of Burundi, a country whose return to
normalcy is well established. History will remember
that my country was kept on the Council's agenda
unfairly in order to satisfy foreign interests. As I clearly
said on 9 August in the Chamber (see S/PV.8325), the
valuable time that the Security Council generously
devotes to Burundi should be allocated to other areas of
tension and conflict, which are rife in other countries.

The meeting rose at 5.05 pm.
