Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. De Mistura for his briefing on the situation in
Afghanistan and Mr. Rassoul for his statement. I
endorse the statement to be made by the representative
of the European Union.

We were obviously shocked and saddened by the
attack that took the life of the former Afghan President
and Chair of the High Peace Council, Mr. Rabbani. The
terrorists are attempting to divert us from our goal;
they must fail. The international community must rally
around the message of unity and determination, as the
Council did on 21 September and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will
continue to do in Kabul. Our aim remains to support
the Afghan Government on its road to fully restored
sovereignty in the framework of a consistent and
determined transition process.

As to France, the President of the Republic
announced our intention to reduce and redeploy our
contingent in cooperation with our allies and the
Afghan authorities. On the other hand, in parallel and
in the same context, the civil component of our effort
will gradually grow. France's engagement will not end
in 2014, but it will have been changed by a friendship
and cooperation agreement between France and
Afghanistan to be signed this autumn.

These major changes are taking place in a
difficult security context, as recalled by the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2011/590). The insurgents
have demonstrated their capacity to carry out complex
attacks at the very heart of Kabul. The number of
civilian victims has increased as compared to the past
year thanks to the Taliban who no longer hesitate to
kill in hospitals and in mosques. That being the case,
the Afghan Security Forces are growing more powerful
and have demonstrated their resolve to fight. We need
to continue to focus on protecting civilians within the
framework of the International Security Assistance
Force. It is just as important to be able to demonstrate
that we are fighting on behalf of values that preclude
any practices that undermine human dignity.

The stabilization of Afghanistan entails its
integration into a regional dynamic based on new rules.
The Conference on the New Silk Road Initiative was
an opportunity to reaffirm the importance for
Afghanistan to once again become the centre of
exchange that it was in the past. With regard to the
ongoing military commitment and a vision for the
economy, there is a need to think deeply about the
regional parameters for security. We welcome the
upcoming Conferences in Istanbul in November and in
Bonn on 5 December, which will help us to move
forward on all of those issues.

At the Kabul Conference last year, the goal of
Afghanization was set forth with conditions - better
management of public finances, reducing corruption,
and the performance of the budget. The international
community cannot continue to effectively carry out its
commitment if those conditions are not met and
agreement is not reached between the country's
authorities and the International Monetary Fund to
address the Kabul Bank crisis.

Moreover, Afghanistan cannot allow the
institutional crisis that has been taking place since the
last legislative elections to continue. We note the
announcement by the Independent Election
Commission to change the composition of the lower
chamber. We call on all Afghan institutions to work in
line with their respective purviews, in the framework
set out in the Constitution and the principle of the
separation of powers. That episode makes it all the
more necessary to carry out genuine electoral reform
with the support of the United Nations.

We are convinced that the United Nations in
general, and UNAMA in particular, will have a major
role to play in Afghanistan in coming years. Its
presence and its mandates will change based on the
transition. We look forward to the results of the
strategic review requested of the Secretary-General in
resolution 1974 (2011).

We would like to conclude by commending the
efforts of Special Representative Staffan de Mistura,
who has led UNAMA with great skill and the vision
necessary to refocus its actions and help it through
dramatic moments. I also pay tribute to the personnel
of UNAMA, who at the request of the Security Council
and UNAMA are working in challenging and
dangerous conditions in favour of the stabilization,
security and development of Afghanistan.

