Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): As the Security
Council's penholder for Darfur, the United Kingdom
wholeheartedly welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2296 (2016), which extends the important
work of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for another year. I also
welcome the constructive spirit in which all members
of the Security Council engaged with us during
the negotiations.

The situation in Darfur for many is desperate.
Millions of people have fled their homes. Millions of
people need humanitarian assistance just to survive.
To the United Kingdom, the need for UNAMID is
therefore clear. The resolution is much more than a
simple mandate renewal; it is a vital recommitment
to protecting civilians in Darfur, to improving the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, and to supporting
mediation, both between the Government and the
Darfur armed groups, as well as among communities.
The text strikes a balance. It enables UNAMID to
provide the protection and support necessary for the
vulnerable in Darfur, but it also seeks to help deliver
progress on the benchmarks that will ultimately enable
UNAMID to leave Darfur, as my Egyptian colleagues
and others have just set out.

In adopting the resolution unanimously
today - and I very much agree with the comments
made by my Venezuelan colleague on the importance
of unanimity - we have sent an important message
of support to UNAMID and to the people of Darfur.
For the Government of the Sudan, it is an honest but
fair message. Through this resolution, we have not
shied away from the situation in Darfur. We have
clearly expressed our concern at the fighting in Jebel
Marra and the impact on civilians, especially of aerial
bombardments. We have also called on the Government
of the Sudan to ensure unfettered access for UNAMID
and humanitarian personnel and to release all UNAMID
shipments. It is essential that UNAMID have the food
and equipment that it needs to deliver on its mandate.
We welcome the recent progress on this issue and trust
that it will continue.

We have welcomed positive developments in
other areas, such as the Government of the Sudan's
adoption of an action plan for the protection of children
from violations in armed conflict, and we have
welcomed the Government's signing of the road map
agreement proposed by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel. We urge non-signatory groups
to join them and sign this important document.

I am confident that this resolution provides the
basis for a strong relationship between the Council, the
African Union, UNAMID and the Government of the
Sudan. I hope that it will enable us all to work together
in a spirit of mutual cooperation to the benefit of those
suffering in Darfur.

