Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
It is always a good idea to follow closely the introduction
of new procedures, which is why today's meeting seems to
us to be useful.

It was in May 1993 that the first meeting of troop
contributors took place. The Secretary-General had taken
the initiative for that meeting, which concerned the United
Nations Protection Force. Since then the use of that type of
meeting has increased, and the Security Council has dealt,
in two presidential statements - that of 3 May 1994,
subsequent to the discussion of the report of the Secretary-
General on "An Agenda for Peace"; and that of 4
November 1994 - with the question of the modalities for
organizing such meetings.

It remains important to continue the discussion in
order to find improved consultation procedures that are
consistent with the balances established by the Charter and
to make it possible for those States which undertake the
effort of making personnel available for United Nations
peace-keeping operations to be appropriately heard as to the
use that may be made of their contingents. France, in its
twofold capacity as a permanent member of the Security
Council and as a large troop contributor to peace-keeping
operations, is aware of its responsibilities in this regard.

The usefulness of the present formula for
consultations, which brings together troop contributors,
members of the Security Council and the Secretariat,
needs no further proof, just as the interest that Member
States have shown in the means of organizing these
meetings is evident.

The General Assembly's debate of 28 and 29
November 1995 on agenda item 11, "Report of the
Security Council", attests to the vitality of exchanges of
views in this respect. The French delegation, for reasons
of principle, did not participate in that debate, but we
noted with the utmost care the observations that were
made. We feel, in fact, that the purpose of the
Assembly's consideration of the Council's report is to
give Member States - in particular, those that are not on
the Council an opportunity to express their views on
the Council's activities, highlighting possible
shortcomings and, where necessary, making suggestions
to improve the relationships between principal organs.

 

In this context, we feel that our duty is to listen and
reflect on the way in which the Security Council could
follow up on the ideas expressed by those on whose
behalf the Council acts in accordance with Article 24 of
the Charter.

Thus, last year, after having heard the General
Assembly's debate on that item, we recommended that
emphasis be placed on strengthening the role of public
debate in the work of the Security Council. This seemed
to us to be the most direct and most open way of
responding to the desire for transparency expressed by
Member States, and especially by troop contributors. At
the time, we had no illusions about the possibility of
reversing, in short order, a tendency to over-emphasize
informal consultations. We had in mind a long-term effort
to work against the force of routine habits of working in
a small committee.

Clearly, we are at the very beginning of this
endeavour. But the massive support expressed for the idea
during the General Assembly's debate on the report of the
Council is an incentive to do more in this direction in the
months to come so that next year we shall be able to
present a more satisfactory record regarding the number
and quality of public meetings.

 

We certainly agree that the relaunching of public
debate, particularly orientation debate, does not exhaust the
subject of the relationship between the Security Council and
the contingent-contributing countries. The present formula
of consultation meetings is the result of a compromise that
was developed in May and November 1994, in which we
find evidence of the ingenuity and pragmatic spirit of our
partners from the United Kingdom, who contributed greatly
to the successful completion of negotiations, which were
not easy.

The arrangement now in force provides for two types
of meetings. On one hand, there are regular meetings,
convened and presided over exclusively by the Secretariat,
to which members of the Security Council are invited.
These meetings are aimed at providing for contacts with
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General and force
commanders and for consideration of the practical questions
that arise in specific operations. On the other hand, there
are meetings over which the President of the Security
Council for the month and a representative of the Secretary-
General preside jointly. These are aimed at facilitating
exchanges of information and of opinions before decisions
affecting the mandate of an existing peace-keeping
operation are taken, or in cases of unforeseen events that
could call for action by the Council in respect of a given
operation.

The same constructive and realistic spirit should
prevail today. After today's meeting it will be up to the
Security Council and, more specifically, its working group
on procedures to analyse the comments on the current
format of meetings of troop contributors. Then, bearing in
mind possible shortcomings and lacunae that will have been
identified, it would be appropriate, without any
preconceptions, to decide what was due to lack of
experience, what was due to practical problems in the
preparation for meetings, and what could be accounted for
by conceptual problems in the system. Indeed, not every
shortcoming would automatically require institutional
reform.

On the other hand, it is perfectly conceivable that the
Security Council will envisage the adoption of a document
that might introduce certain changes in the arrangements
now in place, if this proves necessary for a better exchange
of information and of opinion. LogicalIy such a document,
should it be produced, ought to be in the form of a
presidential statement. Indeed, this is the way in which the
Security Council customarily takes a stand on its own
procedural practices.

It would be premature for us to presume at this stage
what the contents of that document might be. To facilitate
future discussion, the delegation of France would,
however, like to recall certain principles to which it is
dedicated in respect of the question of consultations with
troop contributors.

First of all, it is important to us that the Secretariat
preserve in any exercise relating to the conduct of peace-
keeping operations the prerogatives which are its own. It
has never been the practice of the Security Council to
assume responsibility for the conduct of operations. The
Council determines the mandates, the Secretary-General
engages the troops. It is therefore important, in our view,
that the Secretary-General be associated, under all
circumstances, with the chairmanship of meetings that are
of deep concern to him.

It would seem to us untimely to make of troop
contributors an abstract category of Member States which,
for all operations, would have a right to participate in the
decisions of the Security Council, whereas other Member
States would not have that right. The consequence of this
concern to comply with the Charter is that the
consultation procedures have to be established operation
by operation. If we were to aim at a structure that in
theory would encompass all peace-keeping operations, we
would confront the problem of who should participate,
because the contributors vary from one theatre of
operations to another. The existence of such a structure
would mean that certain States constitute outright a new
category of members, a contributor category, whether or
not they are actually present on the ground. Likewise, we
are reluctant to accept the idea of "potential contributors"
to an operation, since any Member State is, in principle,
a potential contributor. Consequently, the idea of
consultations which would be held before the adoption of
the mandate of a force, in other words, at a time when the
force does not yet exist, does not seem realistic to us,
unless we want to create a new category of Members of
the Organization, which, I repeat, would seem unjust and
arbitrary.

As much as we are in favour of strengthening
the flow of information among the partners in peace-
keeping operations - members of the Council, troop
contributors, the Secretariat - we are equally doubtful
about the advantages to be derived from turning
consultation and information sessions into a form of
Security Council meeting. We have initial reservations
concerning the idea of resorting to Article 29 of the

 

Charter, which allows the Council to create the necessary
subsidiary organs for the performance of its functions.

Therefore, we recommend maintaining a clear
distinction between debates with a political flavour, in
which all Members of the Organization should be able to
express their views and which must accordingly be held at
public meetings of the Security Council by virtue of
Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter, and dialogue of a more
practical and more technical nature, which should be
between the Secretariat, the troop contributors and the
members of the Security Council. We believe that these
latter meetings are more information-oriented and that the
information should be instructive, reciprocal, well prepared
and well used by the Security Council, as envisaged in the
presidential statement of 4 November 1994. In this respect,
there is undoubtedly room for progress in the preliminary
work to be accomplished to make these consultations as
effective as they can be. The feeling of the French
delegation, at this stage of our shared reflection, is that it is
possible to make better use of the framework provided by
the consultation meetings with troop-contributing countries.
We are not convinced that this framework, as we know it,
is inadequate and must be changed if we are to improve
matters .

