Mr. Winid (Poland): Poland aligns itself with the
statement just delivered by the observer of the European
Union and with the statement delivered by the Chair
of the Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004).
My delegation would like to make some additional
comments from our national perspective.

We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
open debate and for your first quarterly message in
your capacity as the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), which was circulated in May. The ability of
non-State actors to acquire and use weapons of mass
destruction poses a continuous and real threat to global
security and to the non-proliferation regime.

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC) - one of the most universal treaties in the field
of disarmament. However, it is with grave concern
that we are following the recurring cases of the use of
chemical weapons in Syria and Iraq. Reports by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW)-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
have confirmed that the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham was among those responsible for horrific attacks
on civilian populations over the past few years. Any use
of chemical weapons strikes at the very foundations on
which the CWC has been built.

Although the OPCW is not an anti-terrorist
organization, Poland believes it has the potential to
counter the threat of the misuse of toxic chemicals by
non-State actors. The OPCW position against terrorism
can be strengthened by the full implementation of CWC
provisions by States Parties. Poland also supports OPCW
cooperation with other international stakeholders,
including the Global Partnership against the Spread of
Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
and the 1540 Committee.

Half a year ago, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2325 (2016), which Poland had the honour
to support and co-sponsor. It was the culmination
of the six-month-long comprehensive review of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
identified the strengths and areas for the improvement
of the resolution. The resolution drew conclusions on
the evolving nature of the risk of proliferation and the
rapid advances in science and technology that might
influence the non-proliferation regime. We fully
share the approach taken in resolution 2325 (2016),
which states that more attention should be paid by
States to enforcement measures, to measures relating
to biological, chemical and nuclear weapons, and to
national export and transshipment controls.

As you have accurately pointed out, Mr. President,

"Experience shows that taking full advantage
of direct interactions with Member States is the
best way to achieve sustainable and measurable
results with regard to effective implementation of
the resolution".

We therefore commend Chile, China and the
Russian Federation, which hosted regional courses for
the 1540 contact points. Based on our own experience,
we understand how important it is to develop
cooperation at the regional level in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004). We also repeat our readiness
to assist other States, at their request, in their capacity-
building efforts.

Some simple steps may significantly strengthen
non-proliferation. To name just the basic ones - we
encourage the remaining 16 States to submittheirnational
implementation plans with regard to resolution 1540
(2004). We also call on States that have not yet done
so to accede to the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.

Poland welcomes enhanced cooperation between
the 1540 Committee and international organizations
such as the International Atomic Energy Agency
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. We encourage Member States to develop
direct engagement with the 1540 Committee and with
other relevant forums, such as the Global Partnership,
the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Australian Group, the
European Union Chemical, Biological, Radiological
and Nuclear Risk Mitigation Centres of Excellence
Initiative, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Global Initiative to Counter Nuclear
Terrorism and the Proliferation Security Initiative.

In conclusion, I wish to state that my country
has traditionally been a firm advocate of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction at
all levels. We stand ready to cooperate with all actors
interested in strengthening the non-proliferation regime
and security for all in a world free of weapons of mass
destruction. Resolution 1540 (2004) plays a pivotal role
in achieving that goal. I can therefore assure you of our
full support, Mr. President, as well as of our support for
the work of the 1540 Committee.

