Ms. Kang (Republic of Korea): I thank you very
much, Mr. President, for convening this meeting and
for the opportunity to speak to the Security Council.

As you state, Mr. President, we are indeed at the
dawn of a new day with regard to the challenge of
North Korea's denuclearization. It is useful to take a
step back and to realize just how new a day it is. Barely
a year ago here in the Council, we were counting the
numbers of North Korea's nuclear tests and ballistic
missile launches and calling for united action to bring
North Korea to the right side of history. At the time,
the thought of President Trump and Chairman Kim
Jong Un shaking hands and holding a summit would
have been considered a daydream. It would have been a
fantasy to imagine President Moon Jae-in and Chairman
Kim Jong Un on top of Mount Paekdu taking photos
together. But here we are, and we have a different set
of numbers to ponder: three inter-Korean summits and
the first-ever United States-North Korea summit in a
matter of five months, with more likely to follow in the
months to come.

Allow me to quickly recap the milestone
developments on the Korean peninsula that have
brought us to this point. They started with North
Korea's participation in the 2018 PyeongChang
Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games, in February
and March, to which the North Korean leader sent a
high-level delegation. That was quickly followed by
the visit of President Moon Jae-in's special envoy
to Pyongyang in early March, who came back with
first-hand confirmation of Chairman Kim's intentions
on denuclearization.

In April, North Korea took a step forward by
announcing that it would discontinue nuclear tests as
well as ballistic missile tests of intercontinental range.
It also announced that it would dismantle its nuclear
test site, which it did a month later. On 27 April, the
two Koreas held an inter-Korean summit - the first
in more than a decade. In the outcome, the Panmunjom
Declaration, the two sides agreed to actively cooperate
for the establishment of a permanent and stable peace
regime on the Korean peninsula, and confirmed
the common goal of realizing a nuclear-free Korean
peninsula through complete denuclearization.

At the first-ever United States-North Korea
summit, on 12 June, the top leaders ofthe two countries
also confirmed the common goal of building a lasting
and stable peace regime on the Korean peninsula, and
the North Korean leader reaffirmed his commitment to
complete denuclearization.

Last week, President Moon Jae-in visited Pyongyang
for his third summit meeting with Chairman Kim. They
discussed at length the denuclearization challenge,
including concrete ways to bring it about. For the first
time in his own voice, the North Korean leader stated
his commitment to turn the Korean peninsula into a
land ofpeace, free of nuclear weapons and threat - and
that at a joint press conference with President Moon
Jae-in, which was broadcast live to the rest ofthe world.

More specifically, in the Pyongyang Joint
Declaration, North Korea announced that it will
permanently dismantle its Dongchang-ri missile engine
test site and launch platform under the observation
of experts from relevant countries, and indicated its
willingness to take additional measures, such as the
permanent dismantlement of the nuclear facilities at
Yongbyon, as the United States takes corresponding
measures. Hopes are now high that the upcoming
United States-North Korea negotiations will produce
more concrete outcomes.

The international community has been able to

bring North Korea back to the dialogue through a well-
measured combination ofdiplomatic tools. In particular,
the Security Council played a critical role. The Council
unanimously adopted a series of sanctions in response
to North Korea's nuclear and missile provocations,
and the international community acted unity in fully
implementing them, thereby sending a clear message
to North Korea that the pursuit of its nuclear weapons
programme will never be accepted. But at the same
time, the door for dialogue was kept open to bring North
Korea back to the negotiating table. Eventually, the will
of the international community prevailed, and North
Korea changed course and came to the path of dialogue
and peaceful resolution. In the past few months, it has
taken a series of "for the first-time" actions that were
unthinkable only a year ago.

As for the Government of the Republic of Korea,
we are committed to continuing to work with the
international community to ensure that the Council's
sanctions are implemented faithfully, even as we
continue to engage North Korea to facilitate substantial
progress towards complete denuclearization. We are
also furthering inter-Korean dialogue to solidify the
momentum for reconciliation and better relations. That
includes implementing the comprehensive military
agreement signed in Pyongyang, which aims to eliminate
the threat of war and prevent accidental clashes.

Last week, while in North Korea, many of us joined
