Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Executive Director Coninsx for their briefings and
welcomes the ninth report (S/20l9/6l2) of the Secretary-
General on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (lSIL/Da'esh) to international peace
and security.

The recent spate of attacks in Afghanistan, Egypt,
Somalia and elsewhere has inflicted colossal damage on
those countries. As noted in the report of the Secretary-
General, despite having suffered military defeats, ISIL
remains an international terrorist organization that
poses a global threat. Issues such as how to deal with
returning foreign terrorist fighters and their family
members and the resettlement and reintegration of
released members present challenges for Member
States. Member States must remain vigilant and keep
a watchful eye on the global terrorism threat. The
international community should foster awareness of
the need to build a community of a shared future for
humankind and step up results-based cooperation in
the joint fight against the threat of terrorism.

First, it is imperative to uphold the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
allow the United Nations and the Security Council to
play a central role in coordinating counter-terrorism
efforts. The fight against terrorism must be based on
unified standards, a zero-tolerance policy, respect
for the sovereignty of the countries concerned, the
primary responsibility of Member States for counter-
terrorism and fully implementing the Council's relevant
resolutions and the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. That is the only way to stay united,
coordinate effectively and work synergistically.

Secondly, it is important to take a holistic approach
by addressing the root causes as well as the symptoms
of terrorism, including by focusing on the elimination
of the root causes themselves. The international
community should push for a political settlement of
hotspot issues, resolve differences through peaceful
means, assist Member States in their poverty reduction
and eradication efforts and in achieving sustainable
development and encourage dialogue and harmonious
coexistence among the various civilizations and
religions on an equal footing. Assistance should be
given to developing countries to boost their counter-
terrorism and de-radicalization capacity.

Thirdly, it is necessary to step up international
judicial cooperation and adopt tailored counter-
terrorism measures in the light of emerging trends
in, and new features of, terrorism. That requires
us to focus on the following prominent issues: the
movement of foreign terrorist fighters, the diversified
means of terrorist financing, the collusion of terrorist
organizations with organized crime and the misuse
of the Internet and communication technologies by
terrorists. Support should be given to Member States
with the aim of enhancing coordination on border
control and law enforcement, intelligence sharing and
results-based cooperation.

Fourthly, the strength and expertise of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), and other mechanisms
should be fully leveraged so that they can continue
to contribute to terrorist threat assessments, the
capacity-building efforts of Member States and
terrorist sanctions, among other things. UNOCT
should be given support to organize regional counter-
terrorism meetings. In the course of their work, all of
the counter-terrorism mechanisms should act in strict
accordance with the relevant resolutions and rules of
procedure, increase coordination among themselves
and enhance communication with Member States with
a view to maintaining the authority and effectiveness
of the counter-terrorism and sanctions regimes and
making a greater contribution to international counter-
terrorism efforts.

As an important player on the international counter-
terrorism front, China is deeply involved in counter-
terrorism cooperation within the framework of, inter
alia, the United Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. China has been supporting Member
States to build their counter-terrorism capacity through
the China-United Nations Peace and Development Trust
Fund and carrying out fruitful cooperation with many
Member States in such areas as counter-terrorism,
intelligence sharing and combating terrorist financing,
transnational organized crime and cyberterrorism,
thereby making a remarkable contribution to the global
fight against terrorism. Together with the community
of nations, China stands ready to fight the threat of
terrorism through concerted efforts in the joint quest
for world peace and stability.

