Mr. Badji (spoke in French): At the outset, Sir, I
wish to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. I am convinced that, under your able leadership,
the work of the Council will be carried out
constructively and efficiently.

I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Cesar
Mayoral, Permanent Representative of Argentina, on
the exemplary manner in which he steered the work of
the Council during the month of March.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the
other members of the Council for having given me the
opportunity, in my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, to participate in this important
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.

Once again, the Council is meeting to consider
the very troubling situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory. The violence in the West Bank and,
particularly, in the Gaza Strip, is escalating at an
alarming pace. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) have
intensified military action, stepping up extrajudicial
assassinations and the firing of missiles and artillery
rounds at Palestinian targets. The number of
Palestinian civilian casualties is mounting, with
children among those killed and injured. Despite the
deaths of innocent civilians, the IDF continues to shell
targets in the Gaza Strip, causing more death and
destruction. At the same time, the firing of Qassam
rockets from the northern Gaza Strip into Israel shows
no signs of abating, provoking violent response by the
Israel Defense Forces. All these acts have no
justification whatsoever and are violations of
international law.

For the same reason, the Committee condemns in
the strongest possible terms today's suicide attack in
Tel Aviv that killed at least nine and wounded dozens
of innocent civilians. The current escalation of
violence is reaching dangerous levels. This situation
could sink into an uncontrollable quagmire unless
reason and calm prevail.

These tragic developments risk destroying what
little hope remains for the Palestinian Authority under
President Mahmoud Abbas and the incoming Israeli
Government to explore ways of reopening dialogue and
returning to peace talks. The Palestinian population,
already suffering under miserable living conditions, is
not only further degraded and humiliated, but also has
to face increasing danger day by day.

We call on Israel immediately to halt military
operations and the excessive use of force. We call on
both sides to cease without delay all acts of violence,
to exercise utmost restraint so as to allow calm to
return. The Committee believes that the Security
Council should live up to its responsibility and help
end the bloodshed and misery in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Israel must stop its military
incursions into Palestinian land and its targeted killings
of Palestinians, and must lift the severe restrictions on
the movement and daily life of the Palestinian people.

In this context, we are very concerned about
recent decisions by some major donors to suspend aid
to the Palestinian Authority. The assistance of the
international community has been so critical in
providing the most basic provisions to millions of
Palestinians. Suspension or redirection of basic aid will
cause disruption and extra hardship in the lives of
many Palestinians at this most critical time. The
Committee appeals to the international donor
community to ensure that the humanitarian plight of
the Palestinian people does not worsen and to do all
they can so that much-needed aid continues to reach
those who need it the most.

The illegal Israeli policies of expanding and
annexing settlements and the ongoing construction of
the separation wall continue in violation of
international law. These policies deprive the
Palestinians of their just aspiration for a contiguous
independent State of Palestine. The international
community has continued to call on Israel to put an end
to its policies that unlawfully seize Palestinian land
and create faits accomplis on the ground. The
Committee calls on the Security Council and the States
parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to undertake
urgent measures to pressure Israel to end this
confiscation of land and renounce this policy.

For its part, the Committee will continue to work
together with the legitimate representatives of the
Palestinian people - first and foremost with the
President of the Palestinian Authority - who support
the principles of non-violence, recognize the State of
Israel and respect and adhere to previous Israeli-
Palestinian agreements. The Committee is also in
favour of a negotiated settlement of the conflict
resulting in the emergence of an independent,
democratic and viable Palestinian State, living side by
side in peace and security with Israel and its other
neighbours.

Such a settlement would make it possible to
resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and to end the
occupation, which began in 1967, on the basis of the
foundations of the Madrid Conference, the principle of
land for peace, Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003),
agreements previously reached by the parties, the Arab
Peace Initiative and acceptance of Israel as a neighbour
in peace and security and in the context of a
comprehensive settlement. Only such a comprehensive
settlement will allow the Palestinian people to achieve
their inalienable rights, which we all ardently desire.

