Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Peru welcomes the holding of this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. We are also grateful for the briefing provided
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General.

However, we deplore the ongoing deterioration of
the situation on the ground, including the recent events
that took place in connection with the mosque in the Old
City of Jerusalem. Peru reiterates its appeal to all of the
parties directly involved to temper their actions and to
move towards a constructive dialogue in a framework
of respect for international law and humanitarian law.

Since 1947, the year in which Peru joined the
United Nations Special Committee on Palestine, our
position on this issue has been clear and unchanged.
Peru supports the two-State solution, with secure
and mutually agreed borders, as the basis for
peaceful coexistence. In that regard, Peru encourages
and supports the various initiatives carried out by the
international community, which are aimed at resolving
the Palestinian question and would allow for the
implementation of the agreements reached in Madrid
and Oslo. Peru believes that renewing the commitment
to resuming peace talks on the basis of the two-State
solution at the summit of the League of Arab States is
a positive step forward. Likewise, it believes that the
visit undertaken by the President of the United States
of America to the region on his first trip abroad could
foster the conditions necessary for a resumption of the
political dialogue. We also highlight the good offices of
various European and Asian States.

Peru emphasizes the importance of complying with
resolution 2334 (2016), adopted in December 2016,
which urges Israel to cease settlement building in the
territories it has occupied since 1967. That practice,
which has become more intense in recent months, is
contrary to international law and poses a serious threat
to the territorial integrity of the Palestinian State and to
the prospect of the two-State solution.

In addition, Peru recognizes Israel's inalienable
right to preserve its own security and existence,
including by exercising its legitimate right to self-
defence, while emphasizing that it must do so under the
principles of proportionality and legality. In accordance
with resolution 2334 (2016), Peru strongly condemns
the commission of terrorist acts against the civilian
population and the motivations of the perpetrators of
such acts.

Peru notes with concern the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The extreme
divisions among Palestinian leaders themselves, along
with the scarcity of basic services and restrictive
measures imposed by Israel, lead to despair, a greater
proclivity for hate speech and additional and more
serious outbreaks of violence. There is an urgent need
for the international community to provide greater
support to those who face such a tragic situation.

The scant progress made in the peace process
and growing differences make it imperative for the
international community to address the Palestinian
question with a renewed sense of urgency. The United
Nations and the Security Council, in particular, have a
very important role to play. As a non-permanent member
of the Council in 2018 and 2019, Peru will continue to
support the facilitation of a minimum framework of
understanding for the resumption of direct negotiations
between the parties and to improve the situation on
the ground.

