Mr. Adom (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I welcome the convening of this debate on the
consideration of the fifty-sixth report of the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2019/843, enclosure). I thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Ms. Selma Korjenie, Head of Programme-Bosnia
and Herzegovina for TRIAL International, for their
detailed and particularly enlightening briefings. In the
light of the report, we have some comments to make on
the political, economic and humanitarian situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On the political front, my delegation notes with
concern that the multi-ethnic State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is still dealing with a political impasse, an
institutional deadlock resulting from the fact that it has
not been possible to form a central Government since
the general elections of7 October 2018. The fact is that
24 years after the end of the civil war, the belligerent
rhetoric and unconstructive behaviour of various
political leaders is impeding progress towards the
country's long-desired national reconciliation, which
requires ensuring accountability.

Adding to the legal difficulties and ethnic tensions
that the country has endured for more than a decade,
the prevention of the holding of municipal elections
in Mostar and denials of the Srebrenica massacre
constitute further obstacles and call into question
the meagre gains made so far in terms of national
reconciliation. The multi-ethnic armed forces of Bosnia
and Herzegovina remain the best example of this to
date. Considering the risk of the situation deteriorating
further, my delegation urges the country's political
leaders to resolutely commit to the noble project of
building a united and prosperous nation integrated
within the European Union space.

With regard to the economic situation, my
delegation welcomes the recent adoption by Republika
Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina of
a four-yearjoint programme of socioeconomic reforms,
which reflects their shared desire to boost economic
growth and strengthen their competitiveness in line
with the recommendations of the European Union. If
this type of reform can inspire a fast-track economic
transformation that increases the chances of integration
into the European Union, there is no doubt that it
could also foster the emergence of a more unified and
competitive economy, creating jobs for young people,
women and other vulnerable groups and reducing
migrant flows towards the richer Western countries.
However, in order to achieve this redeeming economic
transformation, local authorities must rise above their
political differences and commit to promoting the
rule of law and creating a judicial environment that is
attractive to investment.

On the humanitarian front, Cote d'Ivoire is
concerned about the difficult living conditions of
migrants in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Whose numbers
continue to grow, according to the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
In addition, the lack of State preparation and measures
that are inadequate to the challenges involved, as well
as the existence of rhetoric that does not foster even
a minimum of social cohesion, are worsening the
situation of migrants in transit centres and making the
work of humanitarian agencies increasingly difficult.

My delegation believes that despite their size and
complexity, the sociopolitical and economic challenges
that Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to deal with
are not insurmountable. We continue to believe that
a convergence of stakeholders' views and strong
ownership of the national reconciliation process, as
well as economic reforms, will enable the country to
consolidate domestic peace and contribute to stability
and shared prosperity in the Balkans.

In conclusion, my country wishes to commend the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina for
his efforts in coordinating assistance from international
partners. We encourage him to continue his good
offices in working towards the full implementation of
the Dayton Agreement.

