Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (Spoke in Chinese): First, I
wish to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing.
Because of the strong sunlight behind me, I cannot see
him very well. However, I hope that light is a sign of a
brighter future for the political process in Syria.

The establishment of the Constitutional Committee
is a good start for the Syrian political process, with both
the large body of the Constitutional Committee and the
45 -member small body initiating their work in the time
since late October. China welcomes such progress and
appreciates Special Envoy Pedersen's mediation efforts,
as well as the constructive participation of all Syrian
parties. At the same time, there are differences among
the Syrian parties in the Constitutional Committee.
Although that is inevitable, we hope that all parties will
maintain political dialogue through the Constitutional
Committee to enhance mutual understanding and trust.

China supports Special Envoy Pedersen's work
to build on the achievements that have already been
made, in accordance with the Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned principle and resolution 2254 (2015), and to
continue to advance Syrian political process. Attention
should be focused on maintaining the independence of
the Constitutional Committee's work - there should
be no outside interference or imposition of arbitrary
time limits. Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity should be fully respected and
the legitimate demands of the Government of Syria
heeded. Syria cannot be divided or fragmented. We
expect the members of the Constitutional Committee
to put the interests of Syria and its people first and
participate in the dialogue with political will and the
spirit of compromise.

China welcomes the new round of the Astana
dialogue that was convened last week in Nur-Sultan
by Russia, Iran and Turkey, and hopes that it will
help the Syrian parties to bridge their differences and
build consensus.

The eradication of terrorist forces is a necessary
security precondition for the Syrian people to be able to
return to a peaceful and orderly life. Countries should
continue to act in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and international law to combat
all forms of terrorism with uniform standards. The
problem of foreign terrorist fighters in Syria has come
to the fore - Idlib has become a breeding ground for
terrorism, the risk of terrorism spreading across north-
eastern Syria is increasing and there is still a possibility
ofa resurgence ofthe Islamic State. Such developments
threaten peace and security in Syria, the Middle East
and the world. All parties should avoid taking actions
that undermine counter-terrorism achievements and
instead try their best to work together and earnestly
explore the issue of how to bring the terrorists to justice.
We recommend that the Secretariat pay close attention
to the counter-terrorism developments in Syria and the
flow of terrorists there, while proceeding to establish
a terrorist database and providing timely and relevant
information to the countries concerned so that they can
solidify the conditions necessary for the next step in
resolving the issue of foreign terrorist fighters, as well
as other problems.

While advancing the Syrian political process,
the international community should also work to
improve the economic and humanitarian situation
in Syria through efforts to address and alleviate the
humanitarian crisis in the country in a comprehensive,
objective and balanced manner. Syria is currently
facing economic sanctions, oil shortages, damaged or
run-down infrastructure, insufficient resources for
reconstruction and other difficulties, all of which have
exacerbated the humanitarian crisis on the ground and
had an extremely adverse effect on the lives of the
Syrian people.

The large number of refugees has also exerted
economic and social pressure on Syria's neighbouring
countries and become a destabilizing factor in the
region. There should not be any political preconditions
attached to the provision of humanitarian supplies
to Syria. Humanitarian relief operations in Syria
should be carried out with increased communication
and coordination with the Syrian Government
and with respect for the country's sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

China wishes to reiterate its support for the Syrian
political process and stands ready to play a constructive
role in the early restoration of peace, stability and
development in Syria. At the same time, all parties
should make a joint effort to contribute to the Syrian
political process, help build mutual trust and work
towards the same goal through compromise. China does
not support the holding of discussions on the Syrian
human rights issue in the Security Council, or the use
of human rights issues to impose pressure on Syria or
make accusations against it. Such actions are not in line
with the mandate of the Security Council, and neither
are they conducive to creating a good atmosphere for
advancing the Syrian political process.

