Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We once again welcome you,
Minister Popolizio Bardales, to the Security Council.
I take this opportunity to commend Ambassadors
Meza-Cuadra and Allen for Council's successful visit
to Colombia. We welcome the presence of Minister
Holmes Trujillo Garcia. It is always an honour to have
him among us. We also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu
for his briefing.

Since the signing of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace in 2016, Colombia has taken important steps
and become a source of inspiration and an important
reference for world peace. I say to Minister Holmes
Trujillo Garcia that, as Latin Americans, we feel deeply
proud. We reiterate our support for the implementation
of the agreement and welcome Colombia's commitment
to implementing it. We also recognize the efforts and
progress made by the Government in the process of
reintegrating former combatants into civilian life and
in providing guarantees for their safety.

However, the peace agreement continues to present
significant challenges. In particular, we should like
to mention two specific situations: first, the political
management of the agreement and, secondly, the latter's
security ramifications.

With regard to political management, we have no
doubt that the Government is continuing to work to
achieve national consensus on polarizing issues. We
stress the importance of strengthening inclusive and
coordinated dialogue. Furthermore, with regard to the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, we urge the parties to
continue to use the constitutionally established channels
to ensure its effective functioning. We emphasize the
need to preserve the independence and autonomy of
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and other transitional
justice mechanisms.

With regard to the security situation, despite
improvements we are concerned about the killings of
former combatants, community leaders and women.
We are also saddened by the acts of violence and
intimidation putatively carried out by organized
criminal groups.

In the Dominican Republic's view, if no one is held
responsible, then everyone should be held responsible.
We therefore stress that diluting responsibility for
atrocity crimes by having them shouldered by one
generic, non-specific groupjeopardizes social cohesion
and non-repetition. In name of the victims, those who
mourn them and Colombian men and women, we urge
the authorities to spare no effort in identifying those
responsible and punishing them as soon as possible so
as to eliminate impunity once and for all, discourage
violence and guarantee improved protection.

We commend the pact for life signed between the
Government of Colombia and civil society organizations.
It is also time to call for greater focus on the more than
7,000 ex-combatants outside the territorial areas for

training and reintegration, to ensure the holding of
peaceful regional elections scheduled for October.

We underscore the commitment of the Government
to developing an action plan on youth, peace and
security to catalyse the potential of young people and
their contributions to the implementation of the peace
agreement. In that regard, we congratulate Mr. Ruiz
Massieu and his team for their excellent work and
recognition by all Council members and those who
participated in this week's briefing on youth, peace and
security (see S/PV.8577), highlighting as a best practice
the strategy of the Colombian Verification Mission to
implement resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018).

Lastly, we call on international organizations to
support Colombia's peacebuilding efforts with a view
to the future. We urge Colombians to work for their
future and to leave their past behind.

