The President: I shall now deliver a statement in
my national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, for his presentation and for his work in
Somalia, as well as the efforts of the entire United
Nations family in these very difficult circumstances -
including, in particular, the International Maritime
Organization and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. I would also like to welcome the presence
of His Excellency the Permanent Representative of
Somalia.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later in this meeting by Sweden on behalf of
the European Union. Allow me to add a few additional
points.

My delegation agrees with previous speakers that
piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Aden are
directly linked to the lack of stability and the disastrous
economic situation in Somalia. At the same time,
piracy contributes to the deterioration of the security
situation and may play a role in financing embargo
violations. As some merchant vessels are choosing
different routes, piracy also hurts the economic
situation of the region. Moreover, it negatively affects
the delivery of much-needed aid to Somalia.

Austria expresses its deep concern about the
continuing deterioration of the humanitarian situation
in Somalia and its dire consequences for the civilian
population, in particular women and children.

The European Union Naval Force Operation
Atalanta aims to combat piracy off the coast of
Somalia, with the primary goal of protecting vessels of
the World Food Programme delivering food aid. We
would also like to commend the naval engagement of
other States and organizations cooperating in the fight
against piracy in the framework of the international
Contact Group.

The implementation of the pertinent international
legal regime - particularly the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and the 1988
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Maritime Navigation - presents
considerable challenges for States parties to those
conventions in the region.

Austria attaches great importance to full respect
for all applicable norms of international law, in
particular international human rights law, including the
right to a fair trial and non-refoulement.

We welcome the fact that the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) contributes to
countering maritime piracy in the Horn of Africa
through a programme to increase regional capacities to
deter, arrest, prosecute and detain pirates. As the
Secretary-General noted in his report (S/2009/590), the
prosecution of suspected pirates apprehended off the
coast of Somalia is a burden for regional States,
especially Kenya and the Seychelles. In that regard, we
welcome the Contact Group's establishment of the
international trust fund, administered by the UNODC.

We believe that in addition to the naval
operations, the development of rule of law and security
institutions in Somalia, improvement in livelihoods and
education are important factors for the durable
eradication of piracy off the coast of Somalia.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Elmi
Ahmed Duale, Permanent Representative of Somalia.

