Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Petritsch for his

 

informative briefing and report, which give a generally
objective evaluation of the current situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We agree with his idea that the Bosnian State
must finally stand on its own two feet, reject the mentality
of dependence and learn to live not merely from donors'
assistance, but rather on their own internal resources.

We feel that the main task in the Bosnian process
today is to help make Bosnia and Herzegovina a unified,
sustainable State consisting of two equal entities on the
basis of full and consistent implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. We see no alternative to this for the
foreseeable future. If we make a realistic assessment of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we cannot fail to
recognize that, despite the series of achievements we have
heard of today, serious problems remain, primarily in the
creation of state structures and economic reform.

We must acknowledge that no major breakthroughs in
the implementation of the Dayton Accords have been made
to date. The situation is far from ideal in the
implementation of the New York Declaration of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular the
creation of a permanent secretariat for that body, the
adoption of a law on elections, the introduction of a single
national passport and the creation of a unified border
service, all of which Mr. Petritsch addressed in great detail
today. Despite the positive effects of the elections in
Croatia, tension remains in the interaction between the
Croatian and Bosnian entities of the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Although moderate forces were successful in the
municipal elections held in April in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the nationalist parties continue to dominate
the political life of the country, which remains divided
along ethnic lines.

We cannot fail to be concerned at the persistence of
serious problems with regard to the return of refugees,
primarily representatives of ethnic minorities, because of
the strong resistance of local authorities. We hope that the
forecasts for the return of refugees that we heard today
from Mr. Petritsch will be realized in the near future.

Still urgent is the task of reviving a normally
functioning economy. The economy continues to be held
hostage to rampant corruption and an all-pervasive
bureaucracy.

On the whole, despite what we feel to be positive
efforts by the High Representative, the Bosnian power
structures are still unable to assume primary responsibility
for the fate of their country. As a result, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to be governed by command
administrative methods and, to a significant extent,
remains a kind of protectorate of the international
community, kept afloat by the international presence there
and economic assistance from abroad.

In this connection, we feel that the efforts of the
international community - and primarily those of the
Bosnians themselves - must be mobilized if the Bosnian
settlement is to be made sustainable and irreversible, on
the basis of scrupulous and comprehensive
implementation of the Dayton Accords, by strengthening
the multi-ethnic statehood of Bosnia and Herzegovina
through the development of democratic structures and the
observance of the rights of all peoples of the country and
through solid mutual reconciliation and the cohesive work
of all Bosnian parties and securing the appropriate degree
of cooperation between both entities in all areas and at all
levels, particularly in order to progress towards finding
solutions to the outstanding issues.

For its part, Russia, as one of the active participants
in the Bosnian settlement, intends to continue to make an
active contribution to advancing the peace process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the basis of the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords.

