Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to welcome Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
in his first appearance before the Security Council. We
wish him a successful tenure, which would be reflected
in the future and well-being of all Libyans. He can
count on the full support of Uruguay.

We would also like to thank the previous Special
Representative, Mr. Martin Kobler, for his valuable and
courageous administration. If I may, an appropriate
metaphor to describe his competencies would be to
say that Martin had to pedal uphill and against the
wind. He did that enthusiastically until the last day of
his mandate.

We would also like to thank Ambassador Carl
Skau for his briefing on the activities of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya.

Moments of change are usually a good opportunity
to review what has been done as well as to reflect on
the way forward. After six years, it is very difficult
to say that the intervention of the United Nations in
Libya is a success story. Humanitarian intervention,
regime change and nation-building are all expressions
used with respect to the situation in Libya; however,
the facts leave no room for doubt. Libya remains mired
in a situation of institutional ambiguity, in which there
are at least two structures that give the appearance of
Government, several armed structures with effective
control over different areas of Libyan territory, frequent
and bloody armed clashes, and a still visible presence
of terrorist elements of the self-styled Islamic State that
constitutes an additional threat to any peacebuilding
or national reconstruction plans. The Government
of National Accord envisaged in the Libyan Political
Agreement has never materialized, and the Presidency
Council has not succeeded in gaining the legitimacy
necessary to become a valid actor that was respected
by the parties.

On previous occasions, with respect to other
matters considered by the Council, we have maintained
that continuing to do the same things over and over
again can only lead to the same result. Sometimes the
most serious things can be said through humour. In
his celebrated book, The Peter Principle, the author
Laurence Peter describes this situation in a sentence
that I will read out in English because it does not
translate very well into Spanish:

(spoke in English)
"If two wrongs don't make a right, try three."
(Spoke in Spanish)

Let us avoid the temptation to repeat mistakes.
Let us keep an open mind and be forward-looking. Let
us give Mr. Salame our undivided support so that he
feels free to explore new alternatives. This necessarily
means that the Security Council will also be prepared
to explore new avenues, keeping in mind what has
been successful up until now, but also accepting the
challenge of trying new options.

The Council can choose to ignore reality, but it
cannot ignore the consequences of having ignored
reality.

