Ms. Rice (United States of America): I want to
begin by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hedi Annabi, for his excellent
leadership of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and to welcome the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2009/l29) of 6 March 2009. I
also want to extend my thanks to Ambassador Me'rores,
and we ask him to thank the Haitian leadership and the
representatives of the Haitian private sector and civil
society for the warm reception that they extended to all
of us during the Security Council's visit last month. We
are also particularly pleased that former President
Clinton and the Secretary-General were able to visit
Haiti together, which brought additional helpful
attention to the challenges and the opportunities there.

We stand at an inflection point in Haiti - a
moment of real opportunity, but also one of real risk.
Let me start with some of the progress that we
witnessed during our visit last month. The United
States salutes the work and the bravery of
MINUSTAH. Thanks to its efforts and to the work of
the Haitian people, progress has been made towards
consolidating stability and security, including by
strengthening the Haitian National Police. MINUSTAH
has achieved important gains in the area of security,
and we hope that its accomplishments will provide a
sound basis for progress in other critical areas.

MINUSTAH's success is indeed an impressive
story, but it is not the whole story. Much of Haiti's
progress remains fragile, especially after the terrible
difficulties of the past year. Haiti continues to face
extreme hardships in the wake of the 2008 food crisis,
the hurricanes and storms that struck the country and
the ongoing global financial crisis. All of these factors
could yet imperil Haiti's security and seriously
exacerbate the poverty and privation that afflict the
Haitian people.

Especially in the light of this past year's troubles,
the United States is particularly encouraged by the
progress Haiti has made towards the achievement of
four of the five benchmarks outlined by the Secretary-
General, benchmarks that have helped this Council
assess progress. However, we recognize that much
more must still be done in key areas. Desperate
poverty, malnutrition, lack of education and other
socio-economic problems continue to bedevil Haiti.

We look forward to participating actively and
generously in the 14 April donor conference on Haiti,
to be hosted by the Inter-American Development Bank
in Washington. This gathering will provide an
opportunity for partners and the Government of Haiti
to help address Haiti's budget gap and move forward
towards lasting recovery and development. We
welcome the plan that will be presented by Prime
Minister Pierre-Louis, and we believe that forms a very
important basis for enhancing that partnership.

Haiti reminds us yet again that we should not
view security and development as separate spheres.
Indeed, they are inextricably linked. The absence of
one will undermine the other. During our trip, my
colleagues and I saw compelling evidence, firsthand, of
how poverty and unemployment, especially among
Haiti's young people, have created an environment
conducive to potential civil unrest, one that could undo
many of Haiti's hard-won gains.

The Secretary-General has correctly underscored
the relationship between progress on security and
progress in socio-economic and development efforts.
The United States could not agree more. We are
encouraged by the advances that have been made with
the help of MINUSTAH and the bilateral donors in
professionalizing the Haitian National Police, which is
moving towards the goal of having 14,000 officers in
its ranks by 2011. More than 9,000 have already been
trained and vetted, and nearly 500 new officers will
graduate by the second half of this year.

The United States will continue to work with
MINUSTAH to help expand the facilities at the
national police academy and create specialized
leadership training there. For Haiti to be secure, it will
need its police forces to stand on their own, and it will
need intensified efforts to reform the justice sector as a
whole, to address prison overcrowding and deepen and
extend the rule of law throughout the country.

This is particularly true because of the ongoing
scourge of drug trafficking, which harms Haiti and the
region. My Government believes that real progress
must be made here, particularly through the continued
professionalization of the Haitian National Police,
other stabilization efforts, assistance from Haiti's
partners, including the United States, and initiatives to
promote sustainable development. The United States
will increase its support for the Haitian National
Police's counter-narcotics efforts, which will help
expand law enforcement operations throughout the
country. We look forward to continuing to work with
Haitian law enforcement and MINUSTAH to tackle
these serious challenges.

As part of our common efforts, we urge the
Government of Haiti to take advantage of the benefits
that the HOPE II legislation, passed last year by the
United States Congress, can bring. As the Secretary-
General has noted, HOPE II opens up "a huge window
of opportunity" for Haitian access to United States

markets. This programme offers Haiti a crucial chance
to move beyond assistance to genuine economic
growth and, above all, to achieve the job creation that
can fuel sustainable development.

The United States congratulates Haitian leaders
for their efforts to get their country back on its feet. We
recognize the constructive political developments that
have taken place since 2006, and we are particularly
pleased that opposition leaders are free to express their
views. The 19 April Senate elections mark one more
step in Haiti's democratic development. These
elections must be free, fair and inclusive. We thank
MINUSTAH for its continued support of Haiti's
electoral process, and we urge the Government of Haiti
to intensify its efforts to promote a political dialogue in
which all voices can speak and be heard.

Finally, my Government remains firmly
committed to MINUSTAH and to Haiti. We urge the
Haitian leadership, the United Nations, troop-
contributing countries and other parties to deepen our
common efforts to support this country in its fragile
transition period.

As the Secretary-General rightly noted, Haiti
stands at a crossroads, a turning point between risk and
renewal. With continued effort from Haiti's leaders, the
relentless determination of its remarkable people and
enhanced support from the international community,
Haiti can move towards lasting security that will
sustain itself, towards democracy that grows deeper
roots and towards economic progress for all. Haiti will
ultimately choose its own way, but we must all do our
part to help the Haitian people succeed.

