Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing.

We commend the people of the Sudan for their
continued efforts to seek political solutions to their
governance challenges and for putting in place a
civilian-led transitional Government. This is not easy
work, but it is the right work. We also recognize the
important role that the United Nations, the African
Union, Ethiopia and other international partners have
played in supporting a stable transition in the Sudan.

The recent transitional agreement provides a
foundation for civilian and democratic rule in a clear
path to timely elections. These commitments are all to
the good, and we hope that they will be fully honoured.
Additionally, we welcome Prime Minister Hamdok's
focus on including women in all structures of power
in the new Government. We encourage the Prime
Minister to ensure the full, effective and meaningful
participation of women during all stages of the Sudan's
political transition. We are also encouraged by the
establishment of an independent national committee to
conduct a thorough investigation into the violent 3 June
crackdown on peaceful protesters in Khartoum.

However, despite the hope that the international
community has for the transitional Government, we
are deeply concerned by accounts in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/816) of increased criminality,
internal displacement and kidnappings, including of
non-governmental organization workers in Darfur.
These incidents disrupt progress toward peace and
diminish hope among the Sudanese people that they
might be able to go about their daily lives without fear.

We were especially disheartened to read in the
report of continued violations against children. The
report mentions 84 children who were affected by
"grave violations" in just four months, of whom 35
were killed and/or maimed. This is deplorable. As we
all know, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) plays a critical role in
verifying these kinds of human rights abuses in Darfur.
So if these atrocities occur with UNAMID present,
what will happen when it is gone?

That is why, given UNAMID's impending mandate
expiration, at the end of October, it is of such great
importance that the transitional Government quickly
inform the Secretary-General of its priorities for the
mandate's extension. It is also of great importance that
Government forces stop using UNAMID team sites.
We strongly urge the Rapid Support Forces to turn
over all previous UNAMID team sites to community-
based institutions.

Furthermore, after reading the report,
my Government even more strongly urges the
incorporation of gender-sensitive conflict-analysis and
conflict-mitigation approaches in the peace process,
the UNAMID mission and any potential follow-
on mechanism.

Finally, we call on all parties to ensure unhindered
humanitarian access to vulnerable populations as well
as respect for international humanitarian law. We
encourage the transitional Government to work with
United Nations partners, humanitarian actors and
affected communities to devise durable solutions for
displaced Sudanese.

Although we are concerned that it has not been
strictly adhered to, there is a viable path to lasting peace
in the Sudan. So long as all parties remain committed
to doing the right thing, we are hopeful that they can
arrive at a safer, better destination.

