Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Ihave
the honour to take the floor on behalf of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
ECOWAS fully associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Observer of the African Union.

It is with great joy that I fulfil my pleasant duty
of conveying to His Excellency Mr. Faure Essozimna
Gnassingbe, President of the Togolese Republic, our
respect and admiration for Togo's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We
are also grateful that he has chosen for this meeting a
theme that is so important to the stability of our States,
concerning the challenges related to counter-terrorism
in Africa in the context of international peacekeeping
and security. Finally, we would like to thank the
President of the Togolese Republic not only for agreeing
to travel to New York to preside in person over this
important meeting, but also for having delivered an
excellent and comprehensive speech, which will be a
point of reference as we consider this question.

Like other parts of the world, Africa has not been
spared by international terrorism, one of the most
serious challenges to the international community.
The globalization of that threat and its ramifications
in Africa have made our continent both a base and a
prime target of international terrorist networks, mostly
Al-Qaida, which has affiliations in Africa with the
terrorist networks Al-Shabaab in East Africa, Boko
Haram in Nigeria and a myriad of terrorist groups
affiliated with Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb that
are very active in West Africa, the Sahel region and
beyond.

Africa has been the victim of Al-Qaida attacks
since 1998, including those in Tanzania and Kenya.
Fortunately, a number of attempts have failed. For the
first time, the attacks in Mombasa used a ground-to-
air missile against an airline aircraft, which reminds us
that the spectre of terrorism still looms on the continent.
The presence of the threat was definitively confirmed
by the most recent attacks in Casablanca and Algiers.
That terrorist threat in Africa grew out of an affiliation
of the Salafist Group for Call and Combat in Algeria
with Al-Qaida in September 2006, which took the name
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. That group is active
in the Sahel; it penetrates porous borders, which are
difficult to monitor, to recruit extremists for training
and for launching operations that seek to destabilize the
area.

In that context, the Sahel and Sahara regions, just
like East Africa, have been the focus of attention in
recent years, given their vulnerability to the terrorist
threat. Attacks perpetrated in some countries and the
border incidents and threats aimed at destabilizing
regions are among the factors that have convinced
neighbouring countries to form links of strategic
cooperation on the subject. The Malian crisis is but
one of the consequences of the increase in terrorism
in Africa. Northern Mali has gradually become a
sanctuary for terrorist groups, which have circulated
with impunity, committing the worst violations of
human rights. That terrorist presence threatens not only
the States of West Africa and the Sahel but also those
in the Maghreb and beyond. That is a genuine threat
to international peace and security, which requires a
comprehensive and determined response from the
international community.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) therefore welcomed the intervention of
French troops upon the request of the legal authorities
of Mali, which assisted the Malian army in repelling
the offensive of the terrorist groups and showed the
effectiveness of international solidarity in dealing with
the scourge. For their part, African countries made a
commitment to combat terrorism in the Community of
Sahelo-Saharan States and to make the necessary efforts
to establish mechanisms and measures to strengthen
peace and security in the common space through
cooperation on counter-terrorism, transboundary
organized crime, illicit trafficking, money-laundering
and cybercrime.

The forty-second regular session ofthe Summit ofthe
Authority of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government,
held on 27 and 28 February in Yamoussoukro, adopted
the ECOWAS counter-terrorism strategy and its
implementation plan, as well as a political declaration
on a common position on combatting terrorism in
the region. On that occasion, ECOWAS solemnly and
unambiguously condemned terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, including kidnapping, hijacking,
hostage-taking, ransom requests, bomb threats in
public and private places and important infrastructure,
and sabotage and desecration of places of worship and
other cultural or sacred places. The ECOWAS counter-
terrorism strategy is based on a holistic approach. It
includes a full array of measures that are to be taken by
various organizations in member States. It provides a
strategic orientation to confine and eliminate the threat
posed by terrorism to our community. To that end, we
will establish a coordination unit to combat terrorism
and issue ECOWAS arrest warrants and an ECOWAS
blacklist for terrorists and criminal networks in order
to facilitate the coordination and sharing of information
among member States.

In conclusion, ECOWAS is determined to
participate fully in combatting the plague of terrorism.
We therefore call upon the international community,
technical assistance institutions, development partners,
the relevant international organizations and civil society
groups to coordinate their activities with ECOWAS and

to strengthen the various facets of cooperation in order
to vanquish this ongoing threat to international peace
and security.

