Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would first
like to express my appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and the Senegalese presidency for convening today's
meeting, and for inviting my delegation to participate
in this meeting.

The Republic of Korea welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2321 (2016). I thank Ambassador
Samantha Power and the United States delegation for
taking the initiative for the resolution, as well as other
members of the Council for supporting it.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
nuclear-weapons programme, with its latest nuclear
test - its fifth - has become the most serious
threat to the global non-proliferation regime. It poses
unprecedented challenges to the authority of the
Security Council. The programme seems to be nearing
the final stage ofweaponization, and Pyongyang makes
no secret of its intention to acquire and use a nuclear
arsenal. That is totally outrageous.

By adopting the resolution today, the international
community has once again made it clearthatwe will never
tolerate the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
pursuit of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). My
delegation supports the new resolution's introduction
of robust measures that complement and reinforce the
existing sanctions regime. When implemented, they
will significantly restrain the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's ability to carry on with its WMD
programmes by targeting the flow of hard currency,
materials, equipment and technology that they require.

This year alone, it is estimated that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea has spent more than
$200 million on nuclear tests and missile launches. It is
also estimated that the total cost so far for their nuclear
programme must have surpassed $1 billion. That
money could have been used to buy one year's worth
of food for the entire North Korean population. People
need to eat food, not weapons. For reasons defying any
common sense, Pyongyang is paying a heavy price
to gain a nuclear arsenal, at the expense of its own
people. If it had used those resources to benefit people's
livelihoods, the North Korean population's hardship
would have been much relieved.

In that vein, my delegation welcomes the fact the
resolution 2321 (2016) takes a more holistic approach
by addressing the North Korean people's welfare and
dignity, as shown in paragraph 45, which has been
included in a sanctions resolution on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea for the first time. We hope
that the resolution and the continuing discussion on
human rights will contribute to helping our brothers
and sisters in the north in their quest for a better life
and human dignity.

For me personally, this is my last time participating
in a United Nations meeting, as I have completed my
term here and am flying out tonight. I am relieved
because the resolution has been adopted before my
departure, but I am also sorry that I am leaving without
seeing the issue being resolved. The North Korean
nuclear issue is multifaceted. It is an issue of nuclear
non-proliferation that poses the question of whether
or not we will be able to maintain the global nuclear
non-proliferation regime that we have had for the past
half century. We will have to consider whether we will
be able to stand up to the challenge posed to the regime
or whether we will be able to stop it or let it go. We have
a very serious question before us.

It is also an issue of international security. In our
region, when North Korea acquired nuclear capabilities,
it had the effect of breaking the status quo in terms of
our strategy balance. Thus, the other countries of the
region have to consider how to restore the balance. It
is a serious question to be considered whether other
countries should try to match the capabilities or come
up with other ways to restore the strategy balance
in the region. For South Koreans, it is a question of
soul-searching as well - soul-searching about our
national identity, national division and national desire
for unification. Korea's national division should not
become a national curse. When we watch North Korea's
missile launches on television, we feel as if a brother
in the family is wielding a gun and shooting in the air
while his children are screaming out of hunger and fear.

All in all, I believe that what we are doing
here - applying pressure on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea through non-military sanctions
measures - is the right thing to do, and I believe and
I hope that those measures will eventually work. They
will work for the non-proliferation regime, international
security and the two Koreas so that we can eventually get
over the issue and go back to dialogue and cooperation.

I would like to thank you, Sir. all the members
of the Security Council and the Secretariat for the
cooperation and assistance rendered to me during the
past three years.

