Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at the outset to thank Mr. Ghassan
Salame, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, for his comprehensive briefing. We
take this opportunity to wish him the blessings of peace
and calm in Libya during this holy month of Ramadan,
to the extent possible, and reiterate our strong support
for him and for the entire Mission team in their difficult
task ofachieving a peaceful, negotiated political solution
in Libya, despite the difficult situation in the country,
especially in Tripoli, the result of the escalation of the
military offensive that began on 4 April.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by Mr. Sma'il Chergui, African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, to whom we express our
deepest gratitude for voicing in this Chamber an
African perspective on today's topic of discussion.
We welcome his contribution and hope that in future
such input will continue, given the need for partnership
and coordination between the United Nations and the
African Union in addressing issues ofthis nature in the
context of all the crises facing the African continent.

We further convey our gratitude to Ambassador
Schulz, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, for his briefing.

Eight years after the crisis began, the situation
in Libya, far from having improved, is deteriorating
by the hour, which is causing us a heightened sense
of alarm. The exacerbation of the crisis lays bare the
Council's difficulty in finding a solution to the conflict,
which could have been averted in the first place, as we
have stated previously, which is why there is a need
to redouble our efforts to get the process back on the
track of dialogue and find a political solution as quickly
as possible.

In the light of the aforementioned, and echoing the
communique issued by the African Union on 24 April,
we reiterate the call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and for respect for the sovereignty and
unity of Libya and for the protection of civilians and
migrants. We would also remind the parties of their
obligation to respect international humanitarian law
and international human rights law in order to guarantee
the security of civilians.

We take this opportunity to reiterate our rejection
of any external interference, encouraging third parties
to bring their influence to bear so as to achieve an
immediate cessation of hostilities, rather than stoking
tensions. Such interference only makes the situation
worse, and the Council must take this fact into account
and undertake the appropriate measures in response.
Actions of this kind must be condemned and totally
eradicated. In that respect, we believe that the Security
Council must undertake a process of in-depth reflection
on the continuing violations of the arms embargo, as
this is yet another element that adds complexity to
the conflict.

To conclude, I would like to underscore my
delegation's concern about the humanitarian situation,
which is reaching alarming proportions. The death toll
stands at almost 500 people in Tripoli alone, and more
than 75,000 persons have been displaced, according to
official figures. These numbers will only increase if
we fail to find an immediate solution. We reiterate that
there can be no military solution to this conflict.

The ongoing human rights violations remain on the
agenda, in particular the plight of the more than 6,800
migrants and internally displaced persons being held
in detention centres by armed groups and traffickers.
The Libyan people require unflagging international
support in order to address the crisis through dialogue,
reverting to the framework of the United Nations action
plan, as had been envisaged.

