Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March, and to assure you of my delegation's full
cooperation. My delegation is confident that your
demonstrated diplomatic and leadership qualities will
enable the Council to carry out the tasks before it
expeditiously and efficiently.

I should like also to extend my congratulations to
Ambassador Albright, the Permanent Representative of
the United States, for the excellent manner in which she
presided over the work of the Council for the month of
February.

The Indonesian delegation would like also to express
its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his efforts to
keep the Council informed on the volatile and fragile
situation in Burundi. His letter to the Council of 3
January 1996 (S/1996/8) and his most recent report, of 15
February 1996 (S/1996/116), provide ample evidence that
swift action must be taken to avert a worsening of the
situation in that devastated country.

The Indonesian delegation is pleased to note that the
situation in Burundi has recently demonstrated some signs
of stabilizing. In particular, we welcome the improved
coordination between the President and the Prime

 

Minister in promoting peace, as reflected in the
Government's third campaign for the return of peace.
Moreover, my delegation was encouraged by the fact that
the extremists' call for a "dead city" operation met with
resistance from the general population.

There still exists, however, the potential for escalating
tragedy and unrelenting human suffering in light of the fact
that little progress has been achieved towards the
establishment of a broad-based political dialogue between
the parties to this conflict. The situation therefore requires
urgent action if Burundi is to move further away from the
brink of disaster, which may indeed include rampant ethnic,
even genocidal violence. My delegation believes that further
procrastination and ambivalence will not only have severe
consequences for Burundi, but will also encourage the
spread of instability throughout the Great Lakes region. In
this context, my delegation welcomes the recent
proliferation of regional and international peace initiatives,
particularly the efforts of former Presidents Nyerere and
Carter.

The Indonesian delegation recognizes the enormous
task and the challenges facing the Government of Burundi
in implementing measures, with the assistance of the
international community, to promote a climate of stability
and trust. Such a climate would give impetus for dialogue,
accompanied by mutual accommodation, to occur in
Burundi.

My delegation observes that the Secretary-General's
report presents a sombre picture of internal conditions in
Burundi. Ideological differences, extremist positions, the
uprooting of people and crumbling humanitarian conditions
make for an explosive situation. Nevertheless, we believe
that the draft resolution under consideration contains an
array of important measures to promote national
reconciliation and dialogue. Moreover, we believe that the
combination of these measures can encourage an
atmosphere that will temper the vast differences separating
the parties and allow to be heard the voice of moderation
and reason that this crisis so desperately needs.

It is my delegation's View that the crisis in Burundi
needs to be addressed in a comprehensive manner,
specifically at the regional and international levels. The
inherent complexities of the situation require such an
approach, bearing in mind that developments in Burundi
and the solutions offered do not occur in a vacuum. We
believe, therefore, that an approach that recognizes the
mutually inclusive nature of the underlying problems in
Burundi and the broader Great Lakes region - such as
refugees, economic dislocation and ethnic struggles -
will prove more beneficial.

In this connection, my delegation cannot foresee a
lasting peace taking hold in Burundi in the absence of an
open dialogue between the parties that addresses the
underlying issues concerning the establishment of a
permanent political settlement and the creation of
conditions conducive to national reconciliation. We
therefore urge all concerned parties to renew their
commitment to the national debate and to increase their
efforts towards achieving national reconciliation.
Additionally, since the nature of the problems found in
Burundi is such that they have regional ramifications, my
delegation supports the idea of convening a Regional
Conference for Peace, Security and Development in the
Great Lakes Region focusing on issues of political and
economic stability as well as on peace and security
concerns.

While my delegation fully supports all the efforts
aimed at promoting a broad-based dialogue, we
nevertheless believe that this objective could be further
advanced through the consideration of a contingency plan
for a rapid humanitarian response in the event that the
situation deteriorates rapidly. Such a step would, in our
view, allow the international community to be more
prepared to respond effectively should this actually arise.
Moreover, my delegation believes that in an environment
of impunity and economic uncertainty, lasting peace will
prove elusive and the pattern of violence will continue.
We therefore attach much importance to the need for the
international community to lend assistance to reform
Burundi's military, its police and its judicial system, as
well as to provide development programmes and support.
The Indonesian delegation wishes to emphasize,
however, that while the international community stands
ready to initiate a number of measures to bring stability
to Burundi, these would be to no avail without the
cooperation of the parties concerned, internally and
externally. This should include the parties' extending full
cooperation to the Commission of Inquiry, exercising
caution and restraint and refraining from any activities
that could incite further violence or threaten international
humanitarian personnel.

After careful consideration and assessment, my
delegation is going to vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us today. It is our belief that it offers a
comprehensive and well-balanced approach that
emphasizes preventive diplomacy while recognizing the

 

need to be prepared to respond effectively, as conditions
warrant. Additionally, we feel that it will send the correct
signal regarding the international community's resolve and
commitment in discouraging the unacceptable proliferation
of human suffering, which has taken a tremendous toll of
the people of Burundi.

To conclude, my delegation wishes to underline that,
to avert another Rwanda, it is imperative for the United
Nations to take the appropriate and necessary steps to
prevent the tensions escalating into full-scale civil war and
genocide, for not only the countries of Africa, but those of
the world at large, are looking to the United Nations for
action and leadership. An absence of specific measures
would undoubtedly have grave consequences not only for
the region but also for the credibility of the United Nations.

