Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): I would like to start by
joining other Council members in paying tribute
to you, Mr. President, and to your team for your
excellent stewardship of the Council during the month
of February. The Council's most important task is to
address threats to international peace and security
in an effective way, and we therefore welcome the
presidency's commitment to continuing our efforts to
make the work of the Council more result-oriented,
transparent and inclusive. Your innovation for today's
wrap-up meeting, providing the wider membership
with an opportunity to pose questions to the Council, is
another step in that direction.

The Council members who have spoken before me
have comprehensively addressed the important issues
that have been on the Council's agenda this month, and
I do not wish to expand or elaborate a great deal further
on them, other than highlighting a few points without
going into too much detail. We had a constructive
discussion of the situation in the Middle East; we have
focused a lot of attention on the security situation in
Europe, which is, of course, of significant importance
to Sweden; and we have looked at a number of issues in
Africa and Asia. We have challenges ahead of us, and
rather than repeating what has been eloquently discussed
by other Council members, I will cut my statement a
little short and perhaps address a few of the questions
that have been raised by the wider membership, which
has seized the opportunity presented by the Ukrainian
presidency to give the Council some food for thought.

First, with regard to the issue of working methods,
for the elected members the work done by the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, including presidential note
S/2010/507, is key. Those notes provide useful guidance
while retaining the degree of flexibility that the Council
needs. We heard Ambassador Bessho of Japan describe
the agenda of the Informal Working Group for this
year, and I would like to say that we wholeheartedly
support those efforts. In fact, many of the ideas needed
to make the Council more effective are already there.
Individual Council members should make use of them,
and the presidency has a special responsibility for
putting them into practice. The Ukrainian presidency
has demonstrated that in an excellent way.

To be truly successful, however, the support of
all Council members is required, and we are pleased
to note that the beginning of this year has seen us
coming together behind those efforts. In that regard,
two points stand out. First, as some ofmy colleagues on
the Council have mentioned, the greater use of agreed-
on press elements after consultations is not only a way
to increase transparency but also helps the Council to
summarize the salient points of discussions and think
about how best to address the issues further. Secondly,
the inclusion of relevant representatives of regional
organizations and civil society as briefers has brought
a field and regional perspective that has improved the
Council's understanding of the full picture and thereby
enriched the quality of its deliberations and decisions. I
think we have seen that on several occasions this month
as well.

That brings me to the issue of prevention, which
was also raised by a Member State in the questions
posed to the Council. Prevention is at the heart of
the new sustaining peace agenda. The need for a
strengthened relationship on prevention between the
Security Council and the Secretary-General was one of
the key messages that emerged from the open debate on
10 January on conflict prevention and sustaining peace
(see S/PV.7857). In February, Ukraine has ensured that
this strengthened relationship has come to life. Council
members greatly appreciated the Secretary-General's
interactive briefing of the Council on his return from
the African Union Summit, during which he touched on
several initiatives being taken to reinvigorate processes
aimed at preventing relapses into conflict. That kind
of interaction should continue, and I think that with
a concerted effort between us - the Council - and
the Secretary-General, we will be able to do that in a
meaningful way.

To address a question raised about the subsidiary
organs, I would like to mention that as Chair of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
established pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), I was
pleased that the Working Group has already adopted
speedy conclusions on the situation of children and
armed conflict in Colombia, the first negotiated under
our chairship. We will next focus on negotiating
conclusions on children and armed conflict in Somalia.

In conclusion, I would like to respond to a question
on the perceptions so far of the 10 newly elected
non-permanent Security Council members and their
short-term priorities. After two months on the Council,
our overall perception is that at the moment there is
positive momentum within it. The relationship between
the Secretary-General and the Council is becoming
stronger, and there is a commitment on both sides to
working constructively together, with a renewed focus
on prevention and sustaining peace. While there were
some differing views, I believe that the idea of focusing
on how we can prevent conflict - addressing root
causes and looking at sustainable development, human
rights, humanitarian challenges and issues of peace
and security together - is increasingly becoming
part of the Council's conversation. Encouraging that
approach, including by engaging in dialogue with all
Council members, is both a short-term and long-term
priority for Sweden. We look forward to supporting
and working closely with our colleagues from the
United Kingdom as we continue those conversations in
March. The Council trip to the Lake Chad basin region
starting tomorrow will enable us to put that perspective
into practice.

