Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
start, Madam Minister, by welcoming you to the
Council today. We are delighted that you are able to
preside over this important meeting. I would like also
to thank the Mexican delegation, and in particular
Ambassador Heller, for the excellent Mexican
leadership of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

We associate ourselves fully with the statement to
be delivered later by the representative of the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union.

We welcomed the opportunity this morning to

hear from the Secretary-General and his Special

Representative, and from representatives of the

Department of Peacekeeping Operations and of

UNICEF. We were also struck by the powerful personal
testimony of Ms. Grace Akallo.

I would like to pay tribute to the outstanding
work that the United Nations agencies and funds
continue to undertake in the cause of children affected
by armed conflict. I would like to focus particularly on
the untiring work of the Special Representative and her
team and to recognize the pivotal role of non-
governmental organizations and civil society groups in
the field. That this strand of Security Council work
achieves such impact on the ground is testament to
their dedication and to Ms. Coomaraswamy's
leadership.

When the Security Council established its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, it did
so with a clear sense that the new structure would need
to be able to adapt to changing realities. It is now time
to address some of the wider challenges of the child
protection agenda and some of the inefficiencies of the
original model. We have said repeatedly that the
Working Group does not make use of all the tools
available to it in support of child protection. That needs
to change in two ways.

First, we strongly believe that it is time for the
Council to expand the criteria for listing parties that
commit abuses against children. That should be
matched by measures to enhance the effectiveness of
the Working Group. In particular, we should expand
the monitoring and reporting mechanism's trigger to
include both acts of rape and other forms of sexual
violence and acts of killing and maiming that are
committed against children. That would be consistent
with the Secretary-General's recommendations and
would address the deeply worrying patterns that are set
out in his reports.

Secondly, it is vital that we improve the
monitoring of the implementation of the Working
Group's recommendations. We need better feedback on
what works and what does not. The Secretary-
General's reports to the Working Group should include
concrete information on progress made by listed
parties. That may require some additional
administrative support from the Secretariat, but the
impact would be significant.

I would like to turn briefly to several conflict
situations where we have particular concerns about the
impact on children. My Foreign Secretary, David
Miliband, is today visiting Sri Lanka with his French
counterpart, Bernard Kouchner. Tens of thousands of
civilians, including many children, are at extreme risk
as a result of the conflict and the dire humanitarian
situation there. The Security Council has made clear its
support for the efforts of the United Nations, led by the
Secretary-General. We continue to urge all parties to
respect international humanitarian law and to take the
necessary steps to ensure the safe evacuation and
protection of and assistance to the civilian population,
and especially the children, caught up in that conflict.

I would like also to highlight our concern about
forced labour in the military in Burma. Personnel
responsible for underage recruitment have been
identified. Bringing them to account would
demonstrate the commitment of the Burmese
Government to cooperate with the United Nations.

In Nepal, we hope to see the Government
implement its commitment to Ms. Coomaraswamy to
release minors remaining in the cantonments.

I note that Al-Qaida is a new addition to the
annexes of the Secretary-General's report for their use,
and their wilful killing and maiming, of children in
Iraq. The measures contained in Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005) should be brought to bear in
preventing such crimes.

Today's debate is another step forward in the
Security Council's work on these important issues. The
international community must be prepared to take
action against those individuals and groups that
commit egregious abuses against children and that
refuse to undertake the remedial action demanded of
them. We look to the Working Group to lead such
action.

