Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): Let me begin by
joining others in congratulating Germany on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. On a more personal note, Mr. President, it is a
pleasure to see you in the chair. My delegation also
congratulates and thanks Germany for holding this
open debate, which allows States that would not
otherwise have the chance to present their views on
this important issue to do so.

Thailand attaches great importance to the
promotion and protection of the rights of children. We
uphold the best interests of the child in our national
policy and its implementation, particularly the right to
education and universal access to it, which is
guaranteed by the Constitution. We also share the
concern of the international community over the issue
of children and armed conflict.
We note the efforts and intentions of the Council,
as evidenced in today's adoption of resolution 1998
(2011), to better protect children in situations of armed
conflict. We support the effective implementation of
relevant Security Council resolutions on this issue and
would like to offer a few modest suggestions on ways
to further improve work on this important issue.

First, according to resolution 1379 (2001) and
subsequent resolutions, the scope of the children and
armed conflict mandate continues to cover armed
conflict situations that are on the Security Council's
agenda or that may be brought to the attention of the
Security Council by the Secretary-General, in
accordance with Article 99 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which in his opinion may threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security. It has
come to our attention, and as my Pakistani colleague
has mentioned, that the Office of Legal Affairs has
Stated, in the 2009 United Nations Juridical Yearbook,
its opinion regarding the mandate on children and
armed conflict:

"You will recall that for a number of years this
terminology has been used by the SRSG for
children and armed conflict and included in the
title of annex II without a clear mandate of the
Security Council, nor, for that matter, its
endorsement; a situation which gave rise to legal,
political and practical difficulties for the
Secretary-General, the SRSG and the Secretariat
as a whole."

In moving forward and resolving such a serious
systemic impediment, Thailand would like to suggest
that the work of the Special Representative be guided
by the definition of situations of armed conflict in
accordance with international law. In addition, we hope
that the Secretary-General will review and streamline
future reports consistent with the authorized mandate.
We are gravely concerned that any attempt to
reinterpret the mandate without due regard to the
original intention of the Security Council will
undermine this important mandate and the work of the
Council on this issue in the long-run.

Secondly, one can never emphasize enough the
importance of coordination. There are various
mechanisms within the United Nations system on
issues related to children, including the Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict, the
Special Representative on violence against children,
the Special Rapporteur on the right to education and
the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography. Rather than
competing for work outside one's authorized mandate,
coordination among those various mandate-holders is
vital to the overall effective work of the Organization
and to the rational use of its limited resources. In that
regard, we are considering proposing an initiative to
enhance coordination among the relevant United
Nations actors on children. We hope that such an
initiative will strengthen and increase the overall
effectiveness of all existing United Nations tools on the
protection of children.

Thirdly, it is imperative that information
collected and communicated in the production of the
reports on children and armed conflict be accurate,
objective, reliable and verifiable by the United Nations
system. That is the only kind of information that
should be the basis for listing parties to armed conflict
in the annex to the reports. In Thailand's case, the
United Nations country team, including all United
Nations agencies, has unrestricted access to all areas of
the country and makes regular visits throughout the
year.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
concerned Governments is also indispensable. There
should be no denying that the Government has primary
responsibility and should play a central role in
promoting and protecting children's rights, with the
support of the United Nations. Opinion and
information from the United Nations country teams on
the ground, in close coordination with concerned
Governments, should be given due recognition and
form the basis for the annual report. Allegations
unverified by the United Nations country team should
be removed from the report so as not to affect its
credibility.

Fourthly, we welcome the provision in resolution
1998 (2011), adopted today, requesting that Member
States communicate relevant information to the
Security Council on the implementation of its
resolutions on children and armed conflict. Such
engagement will further enhance coordination among
the various stakeholders, align child-related priorities
and ensure greater transparency and accountability in
carrying out this mandate.
My fifth and final point is that there is no one-
size-fits-all solution to addressing challenges relating

to children and armed conflict. Each situation is
fraught with political, socio-economic and cultural
considerations that make it a unique challenge. We
therefore urge the international community to invest
more in areas that can make a real difference on the
ground.

As was articulated in the statement, with which
we fully associate ourselves, delivered by the
representative of Switzerland this morning on behalf of
the Human Security Network, a group to which
Thailand belongs, we feel that demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation efforts are also crucial
to long-term impact. In this regard, investment in areas
such as education, basic health care, poverty
eradication, the rule of law, good governance and
respect for human rights is also paramount to
addressing violence against children more
comprehensively and effectively. At the end of the day,
we must take a more integrated, holistic approach to
the issue. Cooperation between United Nations
agencies and the Governments concerned should be
based on mutual respect and sincere dialogue in order
to facilitate the effective implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

