The President (spoke in French): I should like, at
the outset of the meeting, to extend, on behalf of the
Council, a warm welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Li Baodong, who is joining us today
for the first time. We look forward to working closely
with him.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2010/106)

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mutaboba to take a seat at the
Council table.
2

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Her
Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, in her capacity as Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/ 106, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, and Her Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil, in
her capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. I now
give the floor to Mr. Mutaboba.


