Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, I would
like to thank Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for
their briefings and commitment. Martin said in his
statement that he held the Stockholm Agreement dear. I
appreciate that commitment.
As our colleague for Cote d'Ivoire just said,
there is no military solution to this conflict. There
is no alternative to a political. I therefore very much
appreciate the briefers' work. I know these are little
steps, but even little steps are very important, as
was just explained, with regard to Al-Hudaydah and
elsewhere. To encourage them to continue, I would also
like to welcome Lieutenant General Guha to his work.

With regard to the political developments, we also
appreciate the Saudi engagement to get the Yemeni
Government forces and the Southern Transitional
Council around the table so as to achieve de-escalation
in the south. On all of the different political tracks, we
believe that it is very important that these talks be an
inclusive political process involving women, young
people, civil society and regional actors.

Mark Lowcock's briefings are the most depressing.
Whenever he comes to the Security Council, it is not a
happy day, and today is no exception. But what we are
seeing in Yemen is truly a nightmare and I think that we
as a body cannot accept the violation of international
humanitarian law becoming a new normal.

I would like to take the opportunity to welcome
the Ambassador of the United States, Kelly Craft.
In her statement, she said that 80 per cent of the
population was in need of humanitarian assistance.
What we are witnessing is the world's gravest
humanitarian catastrophe.

At the same time, again recalling what Mark
said, the operating circumstances in Yemen are worse
than ever. We really have to emphasize this and work
against it. We remember before the summer break
when David Beasley of the World Food Programme
described the despicable practice of the Houthis
misusing humanitarian funds for their own purposes
(see S/PV.8578).

Mark mentioned funding shortfalls. In Geneva,
Germany pledged €100 million. We committed to and
paid this amount. We have also pledged an additional
€30 million, which I think we have also mostly
disbursed. I therefore hope that Saudi Arabia will
proceed on 25 September to pay what it had pledged.

Turning to the victims, many around the table have
evoked them. Our Belgian colleague mentioned sexual
violence against women. Our South African colleague
mentioned the number of children being killed from air
attacks. Many speakers have referred to the new report
of the Group of Eminent International and Regional
Experts on Yemen, mandated by the Human Rights
Council. The report (A/HRC/42/17) demonstrates the
terrible impact on of the conflict on the daily lives of
the people. Basic human rights are violated on a daily
basis. There is no excuse for allowing the killing,
torture and abuse of innocent people in this horrible
conflict. I therefore join my French colleague in calling
for that report to have real consequences.

Mark deplored the attack on civilian infrastructure.
Since our last briefing, we have seen numerous more
attacks against civilian infrastructure. I was not aware
that the prison attacked in Dhamar, where more than
100 were killed, used to be a university. This just shows
the extent to which things have deteriorated in Yemen.
There have been further attacks on Al-Hudaydah and
Taiz. I can only join the call for a nationwide ceasefire.
That is what is needed.

We also firmly condemn, like all other members,
the attacks on the Saudi oil facilities. This has a grave
impact on the world economy and energy supply, as
well as on the environment. Those responsible for
these attacks must be identified and we cannot allow
impunity for that or for any of these many violations of
international law.

As everyone has said, it is time for de-scalation,
and I would strongly welcome it if the Security Council
were to publicly endorse that and say something about
the need for de-escalation of the situation.

