I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. We also thank the Secretary- General and the entire team of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for the report contained in document S/2020/871. Although the United Nations has made great efforts since 2013 to establish responsibility for the multiple cases of use of chemical weapons in Syria, it is regrettable to note that all such efforts, which led to the Council's adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), have not made it possible to establish, in a manner acceptable to all, responsibility for the atrocities committed. My delegation therefore calls on the Syrian Government and all other actors in the conflict to cooperate in good faith with the OPCW investigation teams in order to advance those investigations. In addition, as we have stated during previous meetings on this issue, any investigation on this issue and the composition of any team that is to investigate the listed incidents must be inclusive and participatory so as to ensure that the findings are not contested. Indeed, the lack of consensus on how to deal with the issue of chemical weapons use in Syria hampers our ability to hold the real perpetrators of those acts accountable and leaves the victims without recourse. In that regard, my delegation believes that the divergent assessments among the members of the Council must give way to a calm and technical analysis of the results of the investigations carried out in order to guarantee the integrity of the OPCW's reports. Continued engagement between the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Syrian Government will help to resolve the issue of the Syrian Arab Republic's initial declaration and will ultimately advance the work of the Declaration Assessment Team, in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention, OPCW Executive Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1 and Security Council resolution 2118 (2013). In addition, allegations that armed terrorist groups in Syria are in possession of chemicals and may be preparing to mount a chemical weapons attack under a false flag should not be overlooked. My delegation reiterates its appeal to the United Nations and the OPCW Technical Secretariat to pay attention to those allegations, which, if substantiated, would be very dangerous, not only for the region but for the entire world, because those weapons could be transferred to other non-State entities or even to terrorist groups. In conclusion, as a party to the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Niger has consistently said that the use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstance is unacceptable as it constitutes a violation of international law. Finally, whether we are discussing humanitarian, political or chemical weapons issues, we are of the view that respect for Syria's sovereignty and integrity is fundamental to the search for a lasting solution to the crisis.
