Indonesia welcomes the unanimous adoption of the resolution 2538 (2020), on women in peacekeeping operations. As the penholder, we thank all members of the Security Council for their support and constructive engagement during the negotiation process. We deeply appreciate all sponsoring States within the Council, as well as other Member States for their contribution and support for this resolution. The resolution represents an important milestone, since it is the first time that the Council has adopted a stand-alone resolution on the subject of women in peacekeeping operations. It reflects the high priority that the international community has accorded to the indispensable role of women in United Nations peacekeeping operations. Resolution 2538 (2020) recognizes the indispensable role of women in peacekeeping operations and calls upon the Member States, the Secretariat and regional organizations to strengthen their collective efforts to promote the full, effective and meaningful participation of uniformed and civilian women in peacekeeping operations at all levels and in all positions, including in senior leadership positions. It encourages strengthening partnerships to support targeted training and capacity-building for uniformed women personnel and the establishment of networks among women peacekeepers. It also urges Member States and the Secretariat to ensure a safe, enabling and gender-sensitive working environment for women in peacekeeping, including by providing them adequate and appropriate infrastructure and facilities. Indonesia's initiative to promote this resolution is in line with our long- standing and strong commitment to supporting peacekeeping operations as well as the women and peace and security agenda. We are strongly committed to increasing the participation of our women in peacekeeping operations. Since 1999, more than 570 Indonesian women peacekeepers have been deployed in peacekeeping missions around the world. It is our firm belief that investing in women equals investing in peace. We hope that the Council will continue to work together with all countries and partners to translate the resolution into befitting outcomes.
