Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I join in the words of gratitude expressed to
the Chairman of the sanctions Committee and to the
Chairman of the Committee of Experts, which prepared
the report in accordance with resolution 1333 (2000)
and made recommendations about the monitoring of
the arms embargo and the closure of terrorist training
camps in the territory of Afghanistan controlled by the
Taliban. We have studied the report and support its
main conclusions regarding the need to set up a
monitoring mechanism to control the implementation
of resolution 1333 (2000).

It is clear now that since the resolution's adoption
half a year ago the Taliban have in no way tried to
comply with the Security Council's demands. They
have not taken the least step to extradite Usama bin
Laden, nor to close those camps where international
terrorists are being trained in Taliban-controlled
territory.

In the broader context, the Taliban, relying on
external military assistance, are continuing to try to
resolve the Afghan conflict by force. In addition,
recently we have witnessed new Taliban activities that
go against all norms of human morality and ethics.
There continue to be gross violations of the rights of
women and girls. The Buddhist statues were destroyed.
Discriminatory measures, similar to those used in
ghettos in the past, have been imposed against
adherents of non-Islamic faiths who are living in
Afghanistan. As I said, no progress has been achieved
as regards the Taliban's support for international
terrorism.

Given this situation, it is particularly important to
consistently implement resolutions 1333 (2000) and
1267 (1999). In our opinion, an important step along
this road should be Council support for the experts'
recommendations regarding the creation of a
monitoring mechanism.

Of course we understand that no sanctions
monitoring will be effective unless the States
neighbouring Afghanistan cooperate in the matter, first
and foremost the States bordering Afghanistan. We
welcome the proclaimed willingness of the six States to
comply with resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333 (2000).
We believe that cooperation with them should continue
as we work further with the experts' recommendations.
I support the appeal made by the Permanent
Representative of China regarding the importance of
cooperating with neighbouring countries.

We believe that initially the work of the
monitoring mechanism should focus most
fundamentally on the key requirements: ensuring
compliance with the arms embargo and closing the
terrorist training camps. I understand that these are
difficult tasks; however, we cannot afford to do
nothing. That would be worse. It seems to me that the
experts' proposed plan will allow real progress to be
made. Perhaps all of the Security Council's demands
will not be completely implemented as a result, but the
plan will, I repeat, promote real progress towards that
goal. I am referring in particular to the proposals to set
up the Office for Sanctions Monitoring and
Coordination and the Sanctions Enforcement Support
Teams in the region. We are prepared to use this plan as
a foundation. Of course we will still have to define the
plan's specific parameters, including the functions of
each of the proposed elements, particularly with regard
to the teams to be set up in bordering countries. Of
course there should be the closest possible consultation
with the interested States on this matter.

With regard to the location of the monitoring
mechanism, we think it would be preferable for it to be
in New York. This is important for effective interaction
with the sanctions Committee, and also so as to have a
link with the Security Council. If the monitoring
mechanism is set up in a location other than New York,
this link would be weakened, which we think would be
a mistake. It is important to take a close look at the
possible options for financing the mechanism so that its
activities are properly funded.

The report contains many other practical
proposals, including on expanding the list of
embargoed goods and on unifying national legislation
as regards arms trading, customs policies and so forth.
We are prepared to review these proposals, many of
which will require careful study. But right now, I
repeat, we believe the Council should concentrate on
preparing and adopting a draft resolution that would
allow the monitoring mechanism to quickly begin
work. The recommendations requiring further study
can be considered at subsequent stages.

We support the view that sanctions against the
Taliban should be implemented in close connection
with other United Nations decisions that seek to ensure
peace and stability for Afghanistan. Most serious
attention should be given to retaining the targeted
nature of the sanctions: making sure that they continue
to be directed against the leadership of the Taliban,
rather than against the Afghan people.
On the basis of these principles we will be
cooperating with other Council members in the further
work on this report.

