Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank the Egyptian presidency for
organizing this important and timely debate at a moment
when the world is witnessing the unprecedented growth
of terrorism. We welcome presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/6 and its acknowledgement of the need
for the international community to consider the most
effective means to combat terrorist propaganda. We
must counter recruitment and incitement, including
through the Internet, and mobilize mechanisms of
international cooperation to that end. In that connection,
terrorist groups have used the space provided by the
social media to spread their propaganda and reach
prospective recruits throughout the world. Thanks to
the commitment of its political class to dialogue and the
effective participation of civil society, Tunisia has been
able to overcome the difficulties that the democratic
transition process faced, in particular by adopting a new
Constitution that upholds human rights, including the
right to freedom of expression, religion and conscience.
We were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 2015 for
our approach.

However, as important as these achievements
are, they should not blind us to the magnitude of the
challenges our country faces, especially with regard to
the eradication of the phenomenon of terrorism. While
Tunisia has achieved qualitative successes, especially
on the security front, in combating this phenomenon
by thwarting numerous terrorist schemes, eliminating
many extremist terrorist leaders and arresting numerous
suspects and bringing them to justice, it has witnessed
several terrorist operations and has sacrificed the souls
of its sons in defending its country. We commemorate
the lives of four member of the Tunisian National Guard
who were martyred today on 11 May in southern Tunisa
while chasing a number of terrorists.

Tunisia is determined to counter this phenomenon
through the use of the rule of law. In that regard, it
adopted, in 2007, a foundational law on combating
terrorism and money laundering, which was inspired by
international standards and best practices and reflects
the fulfilment of its international commitments,
including the implementation of resolution 2178 (2014).
Tunisia, in cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, developed its
national strategy to combat violent extremism based
on the four pillars of protection, prevention, follow-up
and response. That strategy has focused on prevention
and on addressing threats by countering the attempts
to polarize communities and the spread of Takfiri
messages on the Internet and in prisons and mosques.
The strategy also highlighted the importance of
building a culture of dialogue, peace, tolerance and
respect for all regions religions, beliefs and cultures
and provided for the promotion of curriculums and
the promotion of dialogue to resist extremist thinking.
It also encouraged the study of the role of women in
preventing violent extremism. The strategy focuses
on mobilization via the Internet and encourages
those specializing in Islamic studies, sociology and
psychology to participate effectively in discussions on
the Internet. Practical measures along the same lines
have also been taken.

In 2016, the Minister of Religious Affairs launched
the campaign for a better tomorrow, which involves
the establishment of a cyber portal to propagate true
Islamic values, in accordance with the moderate Zaytuni
approach, and the establishment of a centre to respond
to young men's questions about Islam and to convene
meetings with young people in clubs and any spaces
available in order to raise awareness about the gravity
of extremist takfiri ideology and its repercussions
on the State and its institutions. The importance of
the cultural dimension in resisting takfiri trends has
been emphasized.
While stressing that the main responsibility
in taking measures to counter the messages of the
terrorists and their takfiri ideologies fall on the States,
in accordance with the principle of national ownership,
we reiterate the importance of promoting national
corporation and an exchange of best practices. In that
regard, we emphasize the need to develop international
corporation, including the promotion of private
institutions, so as to ensure respect for human rights
and freedom of expression.

Finally, we would like to affirm the importance for
the international community to make further preventive
systematic efforts to tackle the root causes of violent
extremism in order to more effectively prevent it and
to strengthen the capacity of communities to counter
terrorist ideologies. We believe the Secretary-General's
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/ 70/ 674)
provides a comprehensive guide to promote our efforts
by adopting a preventative approach on the national,
regional and international levels. The upcoming
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy offers a great opportunity to achieve notable
progress in that direction.

