Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): It is a
particular pleasure to be the first member of the
Council to give a very warm welcome to Mr. Smith in
his new job. Those of us who have followed the work
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) have seen that, in the few months
that he has been in that role, he has already given a real
boost to the sense of direction and purpose of the
Directorate. I believe that, with the combination of him
in that role and Ambassador Jurica as Chairman of the
Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee, there is a new
vitality in our work on counter-terrorism.

We in the United Kingdom certainly believe that
the United Nations and the Security Council have a
very important role to play in the fight against
terrorism. The threat of terrorism continues to face a
significant number of United Nations Member States
directly, day in and day out. The consequences of
terrorism reach all of us. Increasingly and tragically,
they seek to strike at the United Nations itself. I would
like to place on record once again the United
Kingdom's utter condemnation of the attack on the
United Nations in Algiers last December and our deep
condolences to the victims and their families.

We must succeed in our joint endeavour to stop
the criminals and murderers from perpetrating terrorist
acts. The terrorist threat is complex and requires a
multidimensional response. It will require work across
the United Nations system, underpinned by genuine
coordination. I believe that Mr. Smith's report helped
to bring all of that out. We have to focus on
interventions that make a visible difference. We will
know that we have succeeded when we see an
improvement in Member States' preparedness to tackle
terrorism. Some of that will come from capacity-
building; we must make sure that it leads to a genuine
increase in countries' capabilities. That includes a wide
range of challenges, from investigation and disruption
of terrorist networks to blocking terrorist financing;
from border security to protecting transports and other
critical infrastructure.

It is against that backdrop that the appointment of
Mr. Smith and his briefing of this Council is so
welcome. We particularly welcome the focus he put on
three things: first, looking internally at CTED
processes to improve their consistency and to get the
most out of the range of expertise in the Directorate;
secondly, looking outside CTED to consult widely on
its role and how it can best work with all Member
States, including through international and regional
organizations; and, thirdly, considering new priorities
in the work of CTED.
08-27612
I think the briefing that Mr. Smith has just given
us has amply demonstrated the focus that he has
brought on all three of these issues, and I warmly
endorse the recommendations he has put forward.

In the areas of renewed emphasis for CTED, we
welcome, in particular, the focus on increased work
with donors, for which we stand ready to do our part.
We welcome the commitment to increase cooperation
with other parts of the United Nations. This should
include strengthening work with the 1267 (1999)
monitoring team and the 1540 (2004) Committee
experts, for which this Council has called for some
time. Equally important, we welcome their
commitment to play their full part in the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

The continued commitment to take forward work
on incitement to terrorism and dealing with that
problem within the context of resolution 1624 (2005) is
also particularly important. In view of the threat we see
emerging today, attacking radicalization and
recruitment is essential, especially by challenging the
ideology of violent extremism and helping to support
vulnerable communities.

We look forward to the report of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee on the implementation of the
counter-terrorism obligations by States under
resolution 1373 (2001) to which Mr. Smith referred.
We attach importance to having a global picture of
achievements and gaps in order for the Council to be
able to guide the priorities of the Committee in the year
ahead. We think that such an analysis will be important
at the start of each year.

I would like to close by saying that under the able
leadership of Ambassador Jurica and Mr. Smith at
CTED, this is a promising time for the work of the
Council on counter-terrorism issues. The United
Kingdom would welcome sustained Council
involvement in counter-terrorism, and we stand ready
to do our part.

