Mrs. Kawar (Jordan): At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Sir, for providing me and the other outgoing
Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
with an opportunity to take stock of our work and to
share some personal observations as we complete our
two-year terms as elected members of the Council.

Over the course of the past two years, Jordan has
had the honour to chair the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which represent two of the longest-serving
Sanctions Committees, established respectively in
2003 and 2004.

With regard to the 1521 Committee concerning
Liberia, the sanctions regime has witnessed a number
of landmark changes during my tenure and that of
my predecessor, Prince Zeid Al Hussein. These
modifications were facilitated by the Security Council
and the 1521 Committee and by following best practices,
with a parallel track of close cooperation between the
Chair and the Permanent Representative of Liberia to
the United Nations in New York, and in collaboration
with the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL).
My delegation was also fortunate to have an enriched
understanding of the post-conflict peacebuilding
challenges faced by Liberia through my predecessor's
chairmanship of the Liberia configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as our commitment
to Liberia since its inception. Today, I pay tribute to
UNMIL and the 256 Jordanian police personnel who
still proudly serve therein even after withstanding
the toughest of circumstances, including the Ebola
epidemic.

A major positive shift in the Liberia sanctions
regime took place on 2 September with the adoption of
resolution 2237 (2015), by which the Security Council
terminated the travel and financial measures set
forth in paragraph 4 of resolution 1521 (2003) and in
paragraph 1 of resolution 1532 (2004). Those measures
are therefore no longer applicable to any individual or
entity, and the 1521 sanctions list has been terminated.
By the same resolution, the Council decided, for a
period of nine months, to renew the arms embargo
against all non-governmental entities and individuals
operating in the territory of Liberia.

In the lead-up to the adoption of resolution 2237
(2004), there were a number of important developments
in the 1521 sanctions regime. On 21 July, the Security
Council Affairs Division of the Department of Political
Affairs presented to the 1521 Committee the main
findings set out in the Secretary-General's update
on the progress made by the Government of Liberia
in implementing recommendations on the proper
management of arms and ammunition, including
enacting the necessary legislative frameworks and on
facilitating the effective monitoring and management
of the border regions between Liberia and C6te d'Ivoire,
pursuant to resolution 2188 (2014).

That presentation followed several important
developments in the Committee in 2014, namely, the
Committee's agreement on 11 July 2014 to recommend
to the Security Council that the Council request the
Secretary-General to conduct an assessment mission to
Liberia as an outcome of the review of the measures
of the sanctions regime in Liberia, in accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 2128 (2013), as well as the
Committee's consideration, on 12 November 2014, of
the report of the assessment mission concerning the
Liberia sanctions regime, annexed to the letter dated
29 September that same year from the Secretary-
General to the President of the Council. We believe that
such assessment missions are part of the best practices
that sanctions committees, and the Security Council
itself, should strive to streamline across all sanctions
regimes from their inception until their termination.

Last but not least, as Chair of the 1521 Committee,
my engagement with the Government of Liberia was
positive in both identifying remaining challenges and
finding solutions to overcome them. I will encourage
the Ambassador of Ukraine, as incoming Chair of the
1521 Committee, to continue engaging the Government
of Liberia, the penholder and the experts in identifying

ways of assisting Liberia to address the few challenges
that remain towards the total lifting of the arms
embargo.

Turning to the 1533 Committee, concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the situation in the
country remains fragile, with the eastern provinces
continuing to suffer from a plethora of predatory armed
groups. Some progress has been achieved on the ground,
notably the military operations conducted by the Forces
armees de la Republique de'mocratique du Congo
(FARDC), supported in part by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and its Force
Intervention Brigade against the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF) in North Kivu. The Committee's
designation of the ADF for sanctions in June 2014
dovetailed with the efforts of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO
to target that armed group. It is also encouraging that
Jamil Mukulu, the ADF leader who was placed on
the Committee's sanctions list in October 2011, was
arrested in Tanzania in July this year and subsequently
extradited to Uganda.

However, there is still plenty of work to be done in
terms of combating the involvement of both the armed
groups and FARDC fringe elements in the trafficking of
natural resources, restoring State authority throughout
the country and creating space for peacebuilding and
national dialogue. It is troubling that so many armed
groups, with no more than several hundred combatants,
have been able to prey on the civilian population in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo for so long.
The numerous predatory actors in North and South
Kivu survive thanks to the widespread availability
of small arms and ammunition, their ability to traffic
natural resources, such as the three T's - tin, tantalum
and tungsten - charcoal, timber and alluvial gold,
with State and private actors in the region, as well as
their propensity to abuse and pillage civilians. In that
connection, I must say that, during my visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, I was privileged to
take a helicopter ride over Virunga National Park, where
we actually saw the cars of those who were involved in
the act of smuggling. That is a common occurrence.

We have spoken too long about the need for
proper weapon-stockpile management in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo; there have to be
tangible and transparent results. To make any progress
on the ground, weapons, whether pilfered from

Government stocks or possibly trafficked from abroad,
must no longer be freely available. There must also be a
more forensic approach with a view to identifying and
choking offmany ofthe predatory armed groups, which
have little if any political agenda and are in fact criminal
gangs. As such, we need to follow the money and
consider assessing sanctions on downstream companies
outside the Democratic Republic of the Congo that are
illicitly sourcing natural resources such as tin, tantalum
and tungsten, as well as gold, from areas controlled by
armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, thereby helping to sustain the same criminal
elements who destabilize the east. We also may need
better tools to track the movement of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's natural resources from the
sites where they are mined all the way across the
border to the international markets in order to support
legitimate mining and trading that can provide jobs and
revenues to the Congolese people and to penalize the
illicit trafficking that fuels conflict. I must add here
that, during our visit to some ofthe mines, I saw 5-year-
old children who were actually involved in gold mining
because it brought more money to their families than
going to school. These are very serious problems that
are affecting the future generation.

Despite these challenges, I am pleased to note
that, with the help of the international community,
the capacities of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to respond to security threats
have increased, and there has been some progress in
the fight against impunity for human rights violations
committed by armed groups and elements of the
FARDC and Congolese police. Given the importance
of this collaborative approach, during my tenure and
that of my predecessor, there was a focus on sharpening
the engagement of the Committee with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and with the countries of the
Great Lakes region. In that connection, I visited the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda
from 24 to 29 May. It was the first occasion in which
a Chair of the 1533 Sanctions Committee travelled to
the Great Lakes region since the establishment of the
sanctions regime, in 2004. During my visit, I was able
to collect first-hand information about the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
the neighbouring States to learn how to assist those
States in capacity-building, in addition to improving
the effectiveness of sanctions provisions. I also
personally conveyed the requests and concerns of the
1533 Committee and the Group of Experts. The main
message for me was that it was only with the help of
the Committee and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that we are able to move on to
the next step.

In addition to my travel to the region, the 1533
Committee held two formal meetings in 2015 to exchange
views with the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
with States of the region on the implementation of the
sanctions regime, and in particular on the reports of the
Group ofExperts. That exchange ofviews has helped the
Committee to gain a more in-depth perspective on the
relevant issues. Earlier this week, for example, members
of the Committee heard the Permanent Representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo echo what the
Minister of the Interior told me in a meeting during my
visit to Kinshasa in May, namely, that even though the
embargo as of the adoption of resolution 1807 (2008)
in March 2008 no longer applied to the Government,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities were
of the view that the embargo still affected their ability
to procure the weapons they need in a timely manner.
While such issues might be addressed through a
reiteration of the relevant paragraph of resolution 1807
(2008) in the next Council resolution on Democratic
Republic of the Congo sanctions, it is clear that the
Committee will need to continue its close collaboration
with the country's authorities to underline that the
sanctions regime is in place to protect the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, rather than to hinder it.

During my tenure as Chair of the 1533 Committee,
I also sought out opportunities for the Committee to
benefit from the insights of other partners. Indeed,
as part of the 12 meetings convened in the 2014-
2015 period, the Committee heard briefings from a
number of external partners, including the Executive
Secretary of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, MONUSCO, the United Nations Mine
Action Service and the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

The Committee also sent over 80 letters to Member
States during the course of 2014 and 2015, sharing and/
or requesting information. In some cases, Member
States were forthcoming with information; in many
others, however, States failed to respond to the Chair's
letters despite repeated follow-ups by the Chair. We
just discussed this matter in the Committee earlier this
week in connection with letters that I sent on 8 May to
the delegations of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of
Tanzania as regards the findings and recommendations
of the 2014 report of the Group of Experts.

In two cases, pursuant to an initiative of the
President of the Security Council, the President and I
held j oint bilateral consultations with the Member States
concerned with a view to underlining the importance
of the Committee's requests for information. Yet the
fact remains that none of the Member States concerned
has responded to my letters of 8 May, some of which
encouraged the Governments of those States to
undertake investigations in connection with the Group's
findings and recommendations. Going forward, it
may be useful to put more creative thought into how
Member States can be encouraged to cooperate with the
sanctions committees and the expert panels; otherwise,
the credibility of the Security Council and its sanctions
resolutions, adopted under Chapter VII as mandatory
measures, will continue to be called into question.

Along these lines, given that the same sanctions
regime has now been in place for such a long period
of time, it may be an appropriate time for some
stocktaking. I alluded to this need for reflection during
my statement to the Council on 14 July (see S/PV.7484),
following my visit to the Great Lakes region in May.

To reinforce the continued credibility of the
sanctions regime in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region, my discussions
with the regional States affirmed the need for more
sanctions designations, particularly for predatory actors
who abuse civilians and traffic natural resources. No
individual has been designated by the Committee since
December 2012, and I have made efforts in that regard
to encourage members of the Committee to revisit the
confidential annexes that have been submitted by the
Group of Experts in tandem with its final reports and
to submit to the Committee the names of individuals
and entities for possible sanctioning. There should be
no perception among Member States, particularly those
in the Great Lakes region, that the importance of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo sanctions regime is
waning and that the Council is less concerned about the
climate of impunity, particularly in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I hope that my visit to the Great
Lakes region was a signal that, on the contrary, we
are looking closely at the sanctions regime, and I trust
that the incoming Chair will undertake another visit to
the region to follow through and undertake pledges in
addition to engaging those States and their assistance
needs.

In closing, I would like to conclude by expressing
my profound appreciation to the members of the
Committees I presided over for their collegiality and
spirit of cooperation. I also wish to extend my sincere
thanks to the Panel of Experts on Liberia and the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as their previous and current members,
for the diligent work accomplished in contributing to
compliance with the sanctions regime. Those Groups
of Experts are tasked with investigating complex issues
in difficult political and security environments, often
at great personal cost. The 1521 and 1533 Committees
have endeavoured over the past two years to offer all
possible assistance to support the Panel's and Group's
work, including during my visit to the Great Lakes
region in May, and took into serious consideration the
findings and the recommendations made by the Panel
and the Group on the most effective ways to implement
the sanctions regime.

Last but not least, I would like to pay tribute to
MONUSCO, its work and all its efforts on the ground.
Allow me, in the name of my country, to thank my
Jordanian compatriot Armed Forces serving therein
for their unwavering commitment towards establishing
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
their sacrifices in fulfilling mission goals, particularly
during very challenging circumstances.

