Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the European
Free Trade Association countries belonging to the
European Economic Area Iceland and Liechtenstein
align themselves with this statement.

It is indeed a pleasure once again to greet the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. We renew our deep
gratitude to him and to the rest of the personnel of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) for the remarkable way in which
they are carrying out their Security Council mandate.

We are also very pleased to greet the Senior
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Mr. Jose'
Ramos-Horta. Our thanks and praise go also to the
people of East Timor, without whose support the
extraordinary progress achieved over the past year
would have been impossible.

The year 2002 will mark the birth of a new
country that will become a Member of the United
Nations: 20 May will be independence day for East
Timor and a date for the Organization to remember
with pride and satisfaction. However, we want to stress
that it will not be the last day of the United Nations
association with East Timor. There is a need to
guarantee the security of the country and the viability
and stability of the future Government as UNTAET
progressively transfers responsibilities to it. The
European Union strongly supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the mandate of
UNTAET be extended until 20 May. We also welcome
the proposals for the phasing out of the United Nations
presence and for a successor mission to serve for an
estimated two years after independence.

The European Union has already endorsed the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the mission
should be an integrated one drawing upon all the
services of the United Nations. We welcome the
consistency of the latest report of the Secretary-
General (8/2002/80) vis-a-vis the proposals he had set
out in his report (8/2001/983) of last October. We look
forward to further specific proposals in due course.

Since the previous report of the Secretary-
General was issued in October 2001, the pace of
progress towards independence has accelerated. The
security environment has improved. A draft
constitution is being intensely discussed by the
Constituent Assembly with the assistance of, inter alia,
the European Union. Presidential elections will take
place on 14 April.

We congratulate UNTAET and the East Timorese
people on the increasing number of responsibilities that
local institutions are assuming in areas such as public
administration, security and social and economic
affairs.

We acknowledge the crucial role that the
Indonesian Government is playing under the leadership
of President Megawati Soekarnoputri. Relations with
Indonesia are gradually improving, although important
issues such as cooperation in the investigation of
serious crimes and human rights violations, payment of
pensions and the demarcation of the common border
are still pending.

Despite these achievements, major challenges to a
successful transition remain. Several reported incidents
of political violence should remind us of the need for
adequate channels for expressing political dissent and
diversity. The full and peaceful integration of various
political currents through political parties will be
critical for a successful transition to democracy.

In the elections held in August 2001, the East
Timorese people showed their political maturity. The
coming 14 April elections should be held in a similarly
peaceful and transparent way.

Despite the continued long-term militia threat
along the border with Indonesia, we note that the
Secretary-General deems it feasible to plan for a
gradual assumption of security responsibilities by East
Timorese institutions. We support the Secretary-
General's proposal to reduce UNTAET's military and
civilian police components by the time of
independence. We note his observations that the
security situation and the provision of adequate
training and equipment to the East Timor Defence
Force and the Police Service will directly affect the
downsizing plans.

Success in East Timor is very much about
reconciliation. During recent months, refugees have
continued to return, although there are still many in
camps in West Timor. Efforts should continue to be
made to promote cross-border contacts, increase
mutual confidence and resolve the problem of the
payment of pensions.

Reconciliation, however, must be cemented by
justice. We welcome the recent establishment of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.
The continuation of the work carried out by the courts
and the Office of the General Prosecutor will be
important steps in this direction.

The European Union once again calls upon the
Government of Indonesia to ensure the speedy
operationalization of the Ad Hoc Human Rights Court,
fully mandated in accordance with international
standards, with jurisdiction over all human rights
violations. In this regard, we welcome the appointment
by the Government of Indonesia of judges for the Ad
Hoc Human Rights Court and recall the urgency of
making the Court operational. We trust that cooperation
with UNTAET in judicial matters will progress in a
similar way. The European Union is ready to provide
technical assistance to both the judges and the
prosecutors of the Ad Hoc Court.

We are hoping for a parallel evolution in the
economic and social services areas. The Secretary-
General's report contains some good news, showing
that economic activity is expanding. The international
community has an important role to play in supporting
the economy of East Timor. It is now time to move
towards a relationship based on development goals.
The donor community should provide support beyond
independence.

The collection and investment of revenues from
natural resources will be essential. As it becomes less
dependent on international donors and develops into a
stable country based on sound institutions and peaceful
relations with its neighbours, it will become attractive
to international investors.

As we see other countries in the world falter in
the wake of conflict or natural disasters, we hope that
the success of East Timor will prove to be less of an
exception and more of a precedent.

The date of 20 May might well become a
significant milestone in the often troubled history of
United Nations peacekeeping. We are learning the hard
way, through trial and error - or perhaps in this case I
should say "trial and success".

In May, a new State will be born, and the United
Nations 4 that is, all of us ~ will have reason to be
proud. It is now up to all of us to bring this process to
fruition and to help our new sibling stride safely into a
world that is demanding, but full of promise.

