Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): Children embody
the most compelling justification for the existence of
States, that is, to protect their most vulnerable charges
as they would preserve themselves. For what is a State
without children, if not on the brink of extinction? The
Philippine Government takes its role as protector of
children seriously. The Constitution requires it to do so.
But in going beyond the demands of the law, Philippine
society has accorded children a hallowed place, as
treasured assets whose survival must be ensured and
whose fullest potential must be fulfilled.

Children do not belong on a battlefield. They have
the right not to know first-hand the horrors of war. But
it is indeed a harsh reality that far too many children
are forced to experience war. In the case of Marawi,
in the southern Philippines, children were recruited by
armed rebels as fighters, couriers, guides or spies. We
are proud that the Government retook Marawi from
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in a relatively
short time. We denounce with indignation the use of
children by criminal groups, and we lament the loss
of children's lives. The Government has intensified
reconstruction, rehabilitation and reintegration in
Marawi, including expeditiously clearing locations of
unexploded ordnance to avoid further casualties and
injuries, especially to children.

The establishment of the Bangsamoro Transition
Authority and the ratification of the Bangsamoro
organic law will pave the way for lasting peace in the
region. We note the readiness of the United Nations to
help build its capacity to achieve peace, democratic
governance and respect for human and children's
rights. The Philippines armed forces has issued
and committed itself to the circular entitled "Child
protection during armed conflict situations", its policy
guide to preventing grave child's rights violations. The
circular reaffirms the armed forces' moral and legal
commitment to ensuring that children affected by
armed conflict are afforded special protection and are
entitled to special respect.

This principle is enshrined in the Philippine
Government's enactment in January of Republic Act
11188, entitled "Special protection of children in armed
conflict act". The law reaffirms that children are zones
of peace and cannot be recruited into Government
forces, or be allowed to participate in armed conflict.
They must be treated as victims, not enemies, and
be protected from maiming, torture, abduction,
rape and killing. They must be treated humanely
in all circumstances and should never be objects of
attack. Communities, Government authorities and, if
applicable, religious leaders are required to preserve
the peaceful integrity of children.

Our new law also prohibits attacks on schools,
hospitals, places of worship, child development and
day-care centres, playgrounds and recreational parks.
The Government denounces the use of schools by
rebel groups to foster their ideology of war and make
soldiers out of children. The Government renews
its solemn responsibility to protect those most
vulnerable 4 children 4 against those malignant
forces by any means necessary to achieve the defining
purpose of the existence and expense ofa State.

The Philippines aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

The Philippines congratulates Poland on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. We will
continue to work with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Gamba, and with United
Nations agencies and other stakeholders in pursuing
our common aspiration that no child will ever again
have to experience the horrors of war.

