Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank Deputy President Zuma and the President of
the Economic and Social Council, Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal, for their very comprehensive and
encouraging statements.

Allow me to commend South Africa for its
successful mediation efforts in Burundi. After the
unsuccessful summit in Dar es Salaam in September
2003, it is doubtful that agreement between the
Burundian Transitional Government and the National
Council for the Defence of Democracy-Forces for the
Defence of Democracy (CNDD-FDD) could have been
brought about without sustained South African
involvement at the highest political level.

My Government also warmly welcomes the
exemplary engagement of the African Union,
especially of the countries contributing troops to the
African mission in Burundi. Germany supports the
African mission, both bilaterally, with 400,000 euros,
and through our contribution to the 25 million euros
that the European Union has pledged. We believe that
such strong regional involvement will remain a
decisive factor also for the implementation process of
the Pretoria Protocol, during which all parties involved
will be faced with new and difficult challenges.

In our view, the cantonment of former combatants
and their integration into the national army is a most
pressing task that requires a considered and
coordinated approach. The European Union provides
an important contribution through the provision and
distribution of food aid.

My Government favours a multi-track approach
to a sustained peace process in Burundi that includes
the African region, the United Nations and the donor
community. The African mission in Burundi, the
regional initiative, the international conference on the
Great Lakes region, the United Nations Office in
Burundi and United Nations agencies are all important
elements in that respect. But, first and foremost, the
commitment of all Burundian parties is needed.

The lack of a ceasefire agreement with Rwasa's
National Liberation Forces (FNL) poses a problem that
needs to be dealt with before an all-inclusive peace
agreement can be signed and implemented. In order to
deflect attempts from disgruntled individuals and
groups to set up FNL as a magnet for elements that
oppose the Arusha Agreement, as well as the Pretoria
Protocol, the peace dividend must be visible and
tangible, brought about by economic and social
development. However, should FNL fail to enter into
negotiations with the Government within the three-
month period, as set out in the regional initiative, the
Council might wish to consider coercive measures
against those FNL leaders unwilling to cooperate, as
well as a weapons embargo against FNL.

As we have heard, especially from Deputy
President Zuma, there has been progress in the past,
but we have also heard and seen that great challenges
lie ahead to bring the peace process to a successful
conclusion. Outstanding reform measures must now be
tackled energetically, despite remaining resistance. We
call on all Rwandan parties, and in particular on those
factions within the Burundian police force and the
military that are disappointed with the Pretoria
Protocol, to recognize that Protocol as a real chance for
lasting peace, not only for Burundi but also for the
entire Great Lakes region.

