The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Kuwait.

At the outset, I thank Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Gilmour
for their briefings. In my statement, I will focus on three
basic issues: the situation in Darfur, the withdrawal of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the upcoming mandate renewal.

On the situation in Darfur, the joint strategic
assessment report (S/2019/445) reaffirms the continued
security stability in Darfur while excluding the
possibility that the UNAMID exit strategy would
affect the situation there. That makes us in the Council
responsible for preserving the Mission's gains and
encouraging the steps taken by the Sudan to extend its
authority throughout Darfur.

As to the drivers of the conflict, these could be
addressed through means other than peacekeeping.
Issues related to land and its ownership, climate
change and the safe, voluntary and dignified return
of internally displaced persons should be the core of
post-conflict peacebuilding. Peacekeeping is no longer
the optimal way, as it was in the past, to address the
situation in Darfur. Accordingly, we call on UNAMID
to maintain the current course, as set out in resolution
2429 (2018) and in the Council's 2018 presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/19.

On the withdrawal of UNAMID, we commend the
Mission's innovative use of State liaison functions,
which contribute to its smooth and gradual exit through
enhanced cooperation with the United Nations country
team in the area of peacebuilding.

The Mission's report of two months ago
(S/2019/305) and the most recent report under
discussion today contain calls for streamlining the
benchmarks and indicators, a majority of which have
been achieved in Darfur. Since the Doha Agreement
for Peace in Darfur remains the reference point for a
political solution in Darfur, and since most legislative
frameworks have been established, we believe that the
priority political solution in Darfur is being applied as
required. However, its implementation could have been
better managed in the light of the reluctance of some
parties to join the political process. The Mission and its
exit strategy cannot remain hostage to the willingness
of those parties to cooperate. The Government of the
Sudan has cooperated in this regard, supported by
UNAMID through the Joint Special Representative and
thanks to the laudable efforts of the State of Qatar and
the Federal Republic of Germany.

On the upcoming mandate renewal, we will work
over the next two weeks on a new mandate for the
Mission. We hope that it will be succinct and clear in
laying out the exit options and specifying the priority
areas, such as capacity-building, promoting the rule of
law, strengthening national ownership and enhancing
cooperation and coordination with the United Nations
country team in Darfur. We thank the brotherly Sudan
for its cooperation and look forward to more cooperation
during the drawdown, withdrawal and liquidation
phases of the Mission in a smooth and safe manner.

We are closely following developments in the
Sudan. We call on all parties to exercise calm and
restraint, denounce violence and pursue dialogue in
order to ensure the success of the peaceful transitional
process. We hope that the measures taken to address
those developments will help achieve security and
stability in the Sudan in a manner that fulfils the hopes
and aspirations of its brotherly people. We call on all
Sudanese to place the interests ofthe nation first, above
all other considerations, for the unity, sovereignty,
stability and territorial integrity of the Sudan.

We stress once again that what is happening
in the Sudan is an internal affair that does not merit
interference, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. We call anew for compliance with
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council on the
Sudan and for the discussion to be restricted to the
subject matter on our agenda, including UNAMID
today. Current developments should not be used to
change courses that have been agreed by the Council in
previous resolutions.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.

