Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The United
States thanks Council members for their efforts to
strengthen the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) in order to
ensure that the Mission supports the people of South
Sudan and their pursuit of lasting peace, security and
stability. The mandate reinforces the core mission of
UNMISS, which is to protect civilians, support the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, monitor and
investigate human rights and support the peace process.
Importantly, it also calls on UNMISS to strengthen its
activities aimed at preventing sexual and gender-based
violence, in response to the growing trend of horrific
sexual violence in South Sudan.

The position of the United States on the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South has been clear and consistent. We
remain deeply concerned about the lack of political
commitment on the part of the parties at the national
level to fully implementing all the Agreement's tenets.
Having seen previous agreements in South Sudan fail
to hold and the country fall back into conflict and
instability, the United States and the people of South
Sudan expect the country's leaders to demonstrate a
clear commitment to implementing the agreement in
both word and deed. As we have stated before in the
Council, we call on South Sudan's leaders to fully
adhere to ceasefire agreements, negotiate security
arrangements and power-sharing agreements, agree
to transparency standards for financing the peace
process, take action against gender-based violence,
stop obstructing ceasefire monitors, permit unhindered
humanitarian access, release all political prisoners,
establish the African Union hybrid court and open up
the political space for peaceful dissent.

Building on the accomplishments of resolution
2436 (2018), on peacekeeper performance, we are
pleased that in this resolution the Council reaffirmed
its support for developing a comprehensive and
integrated performance policy framework that
identifies clear standards of performance for evaluating
all United Nations personnel working in and supporting
peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, there is no bigger supporter of the
people of South Sudan than the United States and we
believe that the renewed UNMISS mandate will help
create a path to long-term stability and security in
the country.

