Mr. Boubacar Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): First of all, Mr. President, I should like to
convey the gratitude of our delegation for the initiative
that you have taken in convening this end-of-year
wrap-up meeting for the Security Council. It gives us
yet another opportunity to engage in a wide-ranging
exchange of Views on our activities and to assess the
progress that has been made with respect to the
objectives set. This exercise should allow us to identify
the obstacles that are strewn along our path, so that we
can take the necessary corrective action and thereby
enhance the effectiveness of our future actions.

Before getting into the heart of the matter, I
would like to say how much my delegation appreciates
the skill, talent and effectiveness with which you
guided the Council's proceedings in December.

There is not a shadow of doubt that the year just
ending has been full of challenges for our Council,
challenges that we were determined to tackle in unity
in order to preserve international peace and security.
We have had to deal with a number of questions; some
of them proved to be more complex than others. In this
vein, we had tremendous success in eliminating certain
trouble spots, in Angola, Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste
and Eritrea/Ethiopia, for example. In all of these
situations, the concerted will of the international
community and the interested parties ultimately
enabled us to agree to a common cooperating
framework to help improve our diagnostic work and
find the appropriate cure.

Even with our successes, we must not forget that
many conflicts still exist, particularly in the African
continent. In this respect, we are duty-bound to
continue our thinking in order to find a successful
outcome for each case, which is our primary calling. To
do this, a participatory approach, founded on
international law and enjoying the support of all of the
actors, both within the United Nations system and
within regional and subregional organizations, is the
best strategy and one that should be strengthened. This
approach should obviously include a true internal, non-
exclusive dialogue, a careful programme of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and a
vision extending to the entire region or subregion at
issue.

The strategy just initiated by the Council along
these lines to settle the Liberian problem is responding,
in our view, to this approach and should be encouraged.
We would like to make special mention of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on conflict prevention and resolution
in Africa, which through its initiatives and suggestions
has enabled us to develop a framework that, if
conscientiously used by the Security Council, will
allow us to overcome the obstacles and find a solution
to a number of delicate situations.

On another level, the sanctions Committees have
contributed effectively, in their methodologies and their
actions, to the recent implementation of an intelligent,
targeted sanctions policy, and they have helped restore
peace through pressure brought to bear on the different
actors. The Groups of Experts, formed to survey the
implementation of sanctions, also played no small role.
In some cases, nevertheless, a great deal still needs to
be done, and the experience of our success should
inspire us. We have to look at how we follow up on
integral implementation of sanctions.

Since 11 September 2001 the fight against
international terrorism has become more essential than
ever. In this respect, we commend the tremendous work
done by the Counter-Terrorism Committee, whose
work should be strengthened further and adapted to the
different insidious forms of terrorism.

Peacekeeping operations, for their part, have been
largely positive. They have allowed us to create an
environment that is conducive to negotiation and
dialogue, while restricting temptations and excesses
and have led, in many cases, to a final peace being
established. The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Prevlaka (UNMOP), which
have just concluded their mandates, are eloquent
examples of this. Nevertheless, there are still many
other conflicts, where peacekeeping forces have been
present for many years without a solution in sight. It is
up to us, in these specific cases, to re-define our
strategy by adapting it to on-the-ground realities, which
presupposes, in our view, a better coordination between
the troop-contributing countries and the effective
implementation of the recommendations from the
Brahimi Report.

During the year under review, our Council greatly
improved its working methods and established greater
transparency in its activities. We increased the number
of our public meetings, which allowed Member States
to communicate their views on the questions under
consideration. We also initiated a number of other
forms of communication that enabled us better to
evaluate what we are doing. Also, the Council has
taken greater interest in topical themes, some of which
are perhaps not, some say, within its purview, even
though they do help us better understand the nature of
some conflict situations. An example of this would be
the questions of food security and HIV/AIDS in
conflict areas. It would seem to be a good idea to us to
stress the importance of Security Council missions on
the ground, which should be encouraged.

Another very important sphere has to do with the
implementation of resolutions we adopt. What we see
is not very encouraging, because there are a number of
decisions not yet implemented. We must make an effort
to avoid selectivity and change this state of affairs.

All of these ideas are for us a way of maintaining
international peace and security. To reach this goal, we
say once again that we must have more determination
and greater will, and we must be guided in our daily
actions by the idea that we can only succeed in unity,
which is the foundation of our credibility.

