Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, let
me welcome His Excellency Mr. Kanat Saudabayev,
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation (OSCE) in Europe and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan, to the Council today.
We congratulate Kazakhstan on the assumption of the
chairmanship of the world's largest security
organization at a decisive moment in its history.

Let me thank the Minister for the presentation of
the programme of work and the priorities of the
Kazakh Chairmanship-in-Office for the coming year.
Leadership of that important organization comes with
great challenges and responsibilities. That is even more
true now that the organization has embarked on the
Corfu process for a European security dialogue in the
Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions. As a participating
State and as host country of the organization, Austria
would like to assure Kazakhstan of its full support in
the efforts to promote the OSCE agenda and for the
endeavours of Kazakhstan to ensure that all three
dimensions of the organization's work are given equal
attention.

Last month the Security Council once again
underlined the importance of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter. The OSCE has over the years played an
active role supporting the implementation of United
Nations principles in various horizontal issues such as
counter-terrorism, the fight against trafficking in
human beings, drugs and weapons, and the promotion
of human rights, the rule of law and democracy. We are
pleased that United Nations representatives will be
invited to address the OSCE Permanent Council in
Vienna this year. In that context we also very much
appreciate the personal interest of the Secretary-
General in increasing cooperation and personal
contacts with the OSCE.

The OSCE institutions and field missions
significantly contribute to narrowing the security gaps
that exist in the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions.
The election observation missions carried out by the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
and the OSCE field missions operating in participating
States foster democratic stability and security in close
cooperation with relevant United Nations agencies and
missions.

In view of Kazakhstan's geographic and historical
proximity, we deem it particularly well placed to
bringing the protracted conflicts in the region closer to
a peaceful solution. In that regard we highly appreciate
the early personal engagement of the Chairman-in-
Office and of his Special Representative, Ambassador
Nurgaliyev. Moreover, we welcome the intention of the
Kazakh chairmanship to advance the organization's
contribution to non-proliferation in connection with the
1540 regime and to the protection of the Afghan
borders. Both issues are crucial for the region's
security and deserve our full commitment.
Let me assure the Minister that we fully share his
very positive assessment of the work of the OSCE,
both the Border Management Staff College in
Tajikistan and the Customs Service Training Centre in

Kyrgyzstan. There are also very useful synergies
between the activities of those institutions and the
work of the European Union (EU) in the field of border
management.

The OSCE role in Kosovo continues to be an
important example for the complementarity of United
Nations, OSCE and EU crisis-management efforts.
Austria would like to commend the OSCE Mission in
Kosovo for the intensive work and coordination with
other international stakeholders in the successful
organization of the recent municipal elections in
Kosovo.

We appreciate the proposal by the Government of
Kazakhstan to convene an OSCE summit later this
year. I have listened very carefully and with sympathy
to the suggestions made by the Minister as to the
preparation of such an event. As the Austrian Foreign
Minister, Michael Spindelegger, assured the Minister
on his visit to Vienna in January, Austria stands ready
to contribute to the necessary preparations in order to
produce substantive progress on issues such as the
protracted conflicts, the Conventional Armed Forces in
Europe (CFE) treaty regime, energy security, non-
proliferation and the promotion of human rights, which
would be very important.

