Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to thank
Ambassador Nestor Osorio for his informative 90-day
report on the activities of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), as well as for his able leadership of the
Committee. I would also like to kindly ask the
Ambassador to convey Portugal's appreciation to the
Panel of Experts for the comprehensive midterm report
submitted to the Council on 8 December.

At the outset, let me reiterate that we share, with
a number of other delegations, a sense of urgency
regarding the publication of the Panel's final report,
submitted in May. We are convinced of the usefulness
of making the report available to all States Members of
the United Nations, including by posting it on the
Committee's website, which should be done as
measure of transparency on the work carried out so far,
but also to raise awareness among Member States of
the need to fully and adequately implement resolution
1929 (2010).

The latest report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
(S/2011/695, annex) has raised significant concern over
the nature of the Iranian nuclear programme, in
particular the continuation of uranium enrichment
activities to near 20 per cent with no plausible civilian
use, which constitutes a clear violation of Security
Council resolutions. Furthermore, according to the
Director General's report, there are indications that
some nuclear activities in which Iran is engaged relate
directly to the development, manufacture, testing and
delivery of a nuclear explosive device.

The information provided paints a compelling
and disturbing picture of the nature of Iran's nuclear
programme, which demands full and thorough
clarification. There is no true possibility for Iran to
regain the confidence of the international community
unless the IAEA is provided with exhaustive responses
with respect to all pending issues regarding Iran's
nuclear activities, as requested by the Agency, and
unless unlimited access to all its nuclear sites,
materials, equipment and personnel is granted without
delay.

While reaffirming our commitment to a
diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue in
accordance with the dual-track approach that has been
pursued in a consistent manner, we understand that it is
now up to Iran to show genuine willingness to
cooperate with the Agency. The Agency is the only
international body capable of ascertaining the true
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.

Portugal again calls on Iran to urgently and fully
engage in meaningful talks on concrete confidence-
building measures, paving the way to a comprehensive
and long-lasting settlement that would restore
international confidence in the exclusively peaceful
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.

