Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): The last
briefing to the Security Council on this item on 15
January 2003, focused on the situation in the north-east
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular,
on military and humanitarian questions.

The aim of today's briefing is to update Council
members on the military situation in the north-east and
on the initiatives undertaken by the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and other actors to reach a
peaceful settlement to this conflict which is ravaging
that part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, will give a briefing on
human rights in the region. A more complete briefing
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and on the
activities of MONUC will be given to the Council on
26 February.

Allow me to take advantage of the opportunity
offered by this briefing to say a few words about the
activities of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Niasse. In support of the efforts of the
facilitator to convene the final session of the inter-
Congolese dialogue, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Niasse, together with South
Africa, has convened two technical committees, which
will meet from 20 to 25 February to discuss the issues
still pending: essentially, finalizing the transitional
constitution; and military and security questions. Mr.
Niasse is convinced that the parties could now begin to
discuss those issues and that the convening of the final
session of the inter-Congolese dialogue should not
depend on the prior settlement of those issues.

Mr. Niasse went to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from 4 to 10 February to consult with the
Congolese parties and to prepare for those two
meetings. The facilitator of the inter-Congolese
dialogue, His Excellency Sir Ketumile Masire, is
convinced that it would be very useful for the Security
Council to encourage the parties to cooperate fully with
Mr. Niasse so that agreement can be reached swiftly on
outstanding issues' so that the inter-Congolese
dialogue can hold its final session as soon as possible.

(spoke in English)
I would now like to turn to the main object of this
briefing: an update on the military situation. As
members of the Council are aware, there has been
continuous heavy fighting in and around the Ituri
region since October, despite the signing of the all-
inclusive agreement on 16 to 17 December. In
December, the Mouvement de liberation congolais
(MLC) and its ally, the Rassemblement congolais pour
la democratie-mouvement de liberation (RCD-ML),
stepped up major offensive operations in the direction
of Beni, North Kivu, against the forces of the RCD-
K/ML, reportedly with the participation of some forces
belonging to the Union de patriotes congolais (UPC),
and they captured the town on 17 December.
Thousands of people were displaced and suffered
human rights abuses as a result of the fighting.

Subsequently, MONUC - with the strong
support of the Security Council and of its five
permanent members, plus the Belgian and South
African ambassadors in Kinshasa - was able to
conclude its efforts to broker a truce, which was signed
on 30 December in Gbadalite. The truce provided for
the withdrawal and disengagement of forces and access
for humanitarian relief. The MLC withdrawal from the
Mambasa-Komanda area commenced in earnest only
on 6 January and, while behind schedule, was
completed on 3 February. Subsequently, in a worrying
development, the UPC - which was not a signatory to
the Gbadalite agreement - took over Komanda.
MONUC has placed a military observer team in
Mambasa and, having carried out preliminary
reconnaissance to Komanda, anticipates establishing a
team there when suitable security conditions prevail.

The Special Representative and the Force
Commander have both urged the UPC to withdraw
from its newly acquired positions, but to no avail.
Instead, UPC forces have continued their advance and
have been seen as close as 25 kilometres east of
Mambasa. It is reported that, on the road between
Bunia and Komanda, UPC forces have established 14
checkpoints, at which soldiers demand money from
each person who passes through. It also appears that
the UPC has significantly reinforced its military
capacity in recent months, including through the
recruitment of child soldiers and the acquisition of
military equipment.

MONUC is deeply concerned about the claims of
the UPC leader, Thomas Lubanga, that he had the sole
legitimate right to control the entire Ituri region. His
actions in support of those claims would inevitably
bring his forces into conflict with those of the RCD-
K/ML. As Council members may be aware, the UPC is
now aligned with the RCD-Goma. It has been alleged
that Rwanda also backs the UPC. The RCD-K/ML is,
on the other hand, being supported by a sizeable
number of FAC troops, possibly up to a battalion,
recently deployed in Beni.

In addition, at a press conference in Kampala on
12 February, a prominent Ituri leader, Chief Kawa,
announced the formation of a new Hema-Lendu
grouping, the Front pour l'integration et la paix,
opposed to the UPC - and called for the retention of
Ugandan forces in Ituri. Hence, any further conflict in
the area has major regional implications beyond the
immediate environs.

Meanwhile, at the southern end of the territory
controlled by the RCD-IQML, the RCD-Goma has
probed north of Kenabayunga, about 50 kilometres
from the border between the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Uganda, most likely in the context of a
standing aspiration to see Kenabayunga as part of
RCD-Goma territory. An attack on the RCD-K/ML -
with its implications in Uganda's eyes for RCD-Goma
and a Rwandan presence close to Uganda's border with
Ituri - or conflict arising from the increasing tensions
between forces of the UPC and of the Uganda People's
Defence Forces (UPDF) in Ituri itself, could trigger a
UPDF military response.

I turn now to the political aspects of the situation
in the north-east. It should be emphasized that the
situation in that part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is now - even more so - one of growing
concern. The importance of a political solution to
underpin any military disengagement and ceasefire is
key. MONUC has been working hard in the past weeks
to defuse tensions and to recommend peace-building
mechanisms. The Special Representative has met with
President Museveni in Kampala, with Foreign Minister
Miranda in Rwanda and with Special Envoy
Mazimhaka in Kigali. The Force Commander is now in
Bunia, urging restraint in what has evolved into not
only a dangerous situation for Ituri-based groups, but
also what may prove to be a new possible flashpoint
between Uganda and Rwanda. In that context,
President Museveni told the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Kampala that he will not
tolerate the intransigence of the UPC.

While MONUC has continued to meet political
players in Bunia to organize a local-level ceasefire
leading up to a convening of the Ituri Pacification
Committee (IPC), as stipulated in the Luanda
Agreement, President Dos Santos of Angola sent his
Special Envoy to Dar es Salaam on 9 February for a
two-day meeting with Presidents Kabila and Museveni.
UPC leader Lubanga also travelled to Dar es Salaam
and met separately with President Museveni.

At the meeting between Presidents Kabila and
Museveni, the Foreign Ministers of Uganda and of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo signed an
amendment to the Luanda accord allowing for a new
timetable for the work of the envisaged Ituri
Pacification Committee. Under the new timetable, the
preparatory committee for the IPC - composed of two
representatives each from the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Government of
Uganda and MONUC, and four representatives from
the parties represented on the ground in Ituri - is
expected to commence its work on 17 February and to
conclude it by 20 March. That will be followed or
accompanied by the total withdrawal of Ugandan
troops from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
is expected that a ministerial-level meeting will be held
in Luanda on 14 February to set up the modalities of
implementation of the Ituri Pacification Committee.
MONUC is continuing its efforts to bring together a
wide cross-section of local parties in Ituri to support
the process.

I shall now touch briefly on the human rights
situation, which the High Commissioner for Human
Rights will describe in more detail. Council members
will recall that preliminary findings of the MONUC
multidisciplinary team, which was sent to the Beni area
to investigate allegations that serious human rights
violations had occurred in Mambasa town, were
presented to them during my briefing on 15 January.
The team worked closely with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in facilitating and
aiding the latter's investigation into the events that had
taken place during the MLC-RCD-N offensive in the
north-east. More details have subsequently been shared
with the Office of the High Commissioner for inclusion
in the High Commissioner's report.

Looking ahead, let me conclude my briefing with
some thoughts for the Council's deliberations on
MONUC's future role in the area of human rights,
especially in the light of the all-inclusive agreement of
16 to 17 December. In that context, we recognize the
leading role played by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we wish to support his
efforts as closely and with as much vigour as possible.
Ultimately, if there is no end to the present culture of
impunity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
progress we seek on the political front may be hard to
achieve. The Council may wish to consider how to
ensure that more attention be paid to human rights in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Department for Peacekeeping Operations and
MONUC, which has a human rights component, will,
in coordination with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, strive towards that
end.

