The President (spoke in Chinese): Pursuant to
the invitation extended at the 5988th meeting, I invite
the representative of Guinea-Bissau to take a seat at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/628, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council recalls its previous
statements on Guinea-Bissau and notes the latest
report of the Secretary-General on developments
in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) (8/2008/628). The
Council reaffirms its support for the continuing
efforts to consolidate peace in that country.

"The Security Council welcomes the
commitment of the Government of Guinea-Bissau
to hold legislative elections on 16 November
2008, as well as the technical and financial
support provided by the international community
towards the elections, including by Angola,
Brazil, Portugal, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the European
Union, the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund
and the United Nations Development Programme.
2
It calls on donors to continue to provide financial
resources to support the electoral process.

"The Security Council calls on the
Government and all actors, including political
parties, the security forces and civil society, to
ensure an environment conducive to transparent,
free and fair elections, and to respect the results
of the polls.

"The Security Council notes with
satisfaction the adoption of the Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau
by the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission on 1 October 2008,
and notes the importance of rapid and effective
implementation of quick-impact projects financed
by the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund. The
Council looks forward to the establishment of the
monitoring and tracking mechanism of the
Strategic Framework.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of security sector reform in Guinea-
Bissau, encourages the Government to sustain its
efforts in implementing the national security
sector reform programme, and underscores the
need for the international community to provide
further coordinated assistance for its
implementation.

"The Security Council remains seriously
concerned by the continued growth in drug
trafficking as well as organized crime, which
threatens peace and security in Guinea-Bissau
and in the subregion. The Council underlines the
responsibility that the Government of Guinea-
Bissau has for tackling this issue and calls upon
the international community to cooperate actively
with Guinea-Bissau in this regard, particularly in
providing continued support for building the
capacity of national law enforcement and judicial
authorities. The Council requests that the
Secretary-General provide in his next report
further details of what measures are required to
deal with these challenges.

"The Security Council welcomes the
initiative of ECOWAS to convene a regional
conference on combating drug trafficking on 28-
29 October 2008 in Praia (Cape Verde), and looks
forward to the resulting regional plan of action.
08-5502]

"The Security Council expresses its concern
about the consequences of rising food and fuel
prices and welcomes the World Bank's support to
address this crisis. The Council encourages the
Government of Guinea-Bissau to continue its
dialogue and cooperation with the international
financial institutions. The Council is also
concerned about the cholera epidemic and calls
on the Government of Guinea-Bissau and its
partners to continue and strengthen the efforts to
secure its eradication.

"The Security Council recognizes and
commends the important role played by the
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
staff of UNOGBIS, as well as by the United
08-55021
Nations country team, towards helping
consolidate peace, democracy, the rule of law and
development, and expresses its appreciation for
their activities. The Council looks forward to
receiving recommendations from the Secretary
General on how the United Nations presence in
Guinea-Bissau should be reconfigured to support
peacebuilding more effectively."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/37.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.10 pm.

