Mr. Abani (Niger) (spoke in French): I would
like in taking the floor to convey to you the
congratulations of the delegation of Niger on the work
that has been so ably accomplished under the Ghanaian
presidency of this body, work that I am sure will
ultimately lead us to concrete results at a time when
several equally crucial challenges face us, challenges
which it is your daunting but very inspiring task,
Mr. President, to manage throughout this month of
August.

I should also like to say, Mr. President, that the
delegation of Niger is pleased about the theme that you
chose for this open debate and for good reason. Peace
consolidation is indeed a challenge to our subregion
because our capacity to consolidate peace in our
subregion will determine the fate of all of our
initiatives. The regional economic programme, where
we enjoy a partnership with institutions and friendly
countries, can only be successful if we create an
environment where peace, security, good governance,
human rights, combating corruption, protecting the
environment, education and health are solidly
established.

The question of peace and security in West Africa
was soon seen as being one of the major problems
facing the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), which immediately proceeded to
strengthen its legal arsenal by adopting instruments
that would help to resolve those problems.

Today, just looking at West Africa alone, we note
a significant improvement in the peace and security
situation in the subregion. Liberia has just achieved an
outstanding success with its presidential elections, with
the crucial assumption of power by the first woman at
the head of an African State. Sierra Leone and Guinea-
Bissau are now gradually building a newly refound
peace, and their situation deserves more than ever to
benefit from the support of the international
community, in particular, that of the new Peacebuilding
Commission, in their efforts to build stable nations
with a focus on national rebuilding. Cote d'Ivoire,
likewise, enjoys the support and assistance of the
international community, and it deserves the continued
unwavering support of the international community for
the efforts it is making.

I should also say, Mr. President, that peace is not
merely the absence of conflict, nor is the absence of
conflict synonymous with peace. Indeed, situations
such as food insecurity and endemic poverty in some
of the countries of the West African subregion often
lead to the displacement of persons and to irredentist
movements, and can thus threaten peace, just as the
burden of debt and institutional deficiencies can also
constitute similar dangers to peace and jeopardize the
development of the West African subregion.

As I said before, Mr. President, your choice of
this theme was, for us, a very wise one, because here in
the United Nations these same concerns are still with
us, as shown in the fact that the World Summit
Outcome called upon all of us to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission, a body which, unlike the
plenary summit recommendations, enjoyed the active
support of a rather broad consensus, which meant that
it could be established in a relatively short period of
time.

Now that we have this mechanism, which should
help us to consolidate peace by assisting countries that
are emerging from conflict, it is essential that the new
institution fully play its role. It is also essential that we
think about how to make that body as effective as
possible.

In that regard, it is essential that the countries
concerned first proceed to build up the capacity of their
national institutions. Here, one of the problems facing
West African countries is the absence of - or
insufficient access to - justice, because judges are
overburdened. This results in delays in the
administration of justice. Similarly, when it comes to
controlling and punishing criminal activities,
deficiencies are resulting in breaches of the peace and
a breakdown of security in our countries.

The circulation of small arms and light weapons
has led to the emergence of warlords, who have taken
advantage of institutional weaknesses within States to
establish their rule, which is based on chaos and
desolation.

My delegation once again congratulates the heads
of State of the subregion, who have transformed their
Moratorium into a legally binding Convention on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and Other Related Materials. The national control
commissions responsible for the collection of small
arms and light weapons which have been set up in most
ECOWAS countries should be congratulated, because
they have spearheaded the work that has led to the
major normative progress that has been made in West
African countries aimed at combating the illicit traffic
in small arms.

My delegation also believes that the ECOWAS
Protocol on Democracy and Good Governance is an
irreplaceable instrument that should be welcomed,
since it has facilitated increased mobilization by
countries of the subregion in situations where peace is
threatened, particularly during unconstitutional
changes of power. That ambitious Protocol on Good
Governance provides for concrete actions, not least
against countries that are conspicuously lacking when
it comes to good governance. It is an instrument that
should be kept strong in the interests of peace
consolidation in West Africa. That instrument, which,
when it was adopted, was considered revolutionary, is
today a tool that should be promoted and disseminated,
because it has deterrent potential when it comes to
preserving good governance.

Another important mechanism that West Africa
must make its own in the interests of peace
consolidation is the African Peer Review Mechanism,
which was initiated within the framework of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development. That innovative
mechanism is a kind of reward for good governance
and peace at the regional and international levels, and
its impact can only strengthen African Governments
and their peoples in their nation-building efforts,
which, as we know, can be fruitful only in a climate of
peace and security.

Accordingly, the countries of the West African
subregion are, in the main, participating in economic
reform programmes in the context of bilateral and
multilateral partnerships. While we appreciate the
crucial contribution of those partners, in terms of both
support for the economy and multifaceted efforts to
combat poverty, such partnerships must give top
priority to national ownership of policies and
programmes by the countries concerned. It is also true
that the search for effective partnerships - when these
have a strictly economic orientation - could upset the
fragile balance of peace and security, particularly in the
poorest countries. For example, we know that social
unrest can be caused by a sudden sharp increase in
certain taxes or in the price of essential goods. While
that might seem normal in some situations, in other
cases it could jeopardize peace and security.

My point is that, in countries where everything is
fragile, peace too is inevitably precarious, and that the
particular situation of each area must be taken into
account. Countries emerging from conflict should
therefore be given the special attention that they
deserve within the Peacebuilding Commission.

In this regard, the approach taken by the
Commission - to consider all the aspects of the work
that needs to be done to help countries to consolidate
peace by providing for the participation of financial
institutions - is extremely important. The
Commission must, however, fully implement the
existing cooperation frameworks between West Africa
and the African Union on the one hand, and West
Africa and the United Nations on the other. That global
partnership for peace is already quite prominent in the
fundamental ECOWAS texts, and, as has been rightly
noted by the United Nations, which provides for active
involvement by the regional economic communities in
peace consolidation, that should be emphasized and
further refined.

Those are my delegation's comments on this
extremely important topic that you, Sir, wisely chose
for discussion in this body. I would like to conclude by
reiterating my delegation's support for the draft
presidential statement that you have prepared.

