The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo for
their presence and their statements. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
welcome the work that he and the staff of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo are
carrying out in Kosovo.

I will highlight three points.

First, a special effort should be made to
strengthen institutions and the fight against corruption
and organized crime. As recalled by Mr. Zannier,
Kosovo has a new Government that must face these
challenges, and we must help them. That is why France
is working alongside Kosovo and the other States of
the region to bring them closer to European standards,
particularly in the area of the rule of law. We express
our full support for the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), which is doing
outstanding work.

Secondly, dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo,
under the auspices of the European Union, is of crucial
importance. Several meetings have already been held
and concrete subjects have been discussed. We hope
that those discussions, aside from their potential
benefits for the population's daily life, will build
confidence between the parties. It is up to the two
States to show a spirit of compromise and creativity.
The United Nations is informed on a regular basis and
will be invited to participate when necessary.

Lastly, reconciliation and justice go hand in hand.
That is the logic of the European project. In that light,
we take very seriously the allegations contained in the
report of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe, submitted in late 2010. They should be the
subject of a methodical and dispassionate investigation.
EULEX opened a preliminary investigation at the end
of January to shed some light on the allegations. The
investigating team held several meetings outside of
Kosovo, in Albania and in Serbia. The Albanian
authorities committed to providing their cooperation.
EULEX has an operational team that is dedicated to
witness protection, respects European standards and
may be reinforced. An international, impartial
investigation is thus under way. We call on all States
concerned to cooperate with EULEX. France will
continue to support the process of rapprochement for
Kosovo and entire Western Balkans with Europe.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Jeremic' for a further
statement.

