Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me first to commend
Ms. Amos, Mr. Guterres and Mr. Simonovic' for their
relentless efforts to help alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people and to ensure respect for their basic
rights. I would also like to thank them for their briefings,
which only confirm how appalling the humanitarian
situation has become and how urgent remains the need
for the Council to act.

It is indeed tragic that, since the beginning of the
Syrian conflict, more than 100,000 people have died
and many more have been wounded. Almost 4 million
have been displaced within Syria and another 2 million
have fled, seeking refuge in neighbouring countries,
including my own, Lebanon. But it is even more tragic
that the Security Council, the organ entrusted by the
Charter of the United Nations with the maintenance of
peace and security, has so far failed to put an end to
the conflict, while every day brings more victims and
greater destruction.

Time and again we and others have warned against
the potential spillover of the Syrian conflict into
neighbouring countries. With the failure to end the
conflict, the potential dangers are now unfortunately
becoming realities. The increasing cross-border fire and
incursions from Syria into Lebanon are threatening my
country's security and stability. We strongly condemn
all such acts, whoever their perpetrators may be and
whatever their alleged reasons. We appreciate the fact
that the presidential statement issued by the Council on
11 July

"echoes President Michel Sleiman's protest, in his
letter of 18 June 2013, at such repeated shelling
from the conflicting parties, including the Syrian
Arab Armed Forces and Syrian armed opposition
groups, that violates Lebanon's sovereignty and
territorial integrity." (S/PRST/2013/9)

In that context, let me reiterate that my Government
remains fully committed to its policy of dissociation
from the Syrian conflict and to the terms of the Baabda
Declaration of 12 June 2012.

Another dramatic impact of the Syrian conflict is
the massive influx into Lebanon of refugees fleeing
violence in Syria. According to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
latest statistics indicate that there are now 607,908
refugees, as compared to 129,106 at the end of 2012 and
28,477 in mid-July 2012. In other words, the number of
refugees has increased by more than 460 per cent since
the beginning of this year, and by more than 20-fold in
a year. In reality, the numbers are much greater. The
Lebanese General Security Directorate puts the number
of Syrians in Lebanon at 1.2 million. The discrepancy
between the figures is due to the fact that many Syrians
have not felt the need to register as refugees, or are
unwilling or afraid to do so for political or sectarian
reasons; on top of that are illegal entrants and the
200,000 to 300,000 Syrian workers traditionally present
in Lebanon, along with the family members who have
joined them since the situation began worsening in
Syria. In addition, there are about 40,000 Lebanese
returnees and 63,000 Palestinian refugees who have
fled Syria since the crisis began.

Syrian refugees are now to be found in more than
1,400 locations in Lebanon, and their numbers exceed
those of local inhabitants in 30 per cent of those places.
It is also noteworthy that approximately 77 per cent of
those refugees are women and children, and that 66 per
cent are in northern Lebanon and the Bekaa Valley,
which are the regions closest to the Syrian border and
also happen to be the poorest areas of my country.
Amid the continued violence in Syria, the number of
refugees and other persons displaced to Lebanon is
projected to reach 1,229,000 by the end of 2013 - the
equivalent of more than a fourth of Lebanon's own
population - putting significant pressure on local
communities. Madam President, it is as if your country,
the United States of America, were to have an influx
of 75 million refugees. which is more than twice the
population of Canada. Can you imagine the impact of
an influx of such magnitude on your own country?

In its spring 2013 Lebanon Economic Monitor, the
World Bank noted that the Syrian conflict

"is severely and negatively impacting the Lebanese
economy. The largest impact arises through the
insecurity and uncertainty spillovers and touches
at the heart of Lebanon's societal fabric."

In fact, in 2012 consumer confidence reached a new
low, plunging by 36.8 percent as compared to 2011. As
security incidents have continued to increase in 2013,
we expect a further drop in consumer confidence,
leading to slowed economic activity. Faced with
uncertainty, private investment has also declined.
Inflationary pressures are mounting. Trade activities
have been widely affected by the Syrian crisis, since
traditional land transit routes through Syria have been
severely disrupted, when not closed altogether, and
insurance and freight costs have risen significantly.
For example, between January and April of this
year, cumulative exports through Syria dropped by
20 per cent. The tourism sector witnessed double-digit
declines during 2011 and 2012, and the Economic and
Social Commission for Western Asia predicts an even
larger decline in 2013, by around 25 per cent. Since
tourism represents between 10 and 12 per cent of our
gross domestic product (GDP), the impact of such a
decline could lead to a 2.5 per cent drop in GDP from
tourism alone.

The Syrian refugee crisis also has broader
implications for stability in Lebanon, and it has put
significant pressure on local resources, leading to
increases in security threats, the crime rate, social
tensions and labour competition, since approximately
1.4 million Lebanese citizens are thought to be affected
by the displacements from Syria. Beyond the fiscal
cost, the influx of refugees has also strained public
services in areas such as health and education.

The pressures and threats on Lebanon are mounting
and the escalating needs of the Syrian refugees have
clearly outstripped my country's capacity. Yet, well
aware of its humanitarian responsibilities and legal
obligations, and in view of the historical and brotherly
ties between the Lebanese and Syrian peoples, Lebanon
reiterates before the Council today that it will not close
its borders to those fleeing the horrors of violence and
destruction. It will not extradite refugees who have
sought safety on its territory. It will not stop delivering
basic humanitarian assistance to any refugee as long
as the means are available. However, Lebanon also
believes that it is its right to ask every member of the
international community to share with it the burdens of
the Syrian refugee crisis, whether in terms of numbers
or assistance - especially considering that Lebanon
is the smallest of the host countries with the largest
number of refugees, both in absolute terms and relative
to its own population.

Clearly, Lebanon cannot cope by itself with the
immense tasks that lie ahead, as the number of refugees
spirals. For a comprehensive and coordinated response
to the current crisis, $1.7 billion is needed to fund
Lebanon's part ofthe fifth Syria regional response plan,
which covers the period from 1 January to 31 December
2013. Direct support to the Government of Lebanon
for strengthening its national capacities and essential
public services is crucial. No less vital is the need to
secure direct funds to meet the needs of Lebanese host
communities in assisting refugees.

The Kuwait conference was a successful start and
pledges have been generous, but we all need to ensure
that pledges do not remain mere pledges and that all
donors make good on them. Undoubtedly, an increase
in the humanitarian assistance to the people of Syria is
a matter of paramount urgency.

Let me conclude, however, by quoting from
Secretary- General Ban Ki-moon's appeal for the people
of Syria, issued on the occasion of the beginning of this
holy month of Ramadan:

"[N]o matter how effective our humanitarian
response, it will not end the violence. The solution
to the problems of Syria does not lie there; what is
needed is a peaceful Syrian-led political solution
for a democratic future in which all Syrians live in
security, equality and dignity" (SG/SM/I5162).

I sincerely hope that the Council will live up to its
responsibilities in helping to make such a solution
possible.

