Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me first to convey the satisfaction of the
Spanish delegation at seeing you, Sir, preside over the
Security Council for the month of February. We are
aware of the symbolism of the Council's being presided
over at this meeting by an African country, a neighbour
of Angola. I am certain that your proven diplomatic
qualities will ensure the success and wise conduct of the
Council's work.

We also wish to congratulate Ambassador Cardenas,
and the Argentine delegation as a whole, for the very
competent and effective manner in which he led the
Council in January.

Spain, which during its recent membership of the
Security Council worked with other members to make a
positive contribution to the Angolan peace process, wishes
on this occasion to join the other States Members of the
United Nations in welcoming the establishment of a new
peace-keeping operation, expanding the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. II) to become
UNAVEM. III. This marks a new phase of the United
Nations presence in Angola, one which we hope will be
the final stage of a long peace process. This decisive
stage has been reached on the basis of the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol on 20 November 1994 between the
Government of Angola and UNITA, which was
accomplished with the assistance of the United Nations
through the efforts of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Blondin Beye, the observer States and
States of the region.

My delegation welcomes the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola, Mr. Venancio de Moura, whose
presence underscores the firm political will of his
Government to comply with the commitments undertaken
in the "Acordos de Paz" and the Lusaka Protocol and to
ensure that these commitments are strengthened through
a significant United Nations presence in the country
throughout the period of implementation.

The decision of the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity to send a ministerial
delegation to New York to attend this debate
demonstrates the keen interest of the African continent in
ensuring that the national reconciliation efforts of the
Angolan parties are accompanied by a firm commitment
by the international community. We are pleased to note
the significant attendance by Foreign Ministers and the
depth of today's debate, which demonstrate great support

 

for the establishment of UNAVEM. III and its rapid
deployment.
Spain, which has close ties of friendship and
cooperation with Angola, joins in the expression of good
wishes and active support, and is confident that the draft
resolution before the Council will be adopted unanimously.

We wish to emphasize the importance of the rapid
deployment of UNAVEM. III in order to consolidate the
progress achieved in the peace process and to implement
the Lusaka Protocol. We understand that the provisions of
the draft resolution relating to the effective deployment of
the components of UNAVEM. III are intended to ensure
that this will occur in the best possible conditions and with
the firm support and cooperation of the parties. We trust
that the Secretary-General will soon be able to inform the
Council that these requirements have been met.

We are all aware that the decision which the Security
Council intends to adopt today marks the beginning of the
final stage of the peace process in Angola, which may yet
encounter certain difficulties. We are convinced that the
commitment of the parties and the support of the
international community will make it possible to overcome
any obstacles, which we hope will prove to be minor, as
reconciliation allows any lingering suspicions or mistrust to
be set aside. A meeting between the President of Angola
and the President of UNITA would represent a very
important step in the right direction.

The series of important gestures made by both the
Government and UNITA to date - among which we stress
the smooth establishment of the Joint Commission in
Luanda, the two meetings held by the Chiefs of Staff of the
Angolan Armed Forces and UNITA, and the agreements
reached between them - are encouraging signs which
should help us to appreciate the will of the parties to fulfil
their respective commitments to the cause of peace, so
widely desired.

As the Spanish poet Antonio Machado said: "In
walking, we have no path before us; it is in walking that
the trail is blazed". We believe that the parties resumed
their journey along that path by signing the Lusaka
Protocol. The international community is at their side and
encourages them through the draft resolution which the
Council is about to adopt.

It is Spain's earnest hope that the people of Angola,
who have endured the devastating consequences of a bloody
civil war, will be able to begin to build on the foundations
of reconciliation and reconstruction of the country, with
the assistance of the international community and the
United Nations. Angola is thus already participating in the
mainstream of democratization and progress which
pervades all of southern Africa and leads it towards a
better future.

