Mr. O'Brien: The members of the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2139 (2014) in February
2014 in recognition of the magnitude of the human
cost this conflict carried. The purpose and intent of
the resolution was clear and unambiguous - to seek
protection for civilians caught in the midst ofthe fighting,
to ensure that civilian facilities and infrastructure
were not attacked, and to compel the parties to enable
unimpeded access for humanitarians trying to reach
people in desperate need of assistance. The 20 reports
of the Secretary-General submitted to the Council since
the adoption of the resolution highlight the parties'
contempt - month after month - for the Council's
resolution and their minimum legal obligations under
international law.

The failure of the parties to uphold the basic tenets
of international humanitarian and human rights law
has propelled the Syrian people to levels of tragedy
and despair that could barely have been imagined five
years ago. By any measure, the situation in Syria has
worsened since the beginning of the year. We now
estimate that some 13.5 million people in Syria are
in need of some form of protection and humanitarian
assistance throughout the country - an increase of
some 1.2 million injust 10 months. More than 6 million
of those in need are children.

This is one of the largest displacement crises of
modern times. Fighting and violence have forced over
half of the people in Syria from their homes in a period
of just over four years, many of them multiple times.
There are now some 6.5 million people displaced
inside Syria. In addition, nearly 4.2 million have fled
the country, with neighbouring countries in the region
bearing an enormous burden. An increasing number
of Syrians fleeing the war and violence are willing to
risk everything aboard unseaworthy boats and dinghies
to reach Europe; of the 680,000 arrivals by sea in the
Mediterranean in 2015, over 50 per cent are Syrian.
They have a right to seek asylum without any form of
discrimination.

The rising levels of fighting and violence over the
past few weeks have had an enormous humanitarian
impact, resulting in large-scale death, injury and
displacement to civilians, particularly in northern
Syria. Indiscriminate attacks on civilian-populated
areas continue with impunity. In Aleppo city, for
example, pro-Government forces and non-State armed
opposition groups have continued mutual shelling inside
civilian-populated areas, with hundreds killed and
injured in September. Meanwhile, clashes erupted in
the city in late September between the Kurdish People's
Protection Units, the Al-Nusra Front and non-State
armed opposition groups, resulting in multiple civilian
deaths and temporarily impacting humanitarian access
to eastern Aleppo city. On 23 October, the main access
route from Hama to western Aleppo city was cut due to
an offensive by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). We are very concerned at this development,
which places at further risk some 700,000 people living
in the western part of the city.

The latest estimates indicate that over 120,000
people have been displaced in northern Syria since
early October as a result of aerial bombardment and
ground offensives among the parties. This includes
some 45,000 people displaced from the southern
outskirts of Aleppo city to relatively safer areas to the
west and south following a Government forces offensive
over the past week. Meanwhile, approximately 80,000
people have been displaced from northern Hama and
southern Idlib governorates to relatively safer parts of
these governorates since early October following an
offensive by Government forces. Elsewhere in Syria,
thousands more have been displaced in Horns, rural
Damascus and Deir ez-Zor governorates over the past
few weeks.

The pace of displacement in Syria remains
relentless. Well over 1.2 million people have been
displaced so far this year, many for the second or third
time. Further displacement is expected to continue at a
similar rate unless there is an end to the fighting.

Attacks on health facilities and health workers also
remain relentless. The United Nations and partners
have recorded attacks on five hospitals in Hama, Idlib
and Aleppo governorates since the launch of recent
offensives, leading to a number of casualties and
their immediate closure due to severe infrastructural
damage, exacerbating an already dire situation for
civilians living in these areas. Since the start of the
conflict, Physicians for Human Rights has documented
attacks on at least 313 medical facilities and the deaths
of 679 medical workers. Such attacks should cease
immediately; parties to the conflict must ensure respect
for and the protection of health facilities, workers and
patients under international humanitarian law.

While we know where those considered to be most
vulnerable are located, humanitarian organizations
are still not able to get sustained, unimpeded access to
millions of affected people. Latest estimates indicate
that some 4.5 million people are living in hard-to-reach
areas. Despite our best efforts, we have been able to
reach only a small fraction of people living in these
areas in 2015 as a result of active conflict, shifting front-
lines, bureaucratic hurdles and conditions imposed by
the parties.

The parties to the conflict continue to use siege as
a weapon of war in Syria. Following a comprehensive
review, we now estimate that some 393,700 people are
living under siege in Syria, including some 200,000
people in Deir ez-Zor city, besieged by ISIL; some
181,200 people besieged by the Syrian Government
in various locations in eastern Ghutah, as well as
Darayya and Zabadani in rural Damascus; and some
12,500 people besieged by non-State armed opposition
groups and the Al-Nusrah Front in Foah and Kefraya
in Idlib. The 26,500 people in Nubul and Zahra, in
Aleppo governorate, are no longer considered besieged
following consistent and credible reports that access to
and from the enclave for people and commercial goods
have significantly improved over the past three months,
although access remains challenging and protection
concerns acute.

Access to besieged areas remains pitiful and
wholly insufficient. So far in 2015, the United Nations
has been able to reach only 3.6 per cent of people with
health assistance and only 0.5 per cent of people with
food per month in besieged areas.

Last week, humanitarian operations began under
the framework of the ceasefire agreement covering
Zabadani, Madaya, Foah, Kefraya and neighbouring
towns, reached in Istanbul on 22 September with the
facilitation of the Office of the United Nations Special
Envoy for Syria. On 18 October, 31 trucks delivered
medical and humanitarian supplies simultaneously to
29,500 people in Madaya, as well as the besieged areas
of Zabadani, Foah and Kefraya. A joint convoy of the
United Nations, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC)
and the International Committee of the Red Cross
accompanied 23 SARC trucks to rural Damascus,
where two trucks crossed into Zabadani and 21 more
entered Madaya and Buqayn, hosting many people
displaced from Zabadani. Eight trucks delivered
a proportional amount of health, food, nutrition,
non-food items and water, sanitation and hygiene
supplies to Foah and Kefraya via a United Nations
cross-border operation through Turkey's Bab al-Hawa
border point, with the support of the Idlib branch of
the SARC. The United Nations and its partners stand
ready to immediately implement the remaining points
covered under the agreement, including the delivery of
additional humanitarian assistance and the evacuation
of the critically wounded. This complex mission shows
once again that when there is the political will, there is
a way to improve the situation for civilians trapped in
conflict in Syria.

Even as the political and military situation evolves,
the immediate priority for humanitarian organizations
remains reaching all people in need wherever they may
be found in Syria. To do this, we must have sustained,
predictable and unimpeded access throughout the
country. While I welcome the continued progress
made on visas for United Nations staff members by
the Syrian authorities, this must be followed by urgent
and significant progress in other areas. So far this year,
only 23 of the 85 convoy requests made by the United
Nations have been approved in principle by the Syrian
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, and fewer than half of
those approved have been able to actually proceed due
to a combination of lack of final security clearances

from Syrian authorities, lack of safe passage from
non-State armed opposition groups, and insecurity.

I once again call upon the Syrian authorities to
urgently approve the 46 currently pending inter-agency
convoy requests and to allow convoys previously
agreed in principle, which are awaiting their clearance,
to proceed. I also call on Non-State Armed Groups, as
well as listed terrorist groups, to allow the deliveries
they are preventing. We would be able to reach an
additional 1.5 million people in dire need of assistance
in hard-to-reach and besieged locations through these
inter-agency convoys if approvals and safe passage
were granted.

We all need to guard against becoming numb to the
impact of this conflict, given the vast numbers and the
sense of political impasse. Yet recent developments in
Syria are a telling reminder that it is ordinary women,
men and children who continue to bear the brunt of this
conflict. Living conditions in all areas of the country
continue to deteriorate sharply. Entire neighbourhoods
and communities are at risk from explosive weapons;
over 11 million people are in need of health assistance,
including 25,000 trauma cases per month; nearly
9 million are unable to meet their basic food needs;
70 per cent of the population are without regular access
to safe drinking water amid continuing water cuts;
schools and hospitals are attacked; and poverty and
unemployment are rampant amid rising prices. Winter
is fast approaching and is likely to further exacerbate
the situation for many families.

The United Nations and its humanitarian partners
will continue to respond to the growing needs to the
best of their ability. While we are reaching millions
of people per month, we continue to try and find ways
to scale up life-saving assistance throughout Syria
in an extremely complex and insecure environment.
Humanitarian workers are putting their lives on the line,
but remain undeterred. I strongly encourage donors to
maintain, and where possible increase their generous
support for life-saving humanitarian operations, as
well as recovery and resilience activities, in 2016.

As I have said to the Council before, the crisis
urgently requires a political solution that addresses the
root causes of the conflict and meets the aspirations of
the Syrian people, who have suffered for far too long.
In the absence of such a solution, I sincerely hope that
the Council and relevant Member States will continue
to use their influence with the parties to the conflict in
order to remind them to uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law, to
distinguish between civilians and combatants, and to
take all feasible precautions to avoid further civilian
injury and loss of life.

