Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, we would like
to say that we endorse the statements made by the
representatives of Egypt and Senegal, and that we will
uphold African solidarity in this matter. Angola will
therefore abstain in the voting on the draft resolution on
the appointment of the Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, for the
following reasons.

We acknowledge that Prosecutor Serge Brammertz
is a professional with the highest level of competence
and experience in the conduct of investigations and
the prosecution of criminal cases. However, we also
acknowledge that Prosecutor Hassan Jallow is an
eminent jurist with the highest level of competence and
experience. He has performed remarkably as Prosecutor
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals and should be subject to the same treatment
as that of his colleagues President Judge Theodor
Meron and Registrar John Hocking, whose terms were
renewed.

We noted with concern that the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals will be
exclusively led by principals from Western Europe and
other countries. We believe that the critical principle
of equitable geographical representation was not taken
into account, since the term of the only African principal
of the Mechanism was not renewed. Furthermore,
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals is an institution for both the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
with two branches, one in Africa and the other in
Europe. The fact that there are no more fugitives under
the ICTR jurisdiction and that the Tribunal was closed
should not prevent the appointment of a principal
from the ICTR. Taking into consideration that the
essence of the Residual Mechanism is to bring together
the experience of both international tribunals, the
Mechanism should have a more balanced composition
and not be restricted to the principals from the ICTY.

