Ms. Anderson (Ireland): I should like to express
our thanks to Austria for organizing this timely debate.
Ireland associates itself with the intervention made
earlier by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.

It is customary on these anniversary occasions to
note the progress made, as well as to map the distance

to be travelled. We would not wish to devalue the
efforts or achievements made over the past 10 years.
There have indeed been advances. For example, one
area in which my country has been particularly active
is in the adoption of the Convention on Cluster
Munitions. But the Secretary-General, in his report of
last May, tells it as it is:

"[F]or all the reports, resolutions and actions of
the last decade, the situation that confronts
civilians in current conflicts is depressingly
similar to that which prevailed in 1999."
(5/2009/277, para. 23)

The frustration of those at the coalface is clear. In
the Security Council's last debate on the issue, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Holmes
reminded us that lip service to the principles of
international law is no substitute for real action. The
New Horizon document acknowledges the significant
credibility challenge for United Nations peacekeeping
that is created by the mismatch between expectations
and capacity. Those same sentiments and frustrations
were echoed in the opening interventions this morning.
We are not short of high quality analysis. We need now
to move from analysis to action. Today, I would wish
to concentrate on four points, the first on enhancing
accountability.

The principles of enhancing compliance and
accountability are ones that we believe need to be
applied rigorously and consistently. We note what the
Secretary-General's report has to say in that regard,
both in general and in relation to the specific situations
he mentions: Sri Lanka, Gaza and Afghanistan. We
agree with his recommendations, including his stress
on the need for consistent condemnation of violations
of the law by all parties to conflict without exception.
All of us are challenged by that. In the week following
the General Assembly's debate on the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48), the challenge has been brought into
particularly sharp relief.

Issues of protection of civilians can typically
arise in a complex political context. We must be
mindful of the complexity of the context but, at the
same time, not be prepared to sacrifice or erode the
principles of protection and accountability. That entails
responsibilities both for those who frame resolutions
and those who vote on them. The temptation to distort
or to dilute the principles of protection must be
avoided. Nor can we succumb to selectivity. Our
concerns about specific situations gain legitimacy and
respect insofar as we are prepared to insist that the
same standards be applied universally.

Secondly, with regard to safeguarding
humanitarian access, such access is the lifeline linking
humanitarian actors to civilians in conflict. The
increase in attacks on humanitarian workers - with
the recent targeted attack on United Nations aid
workers in Kabul being a further grim example - is
putting that lifeline at risk. The statistics are shocking.
The incidence of kidnapping of humanitarian workers
has increased by 350 per cent in the past three years.
Last year marked the greatest number of humanitarian
workers affected by violence in 12 years.

We in Ireland have experienced at first hand the
vulnerability of our international humanitarian
workers. We were relieved by the recent release of
Sharon Commins, a young Irish aid worker who was
held captive with a Ugandan colleague in Darfur for
some months. Efforts continue to secure the release of
Father Michael Sinnott, on which we are working with
the Philippine authorities.

The increased targeting of humanitarian workers
is an affront to the United Nations most basic
principles. More must be done, both to highlight and
prioritize the issue and to strategize so as to arrest and
reverse the trend. There is clearly no simple way to
eliminate the threat. The approach will have to be
multi-pronged, and any proposed steps must respect the
need for humanitarian actors to maintain their
neutrality and independence.

Where United Nations peacekeepers are on the
ground, their role in protecting humanitarian workers
can be critical. The Secretary-General's report refers to
the role played by the European Union Force (EUFOR)
in Chad in preventing criminality against the
humanitarian community. Ireland provided the
leadership for EUFOR and we continue to have a
strong presence in the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad. As our personnel
on the ground in those operations are acutely aware, it
is only through the most thoroughly professional and
impartial approach that the peacekeeping force can win
the confidence of non-governmental organizations, and
thus their assent to having peacekeepers help to protect
them.

Thirdly, with regard to strengthening United
Nations peacekeeping, this issue has been addressed in
almost every intervention today. As speaker after
speaker has recognized, our task now is to bridge the
gap between aspiration and reality. If we needed a
further wake-up call, the joint study recently issued by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
provides it. The study's central finding is that the chain
of events to support the protection of civilians - from
the earliest planning to Security Council mandates to
the implementation of mandates in the field - is
broken.

Two of the key issues are clarity of mandate and
adequacy of resources. Mandates must be clear and
specific. Inevitably, field commanders will face
resource constraints and competing demands on the
resources available, and will need to use their judgment
on how best to deploy them to achieve maximum
civilian protection. But guidance is required. The
mandate of each peacekeeping operation should
elaborate, as fully as possible, who is to be protected
and what level of protection is to be provided. The
means to achieve that should be fully set out in the
operational plans and other directive material.

Peacekeeping missions seldom have sufficient
resources to accomplish the protection task as they
would wish. In almost all scenarios, but particularly
where there is a need to protect civilians over a large
area, air assets are critical. Their value is psychological
and pre-emptive, as well as reactive. Where civilians
are under threat, the belief that a force has the reach
and combat power to react swiftly and decisively will
be a considerable deterrent.

Fourthly and finally, with regard to the
responsibility to protect, Ireland has participated
actively in the evolution of the discussion on the
responsibility to protect. We view it as an extremely
important vehicle for advancing the work on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Resolution
63/308, adopted by the General Assembly in
September, was very welcome. However, like many
others, we would have preferred a text that more
clearly mapped out the future development of the
work. The reference to the responsibility to protect in
resolution 1894 (2009), adopted today, undoubtedly
will help to reinvigorate efforts.

The test of success for today's debate will be
whether it moves us beyond analysis and
consciousness-raising to more concrete outcomes. The
message from the coalface - that actions must match
words, that all of us must demonstrate a much greater
sense of urgency, and that Security Council members
must exercise the responsibilities that accompany the
privileges of membership - must be heeded.

