Mr. Atieh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Madam President, my delegation appreciates
your prompt response in convening this meeting of the
Security Council on an important and delicate issue
that has been on the Council's agenda for decades,
without any real enthusiasm ever having been shown to
resolve it.

The Security Council is meeting today as the
dangerous situation in the Middle East deteriorates
from bad to worse as a result of arrogant Israeli
practices that know no limits because of the lack of any
moral, humanitarian or international deterrence to its
practices, which constitute a real threat to international
peace and security.

Israel, which has never abided by internationally
binding resolutions, is trying to drag the whole region
into a cycle of violence by expanding the scope of its
aggression in the Middle East. The fact that Israeli
warplanes penetrated Syrian airspace is a blatant
violation of the sovereignty of an independent State
and an unjustified provocation to that State, as well as
a flagrant violation of international law. Moreover,
Israel's sweeping aggression against the Palestinian
Gaza Strip and West Bank is a war crime for which it
should be held to account, in conformity with
international law. Such acts of aggression represent an
unacceptable and unjustifiable provocation and direct
hostility for purposes and reasons that are well known.
They reflect Israel's internal failures and its efforts to
export its problems and to Shirk the prerequisites of a
just and comprehensive peace, in accordance with the
resolutions of the United Nations.
The events of the past few hours have shown that
Israel's intentions in withdrawing from the Gaza Strip
were never genuine or sincere. Israel has only been
waiting for an excuse to re-invade Gaza and to pursue
its aggressive policies against the Palestinian people.
The destruction of Palestinian infrastructure that
provides for the basic needs of the people of the Gaza
Strip is a violation of international humanitarian law,
and more specifically of the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Times
of War.

Israel's exacerbation of the situation throughout
the area is compounded by its attempts to provoke
Syria. Worse than its daily violation of international
law, international humanitarian law and United Nations
resolutions concerning the occupied Palestinian
territories, Israel has no qualms about levelling charges
and allegations against other parties as a smokescreen
for the war crimes it perpetrates every day against an
unarmed population.

Our past experience with the Security Council is
a cause of concern, given the Council's repeated failure
to assume its responsibilities in the maintenance of
international peace and security in the Middle East, a
very important and sensitive part of the world. The
question here is: Why does the situation in the Middle
East continue to deteriorate in a cycle of violence? The
answer is to be found in the ongoing Israeli occupation
and aggression, as well as in the Council's being
prevented from taking up its mandate and a lack of
earnest in the search for a just and comprehensive
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict.

It is our hope that the Security Council will today
be able to assume its responsibilities for the
humanitarian catastrophe being imposed on the
Palestinian people as a result of the destruction of their
infrastructure through the bombing of their water
supplies, electric power stations and bridges. The
international community expects the Security Council
to take a firm stance against the Israeli aggression
against the Palestinian people, in conformity with its
Charter mandate to maintain international peace and
security.

In his statement today, the Ambassador of the
United States attacked my country in a most
unacceptable manner, making baseless allegations and
presenting himself as a defender of Israel's aggression
against the Palestinian people. The representative of
the United States is the last person who can claim the
right to make such allegations, especially since the
policies of the United States, which are biased towards
Israel and distort the facts, support extremism and
terrorism throughout the world. The United States
provides cover for Israel in the Security Council as it
pursues its aggressive and destructive policies against
the Palestinian people. That will never serve the cause
of a just and comprehensive peace in the region. It will
lead only to further tension and the deterioration of the
situation there.

Moreover, the repeated allegations made by the
representative of Israel against Syria and others
concerning their purported sponsorship and support of
terrorism are highly ironic. He merely seeks to distract
us from the war crimes and terrorism perpetrated daily
by his own Government against the unarmed
Palestinian people. Israel's destructive military
operations of recent days represent yet further evidence
of the State terrorism it practices in the occupied Arab
territories. Israel must be held accountable, in
conformity with the provisions of international law.

Israel has displaced millions of Palestinians, who
are now refugees in many countries throughout the
world, including Syria, which has provided them with
that which Israel has denied them. Israel has denied
them their basic right to return to their homeland,
which it has turned into military encampments and
illegitimate settlements. It denies them even their right
of self-expression and their aspirations to an
independent, sovereign State with Jerusalem as its
capital.

