Mr. Munoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I thank Lord Ashdown, High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for his report on the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We appreciate his efforts. We
also welcome the briefing given by Judge Theodor
Meron.

Still fresh in our memory are the 1990s, when the
world witnessed in Bosnia and Herzegovina some of
the bloodiest episodes in recent history. We still vividly
recall the gross violations of the most fundamental
human rights that occurred in, inter alia, Srebrenica,
Zepa, Banja Luka and Sanski Most. The tragic outcome
that, as Lord Ashdown said, about 250,000 people were
killed or disappeared, and more than a million people
became displaced persons or refugees, speaks for itself.

The progress made in recent years following the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement, in
particular during the period in question, clearly
indicates that the terrible days of the 1990s are
receding into the past. We should like, inter alia, to
emphasize the efforts made to combat crime and
corruption directly by means of the establishment of
appropriate institutions; the process of restructuring the
court system at all levels; and the launching of expert
reform commissions covering indirect tax policy,
defence and intelligence.
The introduction of modern standards in public
administration is a prerequisite for good governance
and for transparency, and in that connection we wish to
acknowledge the efforts of the State-level Civil Service
Agency, which was created in May 2002.

Let me also mention the reforms made in the
fields of banking, statistics and land registry, which
contributed to the advances made by the so-called
Bulldozer Committee, as well as the entry into force of
the Law on Communications.

However, as was mentioned in Lord Ashdown's
briefing, attention should be devoted to the still-fragile
institutions and to the slow pace of and obstacles to
reform, the appointment of public administration
officials, and the restructuring of various public bodies.

The number of repatriated persons and the
implementation of the property law all are auspicious
signs. We agree, however, that, following the eventual
dismantling of the Reconstruction and Return Task
Force at the end of 2003, continued local and
international support will be required for the return of
the refugees.

A very important step forward has been taken in
combating the networks that provide funding and
support for key International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia indictees, including Radovan
Karadzic. We commend the fact that the Peace
Implementation Council has tasked the High
Representative with establishing a system for domestic
prosecution of war crimes.

In this connection, a Special Chamber in the State
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina will contribute to the
achievement of the general completion strategy
adopted by the Security Council for the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. This
important point is related, I believe, to what was very
clearly recalled by the Ambassador of Germany - the
fact that, in the process of ensuring that justice
prevails, the local dimension is vital, without prejudice
to the role of the special tribunals and of the
international community, working together with
national courts.

The strengthening of national judicial systems is
important not only in re-establishing the rule of law
and respect for law in general, but also to ensure the
success of the completion strategy of both tribunals.

We believe also that broader cooperation on the
part of all States and of regional and international
organizations is another prerequisite for the successful
achievement of the completion strategy, in particular as
relates to the prosecution of all accused persons,
including some who are still at large.

In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina, given its
long and rich history, had in the past to become a kind
of crossroads - a meeting ground for different worlds.
Today it is once again taking the path towards peaceful
coexistence. And, as in past years, I should like to
assure the Council that my country will continue to
cooperate to ensure that this can happen, as we did
until recently by contributing police officers to the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) and as we are doing today by contributing
Chilean army officers.

