I have the honour to deliver this joint statement on behalf of the two Association of South-East Asian Nations members of the Security Council, Viet Nam and Indonesia. We would like to thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his twenty- fourth report (S/2020/1052, annex) and his insightful briefing. Our two delegations commend the efforts made in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the past six months, including the preparations for the upcoming 2020 local elections, and the steps taken to respond to and recover from impacts of the coronavirus disease pandemic with support from the international community. With the approach of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the signing of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, sadly there are not enough positive developments on the ground. The objectives and conditions to build a resilient and united society for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and for the closure of the Office of the High Representative, have not been fully implemented. We note with concern the High Representative's report about the unproductive political climate in the country, the increase in economic dependence and the vulnerabilities of the population. In that regard, we would like to highlight three points. First, we support the approach to strengthen local ownership of the political process, economic development and regional cooperation, which truly serves the long-term interests of the country and its people. We support the work of the High Representative in that regard, and we call for continued international support to Bosnia and Herzegovina, including in terms of capacity-building and human capital development. Secondly, we call on all concerned parties to make more efforts to strengthen national unity for long-term stability and development. Both Viet Nam and Indonesia are multi-ethnic and multireligious countries. As such, we fully understand the value of national unity and harmony for the benefit of all our people. National unity can benefit fromtrust-building measures, national reconciliation, dialogue and the rule of law, all of which are aimed at the ultimate interests of the country and all its people. In turn, such unity can help to achieve the effective formulation and functioning of the Government at all levels and to address all the current challenges. Thirdly, we reiterate the importance of respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the implementation of the relevant treaties and Security Council resolutions. I would like to close by expressing Viet Nam and Indonesia's long-standing support for the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to find a lasting solution that can accommodate the needs of all stakeholders. We have confidence that the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities and people, together with the international community, will find the best solution for a stable and prosperous country.
