Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
presiding over the Security Council this month. I wish
you and the friendly delegation of Cote d'Ivoire all the
best. I would also like to thank you for giving us this
opportunity to address the Council.

I wish to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark
Lowcock for their valuable briefings and efforts. On
behalf of the Government and the people of Yemen, I
would like to express my thanks and appreciation to
the Government and the people of Sweden for hosting
the round of consultations on Yemen held from 6 to
13 December. I would also like to express my sincere
thanks and appreciation to Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his personal commitment to, and interest
in, supporting the efforts at bringing peace to Yemen, as
well as for attending the final consultations in Sweden.

We have come to this meeting today filled with
great hope and optimism thanks to what was achieved in
the consultations that concluded yesterday in Sweden,
which focused on confidence-building measures.
Although we had greater hopes to bring to an end to
everything causing the suffering of the Yemeni people,
we remain cautious due to our previous experiences,
especially as the Houthi militias have not only shown
a lack of commitment to previous agreements but have
in fact turned against them every time. We have signed
more than 75 agreements with those militias since the
start of their aggression, which has been sponsored by
Iran for four years. They did not implement their side
of the agreements.

We look forward to the United Nations shouldering
its responsibility for implementing the agreements.
What was recently agreed upon with the Houthis will
remain a dead letter until implemented on the ground.
That would then reflect their sincere intentions and pave
the way towards further positive steps on other matters.
In that regard, we highly appreciate the efforts made
by Special Envoy Griffiths and his team, as well as the
countries sponsoring the political process in Yemen,
particularly our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the State of Kuwait
and the Sultanate of Oman. Their efforts facilitated
the holding and success of that round of consultations,
as well as reaching an agreement to put an end to the
suffering of hostages, prisoners, detainees and those
who have been missing and forcefully disappeared or
abducted. The return of those people will ensure smiles
on the faces of their mothers, children and parents. In
addition, the efforts made have led to an agreement on
the withdrawal from the port city of Al-Hudaydah and
the declaration of understanding on Taiz.

The Government of Yemen has made many
concessions to end the suffering, which continues to
burden the living conscience of everyone. We have
said time and again that we stand ready to go all the
way to bring peace to Yemen, because we are the ones
most keen to end the suffering of our people. We will
seize any serious opportunity to bring about real,
just, comprehensive and sustainable peace, based on
the three terms of reference agreed upon, namely, the
Gulf Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).

The Government of Yemen reaffirms that it will
continue its sincere efforts to reach peaceful solutions
that put an end to the coup d'e'tat, restore the legitimate
State institutions and resume the political process from
where it was stopped before the coup. His Excellency
President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi of the Republic of
Yemen emphasized that the Yemeni Government is
ready to participate anywhere and anytime in any future
peace consultations, on the condition that the Houthi
militias actually implement what was in Sweden.

We had also hoped to reach agreement on the
remaining issues, such as taking confidence-building
measures concerning the opening of Sana'a airport,
ending the siege on the city of Taiz and reaching an
economic agreement. However, the intransigence of
the Houthis, backed by Iran, and their insistence on
continuing the suffering of the Yemeni people have
squandered our hope.

We recently heard members of the Security Council
and the international community in this Chamber
express their deep concern for the continued Iranian
support to the Houthi militias, including supplying
them with missiles and weapons, in clear violation of
international resolutions, especially resolutions 2216
(2015) and 2231 (2015). Iran continues to destabilize
the region through its Houthi proxies and Hizbullah
in Lebanon and other countries of the region. The
Iranian regime will not succeed with that policy, and
Yemenis will not accept such a policy of destabilizing
security and stability. Iran must end its malice and stop
interfering in the internal affairs of my country. The
international community must bring further pressure to
bear on the Iranian regime so as to alleviate the suffering
of the Iranian people and harness its resources for the
prosperity of its people, instead of leveraging support
for terrorist groups and its proxies in the region.

The Government of Yemen undertook a number
of measures to face the economic breakdown and
deterioration of its currency, as well as to restore the
Yemeni economy from the black market to the formal
banking system. It also undertook measures to manage
and regulate the demand on foreign currency. The most
important results from the package of decisions and
measures undertaken by the Government are as follows.

First, we succeeded in halting the economic
breakdown and bringing about relative stability to the
local currency, by promoting its value against foreign
currencies. The exchange rate of the Yemeni Rial
against the dollar moved from 840 rials to the dollar to
approximately 450 rials recently.

Second, we restored a large part of cash and
commercial transactions from the black market to
the formal banking sector, which is committed to
the international requirements and standards of
transparency and combating the financing of terrorism
and money laundering, especially after the Houthi
militias used such money during the previous period
in the black market in order to finance their activities
after they took control of the Central Bank in Sana'a
in 2015.

Third, we have provided financial and banking
services and the necessary foreign currency to import
basic foodstuffs to all Yemeni governorates at adequate
prices, which are lower than the prices on the black
market. That led to the availability of commodities
in all governorates at reduced prices by all traders, as
a result of the efforts of the legitimate Government
to promote food security and restore its normalcy
throughout the governorates.

Fourth, we have curbed the use of petroleum
products and derivatives to finance armed groups and
undertake money laundering, while reactivating the
monitoring and regulating mechanisms to help achieve
peace, enhance State institutions and promote our
national economy.

Fifth, we have restored and regularized the payment
of pensions in all governorates by the legitimate
Government, despite the fact that the coup militias have
confiscated the balances of different pension funds and
institutions from the Central Bank in Sana'a.

Sixth, we have established an integrated system
of procedures and execution plans on promoting State
resources and rationalizing expenses to ensure the
sustained and organized payment of salaries for civil
servants all over the country.

Seventh, we are coordinating intensively with our
brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to implement
reconstruction and development programmes in
Yemen. Works have started on the ground through the
Saudi programme for reconstruction and development
in some governorates in Yemen, especially by
providing the necessary oil derivatives for generating
electricity at a monthly cost of $60 million. That will
enhance the ability of the Government to shoulder
its responsibilities, particularly to pay salaries and
improve the humanitarian situation.

The Government cannot undertake its economic
and humanitarian responsibilities throughout Yemen
without the support of the international community in
all areas, or do so without compelling the coup militias
to cease their activities and measures that lead only to
further humanitarian and economic deterioration in
Yemen. Hence, the following should be implemented.

First, the relevant State institutions must be
allowed to undertake their independent national duties
and shoulder their responsibilities to safeguard the
humanitarian and economic situations, especially the
Yemeni Central Bank, the Ministry of Finance and all
other affiliated institutions.

Secondly, coup militias must be stopped from
carrying out practices that terrorize traders, banks and
bankers. The aim is to benefit from the services and
opportunities provided by the legitimate Government
based in the interim capital, Aden.

Thirdly, all sovereign State revenues must be
deposited in the Central Bank, under the supervision
of the Ministry of Finance and the Yemeni legitimate
Government, and the imposition of illegal fees and
levies on the citizens must be halted.

Fourthly, freedom of trade and the movement must
be allowed for commodities and money transfers among
various governorates and bank branches and traders.

Fifthly, exports of oil derivatives must resume,
including ensuring their safe passage from areas that
are under the control of the coup militias.

Sixthly, coup militias must be stopped from
interfering in the trade in oil derivatives and stop
promoting the black market, especially when those
militias sell at 150 per cent more than the regular prices,
which worsens the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and the suffering of the citizens and could
lead to the collapse of the local currency.

Seventhly, all international organizations working
in Yemen or supporting it must make all their financial
transactions through the Central Bank of Yemen.

Based on our national responsibilities towards
our citizens, the Government of Yemen has attached
great importance and priority to the humanitarian
issue over the past four years, including launching its
decentralization relief and humanitarian programme.
Thanks to that programme, we have designated land
and sea corridors in Yemen that will ensure the flow of
humanitarian and relief assistance to the most-affected
people and regions. The Government remains focused
on alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people
and ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance
throughout Yemen. In that regard, we highly commend
the generous aid provided by the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the State of Kuwait
and all other sisterly and friendly countries.

The Government of Yemen welcomes the pledging
conference to be held on 26 February 2019 under the
auspices of the Secretary-General and the Governments
of Sweden and Switzerland. We call upon friendly
donor countries to support the humanitarian response
plan and make their pledges in order to fill the financial
gap and address the deteriorating economic situation
in Yemen.

In conclusion, the outcome of the consultations
held in Sweden is a serious step towards building trust.
It bodes well for achieving peace, which is awaited by
the great people of Yemen. The Government of Yemen
continues to offer concessions, regardless of how
difficult they are, to achieve sustainable peace based
on the agreed upon terms of reference, because we
believe that war is launched by fools and peace is made
by the courageous.

We call on the Council to work on implementing
its resolutions on the situation in Yemen, especially
resolution 2216 (2015), in order to put an end to the
conflict. We do not need more resolutions.

The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.
