Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate and for the
strong interest and support your country has
traditionally given to today's topic. I would like to also
thank you for bringing about a very substantive
presidential statement, which has our full support.

We would like to welcome Under-Secretaries-
General Amos and Le Roy and thank them for their
briefings. We are also pleased that High Commissioner
Pillay is here with us again today. This is the third time
running that she is participating in a debate on the
protection of civilians, and we very much hope that
this tradition will be continued. Finally, let me also
thank Mr. Daccord for his intervention.

Today's debate is an important opportunity for
my delegation to take stock of our common efforts in
an area that has been at the core of my country's own
engagement in the Council. The latest report by the
Secretary-General (S/2010/579) provides us with an
excellent basis for our discussion.
While we share the Secretary-General's
assessment that more needs to be done to meet the five
core challenges, we are also encouraged by the
progress made over the past year in implementing
resolution 1894 (2009). I would like to thank the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for their consistent work and support. We
particularly welcome the draft operational concept on
the protection of civilians, as well as the envisaged
strategic framework. We also strongly support the
Secretariat in its endeavour to further improve
predeployment and in-mission training on the
protection of civilians. That initiative needs to be
accompanied by national and international efforts.

Host countries and the Council should come to a
common understanding that our decisions to draw
down missions or adapt mandates are conditioned on
the achievement of clear benchmarks, including in
relation to the protection of civilians. The
establishment of a mechanism to measure and report on
progress against such benchmarks would be very
important, and we think that the experience gained in
that context in the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad is useful and
should be followed up.

Given the gravity and number of existing
allegations, the recent arrests of commanders allegedly
responsible for committing war crimes and crimes
against humanity in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are but a welcome start. The Council must
ensure respect for its resolutions and take vigorous
measures against perpetrators, including through the
establishment of commissions of inquiry, referrals to
the International Criminal Court and the imposition of
targeted measures.

Mass rapes in Kibua in Eastern Congo in July and
August this year have demonstrated the massive
challenges we still face in preventing and responding
to such atrocious crimes. As the presidential statement
rightly underlines, peacekeeping missions must
communicate with the local communities and must be
equipped with the necessary capacities to do so. We
expect the upcoming report of the Secretary-General
on sexual violence to contain bold recommendations
for improving our response, and we hope that the
Security Council will be able to adopt a substantive
outcome next month.
We share the concern of the Secretary-General
over the threat posed to civilians by explosive weapons,
particularly when used in densely populated areas, and
I am grateful for the very clear words of Under-
Secretary-General Amos on this subject. On
16 September, Austria, together with OCHA, hosted a
panel discussion on that subject that clearly
demonstrated the need for more systematic data and
analysis. We hope the Council will become actively
engaged on that important emerging subject.

We welcome the reference contained in the
presidential statement on the need to find durable
solutions to issues concerning internally displaced
persons and refugees, and we hope for a more
systematic consideration of that issue in relevant
Council debates and resolutions. More systematic and
comprehensive reporting on protection issues in the
Secretary-General's country-specific reports will
enhance the consistency of the Council's actions
regarding the protection of civilians. Following the
example of resolution 1325 (2000), this is another area
where we believe that indicators would be useful and
that they should be developed by the Secretariat. That
will allow the Council to assess the effectiveness of its
own policies and measures. We are further looking
forward to receiving the guidance for peacekeeping
and other relevant missions on the reporting of
protection of civilians that was requested in resolution
1894 (2009).

We are encouraged by the fact that the Secretary-
General's report has noted a change in the way and
extent to which protection is addressed in Council
resolutions, including in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. We are convinced that the briefings
received and our discussions in the Expert Group, as
well as the use of the aide-memoire (see S/PRST/2009/ 1), have significantly contributed to this
more consistent approach on the part of the Security
Council. Let me express my gratitude to OCHA for
undertaking the work to update the aide-memoire,
which has been adopted in conjunction with the
presidential statement today.

While our membership of the Security Council
comes to an end next month, let me assure you,
Mr. President, that my country will remain strongly
committed to the subject of today's debate. In this
context we are very much encouraged by the
continuing strong interest of the membership of the
United Nations in issues regarding protection of
civilians, as is demonstrated by the broad attendance at
today's debate. We look forward to continuing our
cooperation with interested Member States and the
Secretariat to further strengthen the protection of
civilians in conflicts around the globe.

