Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome to the Security
Council the First Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeie, in his capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and we thank him
for his comprehensive briefing.

The Russian Federation has consistently championed
the improvement and development of cooperation
between the UnitedNations and regional and subregional
mechanisms on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations, first and foremost, its Chapter VIII. It is on this
basis that cooperation between the United Nations and
the OSCE should be grounded. Cooperation between
the two Organizations is consistent and multilateral
in nature. It encompasses all dimensions of security,
including cross-dimensional issues. The OSCE should
complement the United Nations in dealing with global
issues and assist in the implementation in the areas
of its regional responsibility within the framework of
its mandate of mechanisms that have been agreed at a
global level.

Russia stands ready for constructive cooperation
with the Serbian chairmanship-in-office of the OSCE.
We back the policy course adopted by it aimed at
restoring trust and the development of a positive,
forward-looking agenda. We are convinced that it
is going to lead in an impartial way, mindful of the
interests of all participating States, and it can expect
our support in this endeavour. In our view, there is a
need to focus the work of the Organization this year on
continuing - within the framework of the Helsinki+40
process, which we backed from the very outset - the
political dialogue aimed at finding a path to extricate
European security from its crisis, assist in settling the
conflict in Ukraine through participation of the OSCE
in the Trilateral Contract Group and support the work
of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine.
There is also a need to appropriately mark at the OSCE
the seventieth anniversary of the end of the Second
World War.

On the agenda, we also have the very timely topic
of countering terrorism and drug trafficking. In this
context, we deem it important to organize an OSCE
conference on the threat of foreign terrorist fighters as
a way to counter the spread of terrorist and extremist
ideology, prevent the radicalization of the social and
political mood, and combat drug threats stemming
from Afghanistan.

The current situation speaks to the need for
organizing an event on protecting Christians. In this
vein, two meetings on Islamophobia and anti-Semitism
were organized in 2014. It would be useful to hold a
seminar on a comparative analysis of the methodologies
of the Organization and monitoring of elections at the
OSCE, the Commonwealth of Independent States and
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe,
including an assessment of the conduct of electoral
campaigns and an extension of the comprehensive
analysis of electoral legislation at the OSCE that
was carried out by the OSCE Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) in 2013, upon
the initiative of Russia and Belarus.

The Ukrainian conflict has shown that the OSCE
remains needed in the pan-European area. To fully
realize its potential, the Organization must move
towards a rejection of confrontation and a return of the
discussion to a constructive mode. It is only thus that
we will be able to resolve the accumulated systemic
problems.

The fortieth anniversary of the OSCE this year is
a good opportunity to tackle the issue of updating the
European security system. There is a need to reaffirm
the fundamental principles of the Helsinki Final Act and
the provisions of the Charter for European Security, in
order to take steps towards the implementation of the
principle of the indivisibility of security and implement
States' commitments not to strengthen their security at
the expense of the security of others. We expect to see
the OSCE return to discussing the issue of forging a
single politico-military-humanitarian-economic space
stretching from the Atlantic to the Pacific Oceans,
including the issue of incorporating integration
processes - the so-called integrating of integration.

Separately, I would like to touch upon the
importance of relaunching a substantive discussion
on the reform of the OSCE. Russia backed the idea of
the creation of a panel of eminent or wise persons at
the OSCE on issues of European security and sent one
of our leading political experts to participate in it. We
expect that the intellectual contribution of the group
will serve to lend impetus to a resumption at the OSCE
of broad discussion on key issues of security.

On the whole, we welcome the efforts of the OSCE
on assisting and settling the conflict in Ukraine.
In the Contact Group, with the participation of the
Special Representative of the Chairperson-in-Office
in Ukraine, Ms. Heidi Tagliavini, we were able to
achieve positive results. We are satisfied with the
adoption on 12 February of a package of measures on
the implementation of the Minsk agreements and of
resolution 2022 (2015), which backed it up. Now it is
important to achieve the implementation of the package
measures by all the parties ofthe conflict. In the OSCE,
work has already started on determining modalities and
concrete steps on assisting implementation.

We welcome the active role played by the Special
Monitoring Mission, whose priority areas of work we
see to be monitoring the ceasefire and the withdrawal of
heavy weaponry, assisting in dialogue and investigating
violations of humanitarian law and human rights law.
We are carefully following the Mission's reports, which
should be free of censorship. What is unacceptable
are cases of pressure being exerted on the monitors.
The security provided for them must be unswerving.
The Special Monitoring Mission plays a key role in
monitoring compliance with the Minsk agreements
of 12 February. The impartial verification activity
of the Special Monitoring Mission must be equally
spread over the whole region comprising the area of the
ceasefire and the withdrawal of heavy weaponry under
the 12 February agreement. We expect the Mission
to continue to fully inform us in its reports of the
situation throughout the entire territory. In that regard,
the Mission will play an important role in closely
coordinating all responsible individuals and structures
from Kyiv, Donetsk and Lugansk.

Nevertheless, there should be no reduction in the
attention paid by the Special Monitoring Mission to
other regions of Ukraine in addition to the south-east.
We back the Special Monitoring Mission with financial
and human resources and we are in favour of expanding
its capacities. We continue to search for specialists for
work in the Special Monitoring Mission based on its
growing needs.

On the whole, we are satisfied with the work of
the OSCE's monitors at the Russian-Ukrainian border
crossing points in Donetsk and Gukovo. They are noting
the real situation of refugees, and despite fanciful
claims are confirming the absence of the deployment
of any Russian military forces. We see no need for
proposals to expand their mandate to the whole of the
Donetsk-Lugansk section of the Ukrainian-Russian
border, since they are not in keeping with the Berlin
Declaration of 2 July 2014, which was reached by the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of France, Germany and
Ukraine, for whose implementation the OSCE monitors
were deployed. On this issue, there is a need to reach
agreement with the separatists as one of the parties to
the conflict.

We note the readiness of the OSCE ODIHR to
monitor the elections in the Donbas as soon as all
aspects related to their organization and implementation
in accordance with the package of measures dated
12 February are settled and agreed. The elections will
substantially determine the whole political process of
a settlement. There will be a need to take into account
the fact that a large number of individuals were forced
to leave the conflict zone and now find themselves both
in other regions of Ukraine and abroad.

