Mr. Stareevic' (Serbia): The Republic of Serbia
welcomes the format of this open debate in the
Security Council on institution-building within the
post-conflict peacebuilding process. Charged with
responsibility for safeguarding international peace and
security, the Council can only benefit from such
debate. The delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
should be congratulated for its initiative. The
statements by the Secretary-General; Mr. Jose Luis
Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste; and
Ambassador Peter Wittig, current Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, have given us three
important perspectives germane to the issue under
discussion, while the statements by members and
non-members of the Council alike demonstrate vivid
interest in this question.

These are complex problems that call for specific
answers - from the elimination of the humanitarian
consequences of a conflict to assistance in organizing
the election process and the building of new
institutions, or the rebuilding of old ones. Yet the need
for institution-building is a global problem that affects
countries in almost all parts of the world that have
experienced a conflict. It therefore calls for global
action.

The Republic of Serbia believes that post-conflict
institution-building is among the most important
efforts in securing peace, stability and sustainable
development. For those efforts to be successful, it is
necessary that all actors in the international community
render a contribution, including the United Nations,
regional organizations and Member States that
participated in the conflict directly or indirectly or are
located in the immediate vicinity, as well as
non-governmental organizations.

The United Nations system should be at the
forefront of all activities, primarily through its
organs- the Security Council and the Secretary-
General, the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United
Nations Development Programme and the specialized
agencies of the United Nations.

Bearing in mind that the Republic of Serbia is
part of a region that experienced a very difficult period
starting two decades ago, we are well aware of the
needs and caveats of a peacebuilding process. We
approach it with understanding and responsibly.

We firmly believe that there is a need for all
countries of a region that has been engulfed by conflict
to engage actively. We have made every effort to make
our full contribution to post-conflict peacebuilding
through a policy of promoting good-neighbourly
relations - one of our most important foreign-policy
priorities - through a policy of reconciliation in the
region and through building free and democratic
institutions.

The Republic of Serbia is a signatory party and a
guarantor of the implementation of the Dayton-Paris
Peace Agreement. It gives its unwavering support to
the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
is supportive of all decisions based on the agreement of
the three constitutive peoples of that State.

Last year, the National Assembly of the Republic
of Serbia adopted a resolution condemning the crime at
Srebrenica. Serbia cooperates actively with the
international presences in Kosovo headed by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo deployed in the province pursuant to resolution
1244 (1999) and supports activities aimed at improving
the living conditions for all inhabitants of Kosovo. We
showed our readiness to quickly start a dialogue with
Pristina in accordance with resolution 64/298.
President Boris Tadie has met the leaders of the other
countries of the region on a number of occasions. My
country has thus clearly shown its resolve to contribute
to peace and stability in the Western Balkan region.

The Republic of Serbia is also of the opinion that
full reconciliation in the region will be greatly helped
if justice is fully served through national and
international institutions with regard to all individuals
who committed crimes during the conflict.

Serbia considers institution-building in the post-
conflict period to be a process that, because of its
complexity, calls for the synergy of internal
stakeholders and international actors, a thorough
assessment of the causes of conflict and a global
approach combined with specific solutions. The role of
the United Nations system in this area will always
remain vital. We also support the proposal to
strengthen the consultative role of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission.

The Republic of Serbia has been active, and will
continue to be so, in support of United Nations
activities on building institutions in conflict-affected
areas. We shall also continue our support through our
participation in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
My country fully concurs with the view that the
purpose of institution-building is to progressively
reduce dependence on the international community and
promote self-reliance. We also agree that there must be
at least a basic level of consensus and political will
among the leading national stakeholders for
institutional development to succeed.

Accordingly, an honest analysis of the events
leading to the conflict and of the deeds and mistakes
that caused it is necessary to avoid similar pitfalls in
the future. New institutions and their procedures must
be designed so as to maximize the chances for avoiding
a repetition of past mistakes. Those who do not
remember history are condemned to repeat it, as
Santayana said. Countries that have gone through
conflicts need enlightened leaders and enlightened
institutions, and people must stand up for them if they
care about their future and the future of their children.

Work on promoting sustainable peace, stability
and development is the best prevention against the
resurgence of conflict. The cost of conflict is so high
that it is incumbent upon us to make every possible
effort to succeed in our endeavours to build peace.

