Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Madam President,
for holding today's meeting. We also thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix and Ms. Blakemore for their
valuable briefings.

Despite the fact that the Charter of the United
Nations does not address peacekeeping operations in
any of its articles, they are currently the Organization's
most costly and important activities, as well the most
important tool that the Security Council has at its
disposal for the maintenance of international peace
and security. I will address three aspects of this
topic - first, pathways for reform; secondly, rewards
and accountability; and thirdly, dealing with problems.

First, with regard to pathways to reform, political
solutions and the Security Council's responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security take
priority when we discuss peacekeeping operations.
In discussing implementing or reviewing reforms, we
should always keep in mind the importance of respect
for States' sovereignty and for the three principles of
peacekeeping - the consent of the States concerned,
impartiality and refraining from the use of force except
in self-defence and defence of the mandate.

Reforms start with the definition of clear and
meaningful mandates that support an existing political
process, followed by the development of specific,
measurable tasks and subsequently a review of the
collective efforts of the Secretariat, the Security Council
and the troop-contributing countries (TCCs) with the
aim of establishing shortcomings and achievements.
Resolution 2378 (2017) is an important point ofreference
that guides the Security Council in its deliberations. The
Council is currently discussing reform at various levels,
including the Secretary-General's initiatives, which
we support, in its resolutions or through its subsidiary
bodies. Our debate focuses on our ultimate common goal
of achieving sustainable peace by providing elements
of success in the area of peacekeeping, such as trained
personnel at the operational, theoretical and linguistic
levels; ensuring the necessary equipment; defining
clear policies; and carrying out detailed reviews.

In that regard, I reaffirm that we stand ready to
cooperate with the United States and other States
Members of the Security Council with regard to adopting
a draft resolution in the coming days to support various
aspects of reform and develop peacekeeping operations
based on previous understandings that would eventually
contribute to the development of peacekeeping both
at Headquarters and in the field, and then move it to
higher levels.

Secondly, concerning rewards and accountability,
we have long discussed and even sometimes disagreed
on the issue ofaccountability in cases offailure. We also
must consider the many achievements of peacekeeping
operations. The past 70 years of peacekeeping have
seen myriad examples of success stories in which
peacekeeping operations implemented their mandates
as required, with minimum casualties and loss of
life and money. The United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission, which ran from 1991 to 2003, is
but one example of such success stories.

The efforts of the Secretariat this month, led
by the Secretary-General, deserve support and
commendation. These include the announcement of
the shared commitments and the Secretariat action
plan regarding the report of retired Lieutenant General
Santos Cruz, entitled Improving Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers, in addition to earlier reports
and plans. In that regard, the efforts of the Secretariat
include policies to establish the values of accountability,
discipline and excellence, while respecting States'
sovereignty when dealing with situations pertaining to
their uniformed personnel.

Six months ago, the Secretary-General listed the
elements of an initiative concerning peacekeeping,
of which performance is an essential elements. We
look forward to working with the Secretariat in
order to develop an informed and integrated plan for
peacekeeping operations and their reviews.

That leads me to my third aspect, which concerns
addressing negative phenomena, including sexual
exploitation and abuse. That requires concerted efforts
on our part to eliminate them. In that regard, we must
support the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy.
We also appreciate the rapid and firm response of TCCs
to cases in which discipline is violated.

As for the protection ofcivilians, which is at the core
of the majority of peacekeeping troops, it is achieved
only when civilians feel safe from all threats regardless
of their source. Such threats against civilians constitute
a red line and are totally unacceptable, whether at the
level of the mission, the United Nations with all its
organs, or United Nations membership.

In conclusion, we pay tribute to the sacrifices made
by peacekeepers over more than 70 years of protecting
civilian lives. We commend the participation ofMember
States in peacekeeping, be it by contributing troops,
providing materiel and equipment and training, or
sharing expertise, which are necessary for the success
of peacekeeping operations.

