Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union. I would like to present some remarks
from our national perspective.

Poland strongly supports the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Since 2004, we have
submitted five national reports on the implementation
of the resolution. Recently, we actively participated
in a comprehensive review on the status of its
implementation. We also had the honour to join the
co-sponsors of resolution 2325 (2016), which was
adopted earlier today.

We particularly welcome the provisions of the
new resolution that relate to the delivery of more
effective assistance by the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to States,
enhancing cooperation between the 1540 Committee
and other United Nations bodies and international
institutions and drawing on expertise from industry
and the scientific and academic communities. Such
an inclusive approach will contribute to building more
secure societies. We join others in calling upon all
States that have not yet done so to present their first
national reports on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

The threat of the proliferation or use of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors continues
to be grave and requires urgent action. In particular,
significant efforts remain to be taken to address existing
gaps in national implementation by some States that
need to make the production, use, storage and transport
of materials related to chemical and biological weapons
more secure. The reports by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism have confirmed that
toxic chemicals have been used as weapons in Syria by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and we repeatedly
hear of new allegations that terrorists are still trying to
use them.

Biological agents also pose a deadly threat to our
societies. The recent eighth Review Conference of the
Parties to the Biological Weapons Convention proved
that States must put much more effort into suppressing
biological challenges.

The resolution adopted today accurately states that
more attention should be given to enforcement measures
against the proliferation of weapons ofmass destruction
and related materials and to the strengthening of
international export and transshipment controls.
Poland has therefore completed a comprehensive
review of its national procedures for the interdiction of
weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related materials. As a result, a document on the
subject entitled "National Interdiction Mechanism" was
agreed and is now ready to be adopted by the Polish
Government - most probably by the end of this year.
That mechanism aims at the effective implementation
of our international obligations on non-proliferation,
including United Nations and European Union sanctions.
It also includes guidelines to ensure that, in the event
of any action to interdict the suspected transport of
WMDs, all national authorities concerned will be
ready to react promptly and appropriately, working in
conjunction with international partners. As a follow-up
to that work, Poland is now considering its accession
to the Protocol of 2005 to the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Maritime Navigation.

Let me conclude by thanking the Spanish team for
its excellent work in chairing the 1540 Committee over
the past two years, and by wishing the best of luck to
Bolivia as the next Chair of the Committee.

