Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I would like to
associate myself with the remarks of the two previous
speakers in thanking Ambassador Sinclair very much
for his careful account of the situation, welcoming the
details that the Ambassador of Papua New Guinea has
offered us, congratulating the Peace Monitoring Group
on their role and urging continuing regional
engagement.

The picture is an upbeat one. We are pleased, of
course, that stage II of the weapons disposal plan has
taken place. I think it can be fairly said that the new
constitutional arrangements that result are historic for
Papua New Guinea, and I would like particularly to
congratulate Ambassador Sinclair and his Office for
their role.

I have just two brief points to draw from this. The
first relates to the continuing separation of Francis Ona
and his supporters from the peace process. As
Ambassador Sinclair said, that must be a source of
concern to all. We welcome the efforts of all
concerned, including the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB), in trying to bring
Francis Ona and his supporters on board the peace
process. It will be right to continue to try to do so, but I
join France and Germany in agreeing that this must in
no way delay the peace process.

My second point is an obvious one. It is the need
for continued and exclusive focus on delivering
progress and momentum in stage III. We do not wish to
see any further delays in that process, which means that
there are a tight four and a half months within which to
work. So, it was good to hear from Ambassador
Sinclair and to have confirmed by our colleague from
Papua New Guinea the commitment of the Papua New
Guinea Government to moving forward briskly on
arrangements for autonomy, on the finalization of the
constitution, on the transfer of resources to
Bougainville and on preparations for early elections.
As both Ambassador Sinclair and the representative of
Papua New Guinea have underscored, these too, in
addition to weapons containment, are essential to
building the self-sustaining peace to which we all look
forward.

