Mrs. Patterson (United States of America):
Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this thematic
debate. We compliment the Philippines delegation,
especially Ambassador Baja, for its conduct of the
presidency during this exceptional month. The
leadership of your delegation resulting in the adoption
of two resolutions at the summit-level meeting was
particularly noteworthy.

We welcome today's thematic debate to discuss
supporting and advancing democratic governance to
prevent conflict, both within and across borders. In this
respect, I would like to thank our three speakers on this
topic.

If it is to be truly effective in helping States
prevent conflict, civil society - or perhaps more
appropriately, free society - must be as inclusive as
possible and allow the views of a wide range of actors
to be heard and considered. While they may often vary
widely in their degree of organization, autonomy and
influence, actors as diverse as non-governmental
organizations, community, cultural and religious
organizations, trade and professional associations,
representatives of the private sector such as individual
proprietorships, partnerships, corporations and
business associations, research and academic
institutions and, especially, individuals all have roles to
play in a truly vibrant society. As the presidential
statement we will adopt today notes, only when the
widest possible range of opinion is reflected can civil
society genuinely be a force for conflict prevention and
conflict resolution.

Free societies are most valuable as marketplaces
where free ideas compete. The free exchange of ideas
is a bulwark against those who use violence or
intimidation to achieve their goals. When individuals
and groups have the freedom to express their views and
pursue their legitimate ambitions without fear of
retribution, the risk of internal conflict among them
will almost certainly diminish. Efforts to expand
freedom at all levels are among the most effective
ways of lessening the risk of conflict.

During his recent visit here, President Bush co-
hosted the launch of the United Nations Democracy
Fund. Through this Fund, democratic States will work
to help others join the democratic family. As Secretary
of State Rice said last Saturday, the path to democracy
is often long and imperfect, and it is different for every
nation. One way the United Nations can support
countries seeking self-government is to encourage the
development of free institutions.

The United States firmly believes that building
the institutions that promote and sustain freedom and
democratic ideals creates the necessary foundations for
free societies, and those foundations will prevent
conflict. Where conflict already exists, these same
principles can serve as a basis for lasting peace and
reconciliation. All free societies have certain things in
common. Democratic nations uphold the rule of law,
impose limits on the power of State and treat women
and minorities as full citizens. Such nations protect
private property, free speech and religious expression.
Democratic nations grow in strength because they
respect and reward the creative gifts of their people
and democratic nations contribute to peace and
stability because they seek national greatness in the
achievements of their citizens, not through oppression
of elements of their own citizenry or their neighbours.

