Mr. Sen (India): As this is the first statement I
am making in the Security Council, let me begin by
extending my warm greetings to you, Mr. President,
and to your colleagues in the Council. Please allow me
also to extend our heartiest felicitations to you for
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this important month in the calendar of activities of the
United Nations. I also wish take to this opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador Andrey Denisov of the
Russian Federation on his exemplary stewardship of
the Council during his presidency in the month of
August. I also wish to thank Ambassador Munoz,
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), for his comprehensive briefing
on the considerable progress achieved in the work of
the Committee since the last public meeting on this
issue. I would also like to place on record our
appreciation for Ambassador Munoz and his able team,
as well as for concerned members of the United
Nations Secretariat, for the direction they have
provided in the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Al Qaeda-Taliban sanctions regime.

It has been three years since the attacks of 11
September in New York. Unfortunately, since then,
incidents of terrorism in the Russian Federation, Spain,
Saudi Arabia, India and other parts of the world have
amply demonstrated that international terrorism is not a
passing phenomenon. In fact, as Ambassador Munoz
has rightly reiterated, it constitutes today one of the
most serious threats to international peace and security.

The horrific images of the heinous murder of
some 300 innocent civilians, mainly children, at the
hands of terrorists in Beslan, in the Russian Federation,
less than a fortnight ago, are still fresh in our minds.
The bomb attack outside the Australian embassy in
Jakarta on 9 September, which claimed at least nine
lives, was a manifestation of the same malaise - of
international terrorism representing an attack on all
civilized nations. I wish to take this opportunity to
extend our deepest sympathy to the Governments of
the Russian Federation and Indonesia, and our heartfelt
condolences to the victims of the attacks and their
families. We are with them in sorrow and solidarity.

The international community will have to do
more than issuing routine condemnations of such acts
of terrorism. It will have to act at the bilateral, regional
and multilateral levels to speedily and effectively
address the clear and present danger represented by
international terrorism. The Security Council
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1373 (2001) are an important facet of the
international community's response. It is therefore only
natural that we carefully analyse the strategy adopted
by those bodies in the fight against terrorism.

The appointment of a new and efficient
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team,
established pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004), is a
welcome development. We agree with the Chairman
that the Team deserves to be commended for having
produced a concise, well-conceived and high-quality
document for its first report. I should like to provide
our comments on some aspects of the report of the
Monitoring Team.

The assessment of the Monitoring Team that the
threat from Al Qaeda terrorism remains as real today as
it has been at any time since October 1999 has been
validated by the number and intensity of attacks
worldwide, with their ideological underpinnings
traceable to Al Qaeda.

The Monitoring Team's conclusion that the
sanctions regime imposed by the Security Council has
had a limited impact is disappointing, as it reflects a
continuation of the trend reported by the previous
Monitoring Group in its first report issued pursuant to
resolution 1455 (2003). In our statement on 29 July
2003, during a public debate in the Council on the
same item, we noted that the Monitoring Group had
reported on the limitations of the sanctions regime, in
particular the continuing ability of Al Qaeda to finance
its activities, the ineffectiveness of the travel ban, the
continued use of small arms and light weapons and the
nexus between drug smuggling and terrorism.

Where the report of the Monitoring Team is
encouraging is in its recommendations on the ways and
means to address the existing limitations. Most of the
recommendations appear to be provisional, but could,
in our view, form the basis for refinement of the
existing measures required to adapt them to the
changes in the nature of Al Qaeda/Taliban operations.

We agree with the assessment of the Team that
the Taliban remain a real threat to the reconstruction
and stability of Afghanistan. We do not, however,
believe that the mutual support between the Al Qaeda
and Taliban is confined to assistance with local needs,
nor do we subscribe to the perception that the
relevance of the Taliban was confined to the means and
space they provided Al Qaeda to flourish. It has to be
reiterated here that the Taliban was an offshoot of the
same fundamentalist and militant ideology that
spawned the perpetrators of the terrorist attacks of
11 September 2001 and elsewhere in the world. The
fact that they continue to operate within Afghanistan is
a telling indicator of the support and safe haven they
continue to receive. The inescapable but unstated
conclusion of the report's analysis is of the integral,
seamless nature of the Al Qaeda/Taliban relationship,
their common ideological incubators and training. It is
this Committee's mandate to identify those individuals
and entities which represent that group with the
intention of bringing to bear upon them the measures
envisaged under the relevant resolutions, including
resolution 1526 (2004), and we hope it will do so
without fear or favour.

We also agree with the conclusion that the
Consolidated list suffers from practical and technical
problems. In our view, the first priority of the
Committee and the Monitoring Team should be to
convince Member States to be more forthcoming with
information, particularly with regard to the Taliban, on
individuals and entities in territories under their
control. The second should be to hold States that
harbour such listed individuals or entities accountable
for non-compliance with the relevant Chapter VII
resolutions.

We appreciate the stated objective of the
Monitoring Team to engage and cooperate with
Member States in the implementation of its mandate.
Some ideas enunciated in this regard, including the
convening of a small group of professionals with the
requisite experience and expertise to enhance
understanding on the issue and the proposal to
conclude an international agreement that would
preclude offer of asylum to those on the Consolidated
List are noteworthy and should be further explored.

We also welcome the increase in the number of
tours to States to enhance coordination and information
exchanges. We would caution, however, that to
optimize results, such visits should be carefully
coordinated between the Chair, the Committee and the
Monitoring Team. Ideally, a visit of that nature to a
Member State should involve all three components,
and possibly even the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, in
the context of greater cooperation envisaged with these
bodies. That would enable a more coherent
presentation of the exchange of views, better access
and less duplication in terms of time and money. The
differing roles of the Committee and the Team can be
reconciled by bifurcating field visits or meetings after
completion of the common elements of the programme.

We do hope that, in keeping with its professed
spirit of cooperation and transparency, the Committee
will authorize a more liberal sharing of information
with the general membership on the results of such
Visits.
The report of the Monitoring Team has allowed
us to start working on a new set of recommendations
designed to increase the efficacy and relevance of the
sanctions measures against such terrorist groups as the
Taliban and Al Qaeda. We are confident that some of
the ideas those recommendations represent will receive
further expression by the time the next report of the
Team is due. The continued relevance of the
Committee and all of our efforts depend on keeping
ahead of the game.

Before I conclude, I would also endorse the
implication of the Secretary-General's words that you
quoted, Sir, and of the remarks on making the sanctions
more effective through a regime of fundamental
freedoms, as referred to by the Ambassador of the
Netherlands, speaking on behalf of the European
Union. In that context, I would like to say that the
present Government of India, with its heritage of
secularism, and voted in by the rural poor, is
committed in its common minimum programme to the
abolition of the Prevention of Terrorism Act, because
we firmly believe that it is only in the context of
fundamental rights, the rule of law, access to defence
counsel and all the other provisions thereunder that a
sanctions regime can be truly and effectively
implemented by any country.

I wish, finally, to conclude by offering our full
cooperation in fulfilling the objectives of the Team and
our willingness to share the expertise developed in
India and accumulated through decades of experience
in countering terrorism.

