The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Lebanon, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salam took
a seat at the Council table.

The President: Pursuant to the invitation
extended at the 6047th meeting of the Council, I
recognize the Commissioner of the International
Independent Investigation Commission, Mr. Daniel
Bellemare.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/792, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France.
Members also have before them document
S/2008/752, containing a letter dated 2 December 2008
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council, transmitting the eleventh
report of the International Independent Investigation
Commission, and document S/2008/764, containing a
letter dated 4 December 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon, transmitting a letter from
the Prime Minister of Lebanon to the Secretary-
General.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet
Nam


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1852 (2008).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.
08-65617

