Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like to join previous speakers in thanking you, Mr.
President, for having organized this public meeting on
Bougainville. I should also like to express my
delegation's appreciation to Sir Kieran Prendergast for
his very useful briefing.

The Bougainville Peace Agreement, signed on 30
August 2001, emphasized three fundamental elements:
autonomy, the holding of a referendum and a plan to
eliminate arms in circulation. Since then, the Council
has consistently encouraged the parties to implement
those components in order to reach a final settlement of
their dispute.

My delegation notes that, beyond several
problems related to the collection of weapons and to
the demobilization of combatants, the implementation
of the Bougainville Peace Agreement is proceeding
normally. The achievements already attained have been
made possible not only by the goodwill shown by the
parties, but also by the important support provided by
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) and by the Peace Monitoring Group.

Here, we should like to thank all the countries
and the institutions that are so involved in the
implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement.
Thanks to those joint efforts, we can take a positive
view of the actions undertaken to promote national
reconciliation, the restoration of State authority and the
reconstruction and economic development of the
country.

While we encourage the various actors to
redouble their efforts, my delegation would like to
stress the need to accelerate the operations to collect,
store and destroy weapons. In fact, we remain
convinced that that is one of the essential conditions
for restoring peace and fostering post-conflict recovery
with the international community's kind support. In
order to do that, the public awareness policy should be
pursued with greater energy. Moreover, my delegation
would like to urge the parties to continue their efforts
to establish a genuine national reconciliation policy
and an autonomous government in Bougainville.

I cannot conclude without expressing my
delegation's support for the Secretary-General's
proposal to extend UNPOB'S mandate for another 12-
month period, beginning in 1 January 2003. We remain
confident that that will greatly benefit the completion
of the peace process undertaken in Papua New Guinea,
which will be another success to the credit of the
United Nations.

