Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this meeting. Let me also thank the
Secretary-General, Executive Director Fedotov and
Special Rapporteur Giammarinaro for their useful
briefings. I also welcome the statement made by
Mr. Chergui.

I would like to align myself with the statement to
be made later on behalf of the European Union and the
statement by Norway on behalf of the Nordic Countries.

Trafficking in persons is a trade in human misery.
It is the lowest form of criminality, where illicit
conglomerates prey on those who lack protection or
whose desperate hopes for a better life leave them open
and vulnerable to abduction, exploitation and abuse.
Just yesterday we heard the bone-chilling reports from
Libya of outright slave trade taking place there. I echo
the Secretary-General's and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General's remarks on those appalling
acts as some of the most outrageous abuses of human
rights, and call upon the competent authorities to
investigate these activities without delay. Slavery has
no place in our world and we must work ceaselessly to
end such practices.

As we discussed on Friday during our meeting on
security challenges in the Mediterranean region (see S/PV.8106), there is a complex set of interlinkages
between conflict and instability, human rights violations
and abuses, serious crimes, terrorism, displacement
and trafficking in persons. Conflicts and humanitarian
crises amplify the risk of trafficking in persons, and
there is a link between trafficking and large movements
ofmigrants and refugees. This leaves displaced persons,
migrants and women and children particularly at risk.
This phenomenon is replicated in conflicts all over the
world, including - as we have discussed recently in the
Council - in Iraq, Syria and the Sahel.

Since trafficking in persons essentially entails
violations and abuses of human rights, the prevalence
and impunity of such criminality in turn undermines
the rule of law and can lead to the perpetuation of
other forms of serious crimes. Our resolutions on
trafficking, including the resolution 2388 (2017), which
we have just adopted, clearly acknowledge the link
between trafficking in persons and sexual violence and
exploitation. That is evidenced by the grotesque crimes
committed against women in conflicts. We have heard
ourselves, first hand, from the Yazidi survivor, Nadia
Murad Basee Taha, in December 2015 (see S/PV.7585).
Another example is the reports of violations and sexual
abuses against children in Myanmar and of their
trafficking for sexual purposes in Bangladesh as a
result of the mass displacement of persons along these
countries' borders. Children are often the primary
victims of trafficking, with lifelong consequences.

We must ensure that we can identify and provide
proper aid and support to the Victims of trafficking. To
effectively combat trafficking of persons, especially in
conflict situations, it is imperative that we secure the
evidence so that perpetrators can be brought to justice.
Let me make four points on how we can tackle this
horrifying crime.

First, the United Nations presence in conflict
situations can play an important role in response to
trafficking in persons through support for capacity-
building and reform efforts in national institutions,
and by enhancing national authorities' ability to fight
and ultimately prevent serious crimes. United Nations
missions also have a role in the protection of civilians,
including those at risk of being trafficked. At the global
level, the Council can play its role by including relevant
criteria for the listing of traffickers and their supporters
in sanctions resolutions. The newly established
sanctions regime for Mali, which also targets organized
criminals that obstruct the implementation of the peace
agreement, is an example of this.

Secondly, building strong rule-of-law institutions
is essential. This includes improving our capacity
to secure evidence in conflict situations. In that
regard, we look forward to the work of the team being
established to secure evidence of crimes committed
by Da'esh in Iraq. Cooperation between global and
regional organizations such as INTERPOL and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
and between national law-enforcement agencies, is
also essential. The work of the UNODC on trafficking
in persons, which is enhancing our knowledge and
understanding of this topic, is particularly welcome. In
addition, international legal assistance arrangements
can play an important role as an essential tool to fight
transnational crime. Additionally, a robust international
legal regime on trafficking in persons should provide a
framework for all of our work.

Thirdly, we must remember that trafficking is, in
essence, a criminal, albeit cynical, business model,
capitalizing on the vulnerabilities of persons. Therefore,
we must hit traffickers where it hurts them most, by
going after their assets, which also help finance both
organized crime groups and terrorist groups.

Finally, traffickers are enabled by instability,
poverty and inequality. By creating peaceful, prosperous
and inclusive societies, the full implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development can be a
powerful tool. By working to combat these crimes, we
are also contributing to building and sustaining peace
in societies.

Human trafficking, by its nature, is a crime that
exists below the radar for the vast majority of people.
Those who are trafficked are a hidden population,
kept in the shadows where the unspeakable crimes
committed against them remain unseen. However, we
cannot allow the suffering and violations of human
dignity to go unheeded and unpunished. We must shine
a light into the darkness, we must name and shame
these criminals and work together to bring an end to
this despicable enterprise.
