Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I would like at the
outset to congratulate you, Madam, on the successful
and productive Danish presidency of the Security
Council this month.

I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Soren
Jessen-Petersen, for his informative and, I must say,
encouraging briefing, and to welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/335).

Let me also welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the President of the Coordination Centre of
Serbia and Montenegro and of the Republic of Serbia
for Kosovo and Metohija, Mr. Nebojsa Covic.

More than a year after the tragic events of March
2004, the general situation in Kosovo is now well on
track - hopefully, towards substantial progress. In this
regard, we commend the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government for their
consistent and proactive efforts to implement Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and to bring about
positive change in the areas covered by the eight
standards. We also commend the tireless and efficient
work of Mr. Jessen-Petersen as Head of the Mission,
and take this opportunity to assure him of Ukraine's
continuing support.

The Secretary-General's report reflects many
promising developments on the ground. The
international presence has achieved a number of
important results in strengthening the foundation for
the democratic transformation of Kosovo. However, we
cannot but note the uneven progress in the
implementation of the standards, primarily those
focusing on minority issues, which is reflected in the
Secretary-General's report. In this regard, we are
particularly concerned about the continuing lack of
headway in the areas of minority freedom of
movement, sustainable returns and relevant minority
representation in governmental structures and in the
public sector as a whole. While the security situation
has remained stable in recent months, the safety of
minorities still needs further improvement. Another
serious challenge to the process are the problems of
Kosovo's economy, accompanied by high
unemployment rates.
It is obvious that ultimate progress in these areas
will require further concerted efforts by the
international community, Belgrade and the Kosovars.
We have seen many commitments on the part of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government with
respect to the implementation of the standards; we
expect those commitments to be translated into real
deeds.

The situation in Kosovo remains fragile and
requires a continuous international presence on the
ground, particularly during the extremely sensitive
period ahead of us. Ukraine, as a major police
contributor to UNMIK, is aware of the importance of
maintaining an appropriate security level at this stage.
In this respect, we would like to draw the Council's
attention to the need for donors to fully meet their
financial obligations to the police-contributing States
in a timely manner. A further failure to do so might
limit the capacity of those countries to provide the
necessary personnel, thus compromising security in the
region.

As an active contributor to the Kosovo
settlement, Ukraine reaffirms its commitment to
promoting peace and security in the province and to
ensuring its further stabilization and recovery.

We are standing now at the threshold of a
comprehensive review that will have a crucial impact
on the timing of the final status talks.

My country expects that our discussion today will
lead to the adoption of a carefully balanced approach
that will facilitate the advancement of the goal of
building a politically stable, multi-ethnic and
prosperous Kosovo, in full conjunction with resolution
1244 (1999).

