Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Sir, and the entire Uruguayan team for your hard
work during the very busy month of January. You have
organized and led the Security Council's work in an
exemplary fashion, and the Ukrainian delegation
applauds your outstanding performance. It was no
small feat, given the number of contingencies that have
arisen this January. Having said that, I would like to
share with you some of my delegation's ideas about the
work done by the Council so far.

The subject ofthe Syrian crisis has been consistently
at the centre of the Council's attention. The deplorable
humanitarian situation in the country, the fate of the
people in besieged towns and cities, the situation around
the Syrian chemical weapons programme, the political
process to find a way to put an end to the bloody conflict
that has been ravaging the country for years - all of
this we tried to address. With a heavy heart, I have to
say that the Security Council has not performed very
well in that area despite all of our efforts. The Syrian
people continue to suffer and bear the brunt of the armed
conflict waged on their land. Particularly worrying is
the use by the parties to the conflict of starvation as
a method of warfare. This is absolutely unacceptable,
and I say this as a representative of the country that
suffered the artificial famine organized by the former
Soviet regime during 1932-1933.

It has been said many times in this Chamber that
something has to be done about the Syrian crisis.
Unfortunately, the words do not always translate into
action. I appeal to colleagues around the table that
we try to break the vicious cycle of self-perpetuating
violence in Syria. One thing is needed: political
will - genuine and sincere political will. Without
it, no matter how much or how long we continue our
debates in the Chamber or in the consultation room, the
situation on the ground will not change and innocent
people will continue to lose their lives.

Other than the Syrian crisis, we addressed many
other subjects. I deliberately choose not to go through all
of them, as other colleagues before me have already done
so. However, the North Korean nuclear test on 6 January
demands the particularly close attention of the Council.
This blatant act undermines the very foundations of
the global non-proliferation regime, and it cannot be
tolerated. A firm response from the Security Council is
required. We like to talk about non-proliferation; here
we have a clear case of proliferation, yet the Council is
very slow to react properly.

The Visit of the Security Council to Burundi was
a very useful exercise, although quite disappointing.
The opportunity to talk to different interlocutors on the
ground and see the country first hand was of immense
importance for us as Security Council members
entrusted with the authority to maintain international
peace and stability. The situation in the country will
remain a source of concern for the Security Council for
quite some time, and we have to remain vigilant so as
not to allow the situation to escalate further.

On a different and positive note, I would like to
point out the adoption of resolution 2261 (2016) on the
establishment of a political mission in Colombia to
monitor and verify the implementation of the agreement
between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del
Pueblo. It was a historic moment for Colombia, and the
Ukrainian delegation is proud to have been there to
support the efforts to end the longest-lasting civil war
in Latin America.

I wish to say a few words on the working methods
of the Council. First of all, I strongly support the
points made by the delegation of the United Kingdom
on Security Council visits and on the process of the
selection of the next Secretary-General.

As a member returning to the Council after
15 years, I cannot help but be astonished at the volume
of work that the Council does. There are many more
items on the agenda, and these items are discussed at
much greater length during our meetings. I am afraid,
however, that this is a case where more does not mean
better. Sometimes we are barely able to consider just one
item in one morning or afternoon meeting. I remember
that during Ukraine's previous term on the Council 15
years ago, we would cover three or more subjects at
once. It is my strong conviction that this area of the
Council's work requires significant improvement. I was
able to find the following quote after listening to the
Japanese Ambassador. "Sometimes not speaking says
more than all the words in the world."

I would like to conclude by wishing Venezuela a
successful presidency in the coming month of February.
Venezuela can fully count on our support.

