Mr. Pascoe: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to present the Secretary-General's latest
report on piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast
of Somalia (S/2010/556).

Piracy is a menace that it outpacing efforts by the
international community to stem it. The numbers are
appalling. As of 4 November, the International
Maritime Organization (IMO) reports that over 438
seafarers and passengers and 20 ships are being held by
pirates. That is an increase of almost 100 kidnapped
victims in less than a month. As always, we of course
call for the immediate release of all individuals still in
the hands of Somali pirates.

Pirates are also taking greater risks and seeking
higher ransoms. Just a few days ago, for instance, a
European Union warship escorting supplies for the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) was
brazenly attacked by Somali pirates from a large
freighter that had itself been seized about a month ago.

These acts continue to have serious effects on the
regional economies of East Africa and the economies
of the wider world. In addition, sea-based transport
routes for humanitarian and peacekeeping assistance
are crucial to maintaining a vital lifeline for Somalia
and to providing hope for the Somali people.

The problems would be worse if not for the very
considerable international anti-piracy efforts that are
now under way. Member States have put in place a
strong naval presence off the coast of Somalia, with an
unprecedented level of coordination of navies in this
area. The Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia, which now has 53 participants, is also scaling
up other efforts to counter piracy.

International naval forces and coalitions off the
coast of Somalia have disrupted more pirate operations
and protected more vessels than ever before. Also,
more has been done to implement self-protection
recommendations developed by the shipping industry
and the International Maritime Organization. We are
10-62873
deeply grateful to the European Union, NATO and all
Member States participating in the protection at sea of
World Food Programme humanitarian shipments and
deliveries contracted by the United Nations Support
Office for AMISOM.

But much more is required to tackle the root
causes of piracy off the coast of Somalia. The United
Nations, through the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga,
is playing a key role in helping to integrate the vital
work of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia, the Transitional Federal Government's own
piracy task force, military action by various navies, and
the development of the security, economic and
humanitarian sectors into an overall strategy for
Somalia. A revitalized Kampala process is one of the
key mechanisms to make sure that Somalis themselves,
in their various administrative regions, work together.

As indicated in the Secretary-General's report,
fighting piracy demands simultaneous action on three
fronts: deterrence, security and the rule of law, and
development.

I shall now turn to deterrence. First, more needs
to be done to deter attacks against ships. In this regard,
we would like to appeal once again to all ships
traversing the seas off the coast of Somalia to follow
the recommendations of the IMO and industry-
developed best management practices. Such measures
have proved effective in significantly reducing the risk
of being hijacked. This should be seen as a first line of
defence and is an area where the private sector is
expected to play its part.

Regional cooperation is also critical. Two more
Member States, Jordan and Oman, signed the Djibouti
Code of Conduct this year, bringing the total number of
signatories to 16. IMO has assisted in the
implementation of the Code, which has resulted in the
establishment of three regional counter-piracy
information-sharing centres in Tanzania, Kenya and
Yemen; the construction of a training facility in
Djibouti; and capacity-building in legal and maritime
law enforcement issues.

Deterrence also requires that those found guilty
of piracy and armed robbery face prosecution
according to international law. We welcome the
significant steps taken to improve legal and
prosecution capacities. We are grateful to those
10 countries currently shouldering this burden. I should
10-62873
like to acknowledge in particular Kenya and Seychelles
for their efforts to prosecute suspected pirates.

A number of States in the region have pointed out
that it would be very difficult for them to sustain
prosecution efforts and the imprisonment of convicted
pirates without commensurate financial support. The
Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia has proved to be a
useful instrument for supporting initiatives in this area,
but it needs more funding. I urge Member States and
the maritime industry to contribute generously to the
Trust Fund. My colleague, Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, will provide more details on the
issues related to legal capacity-building.

Long-term imprisonment arrangements for
convicted pirates, ideally in Somalia, still need to be
identified. In his recent report on legal issues related to
piracy off the coast of Somalia (S/2010/394), the
Secretary-General put forward seven possible options
for furthering the aim of prosecuting and imprisoning
suspected pirates. The same report reminded us of the
applicability of international human rights law to
countering piracy off the coast of Somalia.

The Secretary-General's Special Adviser on
Legal Issues related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
Mr. Jack Lang, is carrying out further consultations on
the subject. He recently travelled to the region,
including Somalia. The Secretary-General looks
forward to receiving his recommendations before the
end of the year.

The second pillar of an integrated response to
piracy is establishing security and the rule of law in
Somalia. The United Nations, the Contact Group on
Piracy and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development are all working to develop the capacity of
Somalia to deal with piracy on land and close inshore
waters. This is linked to the broader efforts to develop
Somalia's justice and security sectors. In this
connection, strengthening the Somali police and
establishing a coast guard or a coastal monitoring
capability should be an integral part of the debate
about piracy. The Somali security institutions must also
be provided with predictable funding to allow them to
undertake their functions.

Special Representative Mahiga will continue
working closely with newly appointed Prime Minister
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed to ensure that more
3
focus is placed on making the Joint Security
Committee operational and on moving more rapidly to
build Somalia's security forces. It is important that the
training of Somalia's security forces be closely
coordinated by the United Nations and AMISOM.

Piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia are as also very much an economic issue. The
Somali people, especially the young, need greater
incentives not to succumb to the lure of the pirate
economy. As long as piracy is so lucrative, with
ransom payments adding up to tens if not hundreds of
millions of dollars, and other economic incentives so
bleak, the economic imperative is very obvious.
Economic rehabilitation and the creation of alternative
livelihoods, especially the development and
rehabilitation of coastal fisheries, must be at the centre
of our efforts to fight piracy.

Piracy has created a daunting challenge for the
people of Somalia and the international community.
Warships alone, of course, will not solve the problem.
We need to continue to fight this battle in the broadest
manner, focusing simultaneously on deterrence,
security and the rule of law, as well providing
economic alternatives for young Somalis. We must also
make piracy and robbery off the coast of Somalia
costly by addressing impunity and building the
capacity of the Transitional Federal Government to
expand its authority and deal with law and order.

