Mr. Khamis (United Republic of Tanzania):
Tanzania thanks you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important event to discuss the Ebola
outbreak in Africa.

We also welcome the resolution adopted
today - resolution 2177 (2014) - which sends a strong
political message from the Council in the collective
effort to bring the outbreak under control. Tanzania
was a sponsor of the resolution as a show of support
and solidarity, as well as sympathy with those who have
succumbed to its deadly effects. We pledge to stand
with them in addressing this massive health crisis.

We would like to pay tribute to Member States,
regional organizations, the United Nations system, the
private sector, civil society and individuals for their
various interventions in addressing the Ebola crisis. We
believe that where there is a will, there is a way.

The adoption of resolution 2177 (2014) is a positive
contribution to the ongoing efforts. The Ebola outbreak
has demonstrated the vicious, destructive force of the
disease. The projections for its spread and consequences
are alarming and should provoke an immediate,
collective response on our part.

The pronouncements made in this Chamber today
and elsewhere are truly encouraging. All that remains is
to put those commitments into action and wipe the Ebola
virus from the face of the Earth once and for all. The
triumphs of mankind, especially those demonstrated by
the permanent members of the Council, give us much
hope that the deadly Ebola virus can be contained and
eliminated.

The victims of the Ebola outbreak deserve our
sincere sympathy and support. The isolation and
stigmatization of Victims, including through transport
restrictions, is truly unfortunate. All of us should do
whatever it takes to refrain from engaging in such acts,
which would be tantamount to adding insult to injury.

The Ebola outbreak has highlighted the fragility
that persists on the African continent and which is also
present in other parts of the world. While directing our
efforts towards eradicating the Ebola outbreak in the
short and medium term, in the long term we should seek
to build the capacities of the health and humanitarian

sectors to cope with major outbreaks such as that of the
Ebola virus.

This past June, at the twenty-third ordinary
session of the African Union summit in Malabo, His
Excellency President Kikwete expressed the readiness
of the United Republic of Tanzania to render support
to the regional interventions spearheaded by the
African Union as well as international interventions,
including those undertaken by the United Nations
system. Our commitment and resolve remain: we will
continue to work with partners to strengthen the level
of preparedness to address the Ebola epidemic.

