Mrs. Pandor (South Africa): Ijoin my colleagues in
thanking you, Mr. Minister, for convening this meeting.
We appreciate the useful briefings by Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, and Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General.

This is a timely and pertinent debate, as the majority
of the Security Council's work is dominated by conflict
situations on the African continent. This debate affords
us a unique opportunity to reflect on efforts to resolve
conflicts in Africa, including by African countries
themselves, as well as through partnerships with
continental and external role players.
At the outset, we must acknowledge the positive
strides made by the countries of the continent in
realizing the aspirations of the African Union (AU)
to silence the guns in Africa by the year 2020 and in
pursuing African solutions to African problems. That
has led to the resolution of long-standing conflicts that
have plagued the continent.

Since the transition from the Organization of
African Unity to the African Union in 2000, the continent
has developed a strong and effective framework for
addressing security challenges and threats to Africa.
Those frameworks have created a synergy between
the AU and the regional mechanisms for conflict
prevention, management and resolution. Through the
success of such initiatives, the continent has made
strides in reducing violent and armed conflicts, guided
by the principles of subsidiarity and complementarity
between the AU and our regional organizations.

However, despite the progress made, the challenges
facing the continent are complex and many, involving
multiple cross-cutting issues. Those include the
building of peace and security, promoting inclusive
socioeconomic development and resilience, promoting
access to resources and economic opportunity
and promoting and entrenching democracy, good
governance and respect for humanity.

Historically, some of the contributing factors to
instability and insecurity on the African continent
include poverty, marginalization, inequality,
unemployment, a failure to manage diversity, poor
governance, the scramble for natural resources,
external interference and, more recently, the impact of
climate change.

Furthermore, the matters of terrorism, Violent
extremism and intercommunal violence have
perpetuated instability in some parts of the continent,
taking advantage of the vacuum created by ongoing
conflicts in many areas, as well as the scourge ofpoverty
and inequality. Coercive and often unconstitutional
changes in Governments through military adventurism
have also served to degrade social capital and the
economies ofcountries, resulting in widespread violence
and humanitarian crises. The impact of such challenges
is not only felt on the continent but reverberates to
other countries and regions. Concerted efforts and
partnerships are needed to deal with all those complex
threats, including understanding the conditions that
give rise to them. Consequently, for us on the continent
to experience sustainable peace and prosperity, the
achievement of the continental aspiration envisioned
in Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the United
Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
is required.

The United Nations makes a considerable
contribution to assisting regional and subregional
organizations in Africa to resolve conflict situations,
primarily by deploying its envoys and peacekeepers, as
well as through the valuable work of the United Nations
development system. For its part, the African Union
and its subregional organizations have demonstrated
leadership by reacting rapidly in order to maintain
peace and security on the continent, drawing on their
close proximity to the situations and the ability to
comprehend internal and regional political dynamics.

Since the onset of its young democracy, South
Africa has been an active player in the United Nations
and the African Union. In recognizing the importance
of those multilateral institutions, South Africa has
contributed significant resources to both institutions.
We have consistently been one of the biggest financial
contributors to the African Union. We are also a major
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping missions in
Africa. That includes our past deployments to the AU-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, as well as
in Burundi, and our current significant presence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where our troops
are part of the highly effective Force Intervention
Brigade to build peace in our region.

We have also supported peacebuilding in Africa
through support for political processes. We will
continue such support, including our work to train
women leaders in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

However, the threats to peace and security require
much more. We need to strengthen the partnership
between the United Nations and the AU in achieving our
aspirations for a conflict-free and prosperous continent.
A key area pertaining to strengthening that relationship
is the financing of AU-led peace support operations. It
is unfortunate that, despite commitments to that effect,
there has not been much progress on the predictable
and sustainable funding for AU-led peace support
operations from United Nations assessed contributions.

Another area of importance to which we would like
to see attention given is the need for effective measures
for transitions and drawdowns from peacekeeping to
post-conflict reconstruction and development. It is
vital that efforts be coordinated and harmonized by
all relevant stakeholders to ensure that peacebuilding
activities are effective and that the peace dividends of
such operations are consolidated.
The United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and
the AU Framework for Post-conflict Reconstruction
and Development should work together to provide
assistance to post-conflict countries, as requested
by many such countries. National ownership and
leadership are pertinent to the success of peacebuilding
efforts and, most importantly, to preventing countries
from relapsing into conflict.

We would like to further underline the imperative
of involving women on an equal footing in peace and
security processes. That is not only limited to countries
in conflict but includes all States Members of the
United Nations in order to ensure the prominent role
of women in issues discussed in institutions such as
the Security Council. The inclusion of young people
in such processes would of course also be Vital. Such
provisions and actions would not merely be for the
sake of gender parity in the pursuit of peace but are
a necessary requirement for sustainable and effective
peace, security and development on the continent.

In conclusion, my country is of the firm view
that partnerships for the pursuit of peace and security
in Africa can succeed only provided that all partners
complement each other, while working towards one
common objective of achieving sustainable peace and
security. That requires supporting Africa in taking a
lead in finding solutions to the conflicts that persist on
the continent.

Conflict has no boundaries. Its impact reverberates
across the world. It is therefore in the interest of all of
us to work hard to ensure a safe and prosperous world.

