Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, for his important
briefing. We are also grateful for the information
provided by Ambassador Joanna Wronecka and offer
her our special appreciation for her excellent work
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan.

Peru, which is closely monitoring the renewed peace
process in South Sudan, reiterates its disappointment at
the continued delays in completing the required tasks
with a view to forming of a revitalized transitional
Government of national unity. Those outstanding
issues contribute only to generating uncertainty among
the people of South Sudan and increasing ethnic and
intercommunal violence. We trust that the parties,
aware of their responsibilities to ensure the future of
the country, will fulfil their commitments and make the
necessary progress within the framework established.
In that regard, we stress the urgency of enabling greater
progress in transitional security arrangements. The
joint security mechanism workshop that was convened
in November was a positive step in that regard, and we
hope that it will result in concrete measures to enable
the inauguration of the transitional Government.

We are confident that the recent meeting between
President Kiir and Mr. Machar will contribute to
achieving that objective and to laying the groundwork
for progress on the issue of the number of states and
boundaries. We call on the parties to pursue their
dialogue and identify a process that will enable
those disputes to be resolve progressively, while also
preventing conflict from resurging in different areas of
the country.

We are concerned about the persistence of ethnic and
intercommunal violence and sporadic clashes between
the Government and opposition forces in the Equatorias
region. We reiterate our call on non-signatory groups to
join the commitment to peace in South Sudan, because
dialogue is the only means through which lasting peace
can be achieved. We regret the continued reports of
incidents of human rights violations and abuses, which
have resulted in the deaths of 133 civilians in the past
three months, as the current situation in that territory
is one of impunity. At the same time, we are also
concerned that despite a decrease in political violence,
conflict-related sexual violence has persisted. We hope
that the endorsements of the respective action plans of
various armed groups will be accompanied by concrete
measures to hold the perpetrators of those crimes
accountable for their actions.

We also regret that, despite the decrease in conflict,
the humanitarian situation remains critical. The World
Food Programme has recently warned of a possible
famine in South Sudan that could affect more than
5.5 million people, as a result of the disastrous impacts
of drought and flooding and the fragile economic
situation in South Sudan. Despite that uncertain
scenario, we hope that the collective interest will
prevail and enable a definitive ceasefire, as well as the
allocation of the announced funds for the transparent
and effective implementation of the agreement.

I conclude by expressing my conviction that the
Council will remain united in providing the support
and political follow-up required to cement the peace
process in South Sudan, in close coordination with the
regional leadership carried out by the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
whose actions will play a decisive role in what we
hope will soon be a successful transition period and in
consolidating peace.

