Mrs. Viotti: I would like to thank you, Sir, for
your invitation to address the Security Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of October.

I am pleased to inform the Council that an
integrated strategic framework for peacebuilding in
Guinea-Bissau was formally adopted by the Guinea-
Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
on 1 October. The framework is the result of an
extensive consultative process and a series of thematic
discussions held both in Bissau and in New York. It
binds together the Government, all relevant
stakeholders in the country and the international
community in a set of commitments aimed at
contributing to peacebuilding efforts.

The active and meaningful engagement of civil
society in Guinea-Bissau in that process indicates that
the framework is more than a governmental document.
It is owned by Guinea-Bissau as a whole. It points to
the root causes of conflict and the fundamental issues
that will remain a priority and will need to be
addressed in the coming years.

The adoption of the strategy followed my last
visit to Bissau as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission country-specific configuration on
10 September. During that visit, I had the opportunity
to meet with representatives of the new Government
established on 5 August, as well as with local civil
society, party leaders, international agencies on the
ground and the diplomatic community. The main
findings of the mission were outlined in a document
entitled "Peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau: Conclusions
and recommendations of the Peacebuilding Committee
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau" (PBC/3/GNB/l),
which was forwarded to the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council and circulated during the most recent meeting
of the International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau,
held on 23 September.

The political situation in Guinea-Bissau remains
calm. The change in Government was carried out in a
peaceful atmosphere and within the framework of the
Constitution. Many key ministers were kept in office,
which was a sign of the country's willingness to move
ahead with the necessary reforms. The fact that an
attempted coup d'etat in August did not succeed was
seen as proof that resorting to force is no longer
supported as a means to settle disputes and that the
military remains willing to adhere to civilian rule.

The immediate priority included in the
Framework refers to the successful holding of
legislative elections on 16 November. Following the
completion of voter registration and the publication of
the list of candidates, preparations for the elections are
well under way. It is expected that, following new
pledges by donors, the funding gap will be filled if the
additional resources are used with flexibility to help
the Government cover its sovereignty costs. All parties
in Guinea-Bissau are aware of the significance of the
elections for the preservation of stability and
democracy. The Peacebuilding Commission stands
ready to support and monitor the electoral process.

Reactivation of the economy and rehabilitation of
the infrastructure are also considered key priorities in
the Framework. Guinea-Bissau is a rich country
endowed with fertile lands and abundant rain. What is
needed is our support in order to create an enabling
environment for investment, to diversify and add value
to the country's products, to create employment
opportunities and to generate wealth. In the end, it is
the creation of fiscal revenues that will enable the
Government to operate autonomously in ensuring
stability and delivering basic services to the population.
Overcoming the infrastructure bottleneck 4 in
particular, the current energy crisis - is of pivotal
importance for the revitalization of the economy. In that
regard, we welcome the ongoing dialogue with the
World Bank and look forward to the completion of
procedures aimed at providing Guinea-Bissau with
additional electricity-generating capacity.

All stakeholders in the country recognize security
sector reform as a matter of central importance for
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau. We were pleased to
note the progress made in that area following the active
engagement of international partners, in particular the
European Union and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). The disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process has already
been launched with the selection of 30 high-ranking
military officials, who have been demobilized and who
will be trained in the field of agriculture in Brazil, with
the support of ECOWAS, with a View to their
reintegration into civilian life. That initiative could
serve as an example and prompt similar projects aimed
at reintegrating members of the military into society, as
that aspect is considered essential to the success of
security sector reform.

Strengthening of the justice sector, consolidation
of the rule of law and the fight against drug trafficking
are matters of growing concern on the part of national
authorities and the international community. We are
convinced, as stated in the Strategic Framework, that
the fight against drug trafficking is an issue involving
capacity-building and strengthening the country's
ability to monitor its borders and to identify, arrest and
bring to justice those responsible for criminal acts. It is
imperative that national, regional and international
actors step up their efforts in that regard. In particular,
the immediate disbursement of pledges announced at
the Lisbon Conference last year is essential if we are to
make further progress. We look forward to the
Ministerial Conference to be held in Praia at the end of
October with the objective of enhancing the regional
dimension of the fight against drug trafficking.

In the fight against drug trafficking, there are no
easy short cuts; reinforcing the capacity of the State is
key. Strategies and plans aimed at strengthening State
capacity are already in place in Guinea-Bissau; they
need funding. The international community needs to
demonstrate its seriousness in addressing the issue by
providing the necessary support. Guinea-Bissau may
still be a fragile State, but it is no longer in a war or a
conflict situation, nor is there any evidence that a
conflict is about to take place. On the contrary, there is
a legitimate Government, which is currently in the
process of consolidating its democracy and its
institutions and is trying to pave the way towards
stability and development. Guinea-Bissau deserves our
full respect as a sovereign country whose willingness
and resolve to address its own problems with the
support of international partners should not be called
into question.

Public sector reform is another priority
considered in the Strategic Framework - one that has
an impact on virtually all other areas. Important
initiatives are under way, such as the launching of an
integrated and transparent system of public finance
management that will allow for greater centralization
and transparency of data related to the Treasury,
customs and revenue collection. The country's
performance under the emergency post-conflict
assistance programme of the International Monetary
Fund has paved the way for the commencement of
discussions on a regular programme. That in turn will,
we hope, lead the country to reach the completion
point under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative earlier than expected.

Last but not least, social issues critical to
peacebuilding also deserve our unwavering attention.
The recent cholera epidemic, which has affected more
than 7,000 people and has taken a heavy toll in terms
of mortality, is a sad reminder of the plight of a
population that remains trapped in a vicious circle of
poverty and instability. Poor health and education
conditions are associated with the lack of potable water
and of reliable energy sources in Guinea-Bissau. I hope
that the Strategic Framework will contribute to
addressing that situation by calling attention to the

predicament of the citizens of Guinea-Bissau and by
galvanizing international partners to take action to
reverse the situation. Where such adverse living
conditions prevail, peace cannot take hold.

The Strategic Framework is a flexible document
that will be adapted to circumstances on the ground as
they change. It is to be complemented by a monitoring
and tracking mechanism, which will comprise a matrix
of indicators and benchmarks enabling us to monitor
progress in its implementation. The first semi-annual
review of the Framework will take place in early 2009.
The new Government, which will take office after the
legislative elections, will have an opportunity to
consider the document and to propose adjustments if
necessary.

Therefore, the adoption of the Strategic
Framework does not signal the end of our engagement
with Guinea-Bissau; on the contrary, it marks the
beginning of another important stage of our work. Now
we must ensure that concrete measures will be
implemented in order to provide the citizens of
Guinea-Bissau with the much-awaited peace dividend.

In order to achieve concrete results, however, we
will seek to continue playing our role of marshalling
additional resources and promoting enhanced
coordination among various partners in Guinea-Bissau.
A new allocation of the Peacebuilding Fund could be
announced to finance projects having catalytic impact
and short-term benefits for the population. In that
regard, it will be necessary to strengthen the presence
of the implementing agencies on the ground so that the
Government of Guinea-Bissau can be assisted in an
effective and meaningful manner in formulating and
executing such projects. In particular, a more coherent
and integrated United Nations presence will be crucial
in order to provide the Government with the support it
needs to overcome its many obstacles and effectively
address peacebuilding challenges.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Government of Guinea-Bissau, as well as other
stakeholders in the country that have actively
contributed to the finalization of the Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding. I am particularly grateful
to the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations country team in
Guinea-Bissau for their invaluable support during all
stages of this process. My appreciation goes also to the
colleagues in the Peacebuilding Support Office for their
continuous and unrelenting assistance. Finally, a work
of thanks goes to the delegations of the country-specific
configuration on Guinea-Bissau for their active and
constructive engagement.

