Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first of all to thank Mr. Mark Malloch
Brown, Mr. David Nabarro, Mr. James Morris,
Mr. Nils Kastberg and Mr. Jakob Kellenberger for the
comprehensive information they have given us
concerning the various parts of the humanitarian
picture in Iraq.

We share the sentiments expressed by the
members of the Council with regard to the situation in
Iraq. There has been some progress, although the
situation remains precarious. We also share the concern
expressed about security in Iraq. As has been said,
efforts are being made to improve the situation. We
hope that it will improve rapidly so that humanitarian
assistance can be provided and the enormous
humanitarian task in various sectors can proceed
smoothly, as required by the urgency of the situation.

I would like to ask a number of questions. I have
already written them down, so, of course, my concerns
may overlap some of those that have already been
expressed.

One of the results of the lack of security is that
various aspects of the provision of services might to
some extent be entrusted to religious groups in parts of
Baghdad and in the south of the country. I would like
to know whether measures are being taken to take
control of the hospitals and other service entities so as
to take them out of the hands of religious groups.

At a recent meeting of the Council, my delegation
asked for information with regard to salaries for local
workers. According to available information, the
situation has not improved. We would like to know
more about the payment of wages to local workers, as
that would have a direct impact on the poorest families.

We were informed this morning that the
nutritional needs of the three northern governorates are
once again being addressed and that, fortunately, there
is no food crisis in Iraq. We would like to know how
long it would take to resume delivery of the 480,000
metric tons normally distributed in the country. We
would also like to know about the situation regarding
the quantity of supplies that are usually distributed in
other zones.

Given that the oil-for-food programme has been
extended for another six months, we would also like to
know whether it will be necessary to buy food during
this period and whether provisions have been made to
fund such purchases.

Finally, reference has been made both in the press
and in today's discussion to the mass graves that have
been discovered. We are concerned about the problem
of identifying remains and returning them to family
members. We would like to know who is taking
responsibility for this matter in the field.

