Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors of both
Tribunals and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals for their comprehensive reports
(see S/2014/546, S/2014/556, S/2014/826, S/2014/827 and S/2014/829) and respective briefings.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has supported the
establishment and work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) since its
inception. The legacy ofthe ICTY is manifested through
its extensive documentation of serious violations of
international humanitarian law committed on the
territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991. As such,
it should serve as a constant reminder that there is no
impunity for serious war crimes.

Concerning the work of the ICTY, we note that
all indictees have been brought before the Tribunal,
including several long-term fugitives. We are also aware
of the Tribunal's heavy current workload. However, we
expect the Tribunal to complete its work in the nearest
possible future and to take all necessary measures to
eliminate delays.

Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches high importance
to regional cooperation, which we deem essential if the
ICTY is to complete its mandate and deliver justice
for the many victims of the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia. That remains a crucial precondition for the
process of reconciliation within the country and within
the region as a whole. In an effort to promote further
regional cooperation with its neighbours, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has signed protocols on cooperation
in the prosecution of war crimes, which define the
channels for conducting investigations that concern
the citizens of other countries. Within the framework
of those protocols, productive cooperation among the
judicial institutions of the countries in the region has
intensified, particularly in the areas ofinvestigation and
witness protection. On 5 December, 15 people believed
to have been involved in the torture and murder of some
20 people February 1993 were arrested in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Serbia. Those arrests were made
possible thanks to cooperation between the prosecutors'
offices and law enforcement officials of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia. That is a clear example of
regional cooperation between our two countries and
sends a strong message for ending impunity for crimes
committed during the war.

The cooperation of witnesses, especially victim-
witnesses, is critical to successful war crimes
prosecutions not only before the ICTY, but also before
the courts in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Victim-witnesses
often testify about very traumatic events, and during
the course of their testimony they relive their trauma.
Often, the same victim-witnesses testify in different
trials and against different persons accused of war
crimes. Considering such complexities, we stress that
all those dealing with victim-witnesses must exhibit a
high degree of awareness and treat them with respect
for their dignity and human rights. In that regard, we
respect today's remarks and Prosecutor Brammetz's
recognition ofthe role ofwitnesses in court proceedings.

Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to cooperate with
the ICTY by allowing access to documents and archives
in witness protection matters. Our commitment to
investigating, prosecuting and appropriately punishing
persons responsible for the war crimes remains
unquestionable. The prosecutions of war crimes that
are now the responsibility of the justice system of
Bosnia and Herzegovina are a critical component of the
ICTY legacy. In its fight against impunity, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to strengthen the national justice
system at all levels, while bringing those responsible
for the most serious crimes to justice.

In November, the Office of the Prosecutor of
Bosnia and Herzegovina had 679 recorded war crimes
cases, against 5,119 persons accused of war crimes.
Today, 35 prosecutors are working in the Office of the
Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina on war crimes
cases. This year, 42 war crimes indictments have been
issued against 82 persons. We expect that by the end of
the year this number will increase to 100, which is about
25 per cent of the total number of all persons accused
of war crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the past
10 years. The Courts of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
issued 107 final judgments against 175 persons.

The National War Crimes Strategy, which was
adopted in 2008, sets the uniform criteria in Bosnia
and Herzegovina for assessing the complexity of war
crimes cases. According to the Strategy, the most
complex and highest-priority war crimes cases should
be judged within seven years, and the other cases
within a period of 15 years from the adoption of the
Strategy. The Strategy improves consistency injudicial
practices across the whole country and at all levels. It
also strengthens the capacity ofthe judiciary and police
authorities while ensuring the protection and support of
victims and witnesses.

The implementation of the Strategy is a complex
process with participation of numerous institutions of
all authority levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
main causes of delays in the implementation of the
Strategy occur due to delays in the transfer of less-
complex cases from the State level to the level of the
entities and the Breko district, delays in establishing a
centralized database of war crimes case files, and the
method of measuring the performance of prosecutors'
and judges' performance. Strengthening the efficiency
of the implementation of the Strategy depends on our
ability to strengthen the capacity of the judicial system.
In achieving this objective, we would like to welcome
the European Union's support to the implementation of
the Strategy's goals.

An important aspect of cooperation between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the ICTY is the search for
missing persons, exhumation efforts and the exchange
of information about victims. In the aftermath of the
war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the number of missing
persons is estimated at 30,000. While 20,000 cases have
been solved to date, 8,000 persons remain missing.
The search for missing persons involves cooperation
between the Government institutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and international organizations,
non-governmental organizations and the network of
Red Cross and Red Crescent societies.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the Ambassador of Chile in his role as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
and the Office of Legal Affairs of the United Nations
for their work.

