Mr. Sharma (India): It is a pleasure, Sir, to see
you presiding over the Council. Let me also thank you
for calling this meeting and for giving us the
opportunity to speak on this vital issue at a very critical
juncture. Since the representative of South Africa has
spoken on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, we
will confine ourselves to making some supplementary
remarks.

We are deeply dismayed and gravely concerned
over the spiraling violence in Jerusalem, the West
Bank, the Gaza Strip, other parts of the Palestinian
National Authority area and Israel in recent weeks. The
tragic cycle of violence that has engulfed the region
has undermined prospects for lasting peace and
stability based on a just settlement of differences and
has led to a most tragic toll of lives and to regrettable
loss of property. It is imperative that this chain of
action and reaction be broken before the level of
violence escalates beyond control and the prospects for
lasting peace recede further. The consequences of
unfettered violence could be disastrous, and we support
appeals for the abjuration of violence and for a
cessation of hostilities.

The escalating situation in the region has had a
severe impact on the Middle East peace process and
has seriously dented the trust and confidence between
the parties - a necessary condition for forward
movement in terms of the time-frame envisaged in
negotiated agreements on interim and final status
issues. Apart from the inherent danger of extremist and
intransigent thinking gaining the upper hand and
radicalizing public opinion, such a situation vitiates the
prospects for a peaceful resolution of the conflict.

We deeply regret the loss of so many lives
through wanton acts of terrorism. The closure of Orient
House and other Palestinian offices in Jerusalem and
Abu Dis and the excessive reaction to the incidents of
violence have led to a regrettable exacerbation of the
conflagration. This will inexorably lead to a
deterioration of the situation through heightened
violence and will have an adverse impact on the
resumption of dialogue. Moreover, such actions also
impair the carefully crafted agreements and
understandings that are the basis for the dialogue.

We remain convinced of the need for dialogue
and peaceful negotiations in finding a just,
comprehensive and lasting settlement of all issues in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land for
peace. A worsening situation of violence cannot be a
solution to the complex and sensitive issues at stake. It
should not be allowed to undermine the peace process
for which the leadership of Palestine and Israel have
striven so hard. Consequently, it is all the more
imperative to eschew violence and exercise utmost
restraint in order to create a atmosphere conducive to
the resumption of dialogue. We hope that, with the
requisite will and determination and with a strong
commitment to establishing durable peace, diplomacy
and statesmanship will prevail. We trust that the
wisdom and sagacity displayed in concluding past
agreements will be a guide to a just and successful
outcome.

