Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Times change, and institutions must adapt to change. This
is the subject of our debate today.

In the field of peace-keeping, the Security Council and
the troop-contributing countries must work closely together.
If Member States are not willing to participate in operations
that are decided on and renewed by the Council, there will
be no peace-keeping.

It is therefore reasonable to expect the Council to be
aware, before taking decisions, of the military resources and
political support forthcoming from Member States. It is
equally important for troop-contributing countries, before
taking decisions regarding their own commitments, to
discuss with members of the Council the options under
consideration for mandate and force structure. Today's
debate reflects a somewhat curious situation: troop-
contributing countries are again before the members of the
Security Council to plead for more formal and more
complete consultations. Is this not in our best mutual
interests?

My delegation associates itself fully with the ideas
formulated by a number of troop contributors, as expressed
by the Permanent Representative of Argentina. We warmly
congratulate Argentina on its initiative and efforts. Thirty-
four countries officially requested the holding of this
debate, the purpose of which is to examine ways in which
the existing consultative mechanisms can be strengthened.
We note with satisfaction that three permanent members of
the Council, by associating themselves with the letter
requesting a debate, have clearly reaffirmed their
endorsement of this objective.

(spoke in English)

In our View, the consultations held in pursuance of the
implementation of the presidential statement of 4 November
1994 have been of some use to troop contributors, as well
as, we hope, to members of the Council. They have
provided a forum for frank exchanges of views, even if
troop contributors have not always availed themselves of
that opportunity. Much remains to be done to make these
consultations more effective. The sensible proposals
enunciated by Argentina, if adopted by the Council, would
undoubtedly achieve this result. We strongly believe that
the implementation of these proposals would improve the
United Nations handling of peace and security issues.

Canada attaches particular importance to some of these
proposals. We strongly believe that a distinction needs to be
drawn between the discussion of political and mandate
issues, on the one hand, and of operational issues, on the
other. The former are the concern of the Council and
should be discussed directly with it; the latter are the
responsibility of the Secretariat and need to be addressed
between it and troop contributors. The current process of
joint Secretariat and Council chairmanship of meetings
with troop contributors tends to confuse political and
operational issues. Consultations with the Security
Council on mandate issues should therefore be chaired by
the Council, with the Secretariat present as a matter of
course.

We also wish to highlight, in the context of
enhancing the United Nations rapid-reaction capability,
the need for the Council to consult potential troop
contributors, identified by the Secretariat, before
launching and operation. Such a measure, combined with
the establishment of a standing, deployable headquarters
involved in contingency planning, would give the Council
confidence that its decisions could be implemented
quickly and effectively.

I cannot leave this subject without making a few
further comments about the decision-making process of
the Council. No consultation procedure agreed by the
Council will work if the members of the Council do not
seriously take into account the advice offered by troop
contributors and by the Secretariat.

As I noted on 12 December, during the debate on
the renewal of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda (UNAMIR), the Council seems overly inclined
to take decisions about peace-keeping operations which
are sometimes ambiguous, decisions which have not
always been fully thought out or which are based on
incomplete information. Too often, such decisions seem
to be motivated by short-term political expediency rather
than by a careful consideration of all relevant factors.
This has resulted in difficulties we are all aware of and
has seriously impaired the credibility of our Organization.

Mandates agreed by the Council must be clear and
implementable. They cannot be dissociated from the force
structures necessary to carry them out. To do otherwise is
to court disaster, and we have seen enough of that to
know this to be the case.

We would argue that the Security Council has two
choices regarding peace-keeping operations. The first,
which is obviously the more desirable, is to ensure,
through careful, methodical decision-making, that the

 

United Nations response is fully adequate, politically and
militarily, to meet the exigencies of the situation at hand.
All the resources agreed to be necessary must be available
to implement the decisions taken. The second option, if the
United Nations cannot marshal adequate resources, is to do
nothing. The era of half-hearted, under-resourced and ill-
defined operations should now be over. Effective
consultations with troop contributors, we believe, can help
ensure that this will be the case.

