The President (spoke in French): I now take the
floor in my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of my country, Rwanda.

(spoke in English)

I have been honoured to preside over today's very
important debate on the theme "Prevention of conflicts
in Africa: addressing the root causes". Allow me,
first, to express my sincere gratitude to the Secretary-
General forjoining us earlier today. I also welcome the
presence of my colleague, His Excellency Mr. Elliot
Ohin, Minister of State and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of the Republic of Togo, as
well as His Excellency Mr. Tekeda Elemu, Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia to the United Nations, who
is representing the Chairperson of the African Union
(AU).

The rationale behind the selection of today's theme
lies in the unfortunate fact that around 70 per cent ofthe
Council's agenda relates to conflicts in Africa. Clashes,
whether between countries or peoples or between States
and their citizenry, are not unavoidable. There can be
no issue that the Security Council faces that deserves
greater focus or urgent attention than the prevention
of conflict. As we shift energy and resources from
conflict zone to conflict zone, from crisis to crisis, are
we truly fulfilling our mission if we fail to properly
examine the factors that cause conflicts and crises to
begin with? While each conflict has its unique causes
and consequences, there is also a discernible pattern
from which we can draw and apply lessons. Those
deep-rooted causes include the legacy of colonial rule
for Africa, problems of nationality and identity, a lack
of democracy and the rule of law, corruption and poor
governance, foreign interference, poverty, famine and
disease, and the exclusion of groups based on gender,
ethnicity, religion, region and other criteria. Preventing
conflicts is possible, provided that those elements are
addressed and that leaders and stakeholders, together,
do not shirk their responsibilities.

Collective efforts in advancing peace and
security in Africa have come a long way since the
Organization of African Unity was founded, 50 years
ago. Since 2002, when the African Union succeeded
the Organization of African Unity, Africans across the
continent have demonstrated a growing capacity for
working together in reducing and preventing conflicts.
Of course, there are problems with inconsistent and
poor implementation, and the African Union needs
and has decided to do more and better. And yet, in my
view, there is little doubt that the best initiatives for
conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction
are emerging from Africa itself, and the United Nations
would do well to embrace those ideas.

Much has been said in this Chamber today on the
root causes of conflict in Africa. I will therefore limit
my statement to three key points - first, democracy
and political and economic governance; secondly,
regional and subregional integration; and, thirdly,
justice and reconciliation.

On democracy and political and economic
governance, when the Organization of African Unity
was transformed into the African Union, governance,
democracy and human rights became a centrepiece of
the emergent agenda. Those principles were enshrined
in the Constitutive Act of the African Union and
in the African Charter on Democracy, Elections
and Governance. The ethos of democracy and good
governance embedded in the Constitutive Act sits
alongside the guiding principle that peace and security
are vital prerequisites for both. Furthermore, as some
before me have pointed out earlier today, the AU has
adopted processes that have at their core the promotion
of governance as a conflict prevention tool, through
building a more efficient, responsive and accountable
public sector. One of those processes is the African
Peer Review Mechanism, mentioned earlier, which
assesses participating Governments against a set of
agreed principles. It aims to promote and reinforce
high standards of governance by analysing systemic
or structural problems in countries under review
and to provide advice and recommendations before
crises erupt. The African Union Peace and Security
Architecture was another milestone for integration and
conflict prevention in Africa. It has established other
important instruments, including the Panel of the Wise,
the Continental Early Warning System and the African
Standby Force. Should the Security Council not take
careful note of those policy responses? Should it not ask
how can we can adapt such initiatives and apply them
on a global scale?

On regional and subregional integration, democracy
and good governance are not the only tools for conflict
prevention in Africa. Another is regional and subregional
integration. The vision of the African Union is to build
an integrated, prosperous and peaceful continent,
driven by its own citizens and capable of standing as
a dynamic force in the world. We have sought to build
a strong and prosperous African Union with each of
its subregional building blocks being able to deal with
its own conflicts without foreign interference and lift
up the continent and its people. Take, for example,
the recent efforts of such regional groupings as the
Economic Community of West African States, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
Such targeted regional approaches allow us to address
other issues that fuel conflict in Africa, such as
artificial boundaries and the related issue of nationality
and identity, and the remnants of our colonial past that
act as conflict-enabling forces, as have been identified
by other speakers today.

The collaboration and partnership among the
Security Council, the African Union and its subregional
organizations is of the utmost importance. We welcome
the strengthening of that cooperation over recent years,
including through the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa. Ofcourse,
we can do more, particularly in conflict prevention
and resolution, while ensuring that the partnership is
coherent, consistent and based on mutual respect.

Justice and reconciliation represent another
important tool for conflict prevention in Africa. As
the Council may be aware, Rwanda is commemorating
this very month the nineteenth year of the genocide
perpetrated against the Tutsi of our country. For Rwanda,
justice and reconciliation are inextricably linked. After
much trial and error, the Government and the people of
Rwanda have come to embrace a home-grown system of
reconciliatory justice known as Gacaca. Those courts,
which closed their doors in June 2012, handled about
2 million cases in 10 years. Rwanda is in a position to
share its unique experience with post-conflict societies,
where it applies, of course, and as a means to bring
about reconciliation and prevent further conflict.
Meanwhile, as was mentioned by a few speakers earlier
today, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
while establishing useful jurisprudence, particularly in
the area of genocide as a crime and rape as a weapon of
war, has handled only 75 cases in 17 years.

Another international tribunal, sometimes
presented as a mechanism for conflict prevention,
is the International Criminal Court, which was also
mentioned earlier today. If any country in the world
has reason to support a robust system of international
justice, it is Rwanda. However, we do not believe that
the International Criminal Court, as it operates today,
plays a constructive role in preventing conflict; instead
of delivering justice and preventing impunity, in
practice the Court has shown itself subject to political
manipulation from areas outside conflict zones as well
as from competing factions within such zones. We
cannot therefore support an international criminal court
that condemns crimes committed by some and not by
others, or that imposes itself on democratic processes
or the will of sovereign peoples. Such a court cannot
facilitate reconciliation, which is a vital precursor to
peace.

Both as a sovereign nation and as an African
member of the Security Council, Rwanda will continue
to uphold the principles ofjustice and fairness and to
ensure that the independence and sovereignty of the
continent is respected. Once again, I urge the Council
and the international community to focus on the
structural prevention of conflicts and to examine their
underlying political, social and economic causes. We
have no doubt that an enhanced partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations will yield a better
outcome for the prevention of conflict on the continent.
In addition, the personal vision and commitment of the
Secretary-General to Africa's peace and security will
remain an important ingredient in that regard.

I would like to conclude my remarks where I began.
It is Rwanda's sincere hope that, through this debate,
and in many future forums, the Security Council
will direct its focus and energies towards preventing
conflicts rather than the mere day-to-day management
of crises once they have erupted.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Council has before it the draft text of a
statement by the President on behalf of the Council on
the subject of today's meeting. I wish to thank Council
members sincerely for their valuable contributions to
the draft presidential statement. In accordance with
the understanding reached among the members of the
Council, I shall take it that they agree to that statement,
which will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/PRST/2013/4.

It is so decided.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15 pm.
