Mr. Quinlan (Australia): We thank Jordan for its
boldness in convening today's debate on a topic that
is challenging, indeed breathtaking, as you have said,
Mr. President, for all Member States.

Conflict prevention is why the United Nations
exists, but 69 years after the San Francisco Conference,
we are still struggling every day "to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war". We witness
the daily devastation in Syria, in South Sudan, in
the Central African Republic and elsewhere, and the
objective of peace seems as distant as ever.

In bringing us to today's debate, Mr. President, you
have asked how our understanding of history can help
prevent, rather than feed, further conflict, and how the
Council itself can help to foster that understanding.
Those are crucial questions for the Council as we work
to prevent conflict between States and conflict within
States.

To prevent conflict, we obviously must first
understand what triggers and drives it, we must be able
to recognize the warning signs, and we must recall the
particular vulnerability of countries that have already
experienced conflict. Between 1945 and 2009, more
than half of all countries that suffered from civil war
relapsed into conflict after its apparent end. Too often,
history appears to be destiny.

National mechanisms are usually in the best position
to establish what led to conflict and what happened
during it. Truth and reconciliation commissions can
provide an authoritative account of events that led to
or occurred during conflict, and so serve as a crucial
bulwark against those who might seek to use and
abuse history in order to foment further conflict. The
Security Council should provide strong support to
those mechanisms, as it did in resolution 2100 (2013) in
relation to Mali.

Other parts of the United Nations system, including

the Department of Political Affairs, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund, should
similarly support and encourage truth and reconciliation
processes. Accountability processes play an important
role in helping to uncover the truth. Justice that is
perceived to be legitimate can help a society move
past the pain of its past by holding perpetrators to
account and giving victims a voice. Criminal courts,
whether national or international, can, through their
findings, confer legitimacy on otherwise contestable
facts, making it more difficult for societies to deny past
wrongs.

There must be accountability for perpetrators
of serious crimes, regardless of affiliation. Victors'
justice is short-lived and ultimately destructive. One
of the formative achievements of the United Nations
has been the spread of universal rights as an accepted
norm, the idea that we all have obligations regardless of
our relative power over others. That is something that
the Council must always continue to emphasize.

The Security Council should also make full use of
the tools at its disposal, inherently imperfect though
they are. Commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions established by the Council under Article 34
of the Charter have proven to be useful mechanisms.
The Council's recent decision in adopting resolution
2127 (2013) to establish a commission of inquiry to
investigate violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights in the Central African Republic is an
essential part of addressing that conflict.

Of course, other United Nations organs can also
play a role. The Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, authorized by
the Human Rights Council, has played a persuasive role
in establishing the terrible facts of that conflict.

Regional organizations can also play a role.
The African Union's recent decision to establish a
commission of inquiry to investigate events surrounding
the current conflict in South Sudan is an example. In
our own region, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) is working with the United Nations
to document lessons learned through ASEAN's good
offices, mediation and facilitation roles and is sharing
experiences on the effective conduct of peace processes
and negotiations. All of those tools can assist societies
to understand events that led to and occurred during a
conflict. Inclusive and transparent processes can help
to ensure that different perspectives and grievances are
heard and acknowledged, and so build a picture of the
broad history of the conflict. Incorporating women's
voices in those processes is fundamental. Nurturing
open and receptive education is essential.

But we must be realistic about the prospects for
ultimately arriving at a shared history. Often no single
history of a conflict or single understanding of events
will be achievable, or necessarily even be desirable.
Differing interpretations of events are inevitable, but
the facts about those events should be inescapable. We
must make every effort to establish those facts and to
record and document testimony. Then we should be
able to ensure that the victors alone do not dictate the
history. The United Nations has an instrumental role in
that, one that can often be decisive. It is a role that we
should embrace seriously in our work.

It is not enough simply to advocate reconciliation
and shared historical understanding. Practical efforts
must also be made to ensure that differences cannot
be exploited to spark further conflict. Central to that
endeavour is ensuring that a post-conflict society is
able to effectively mediate differences and address
grievances. That is where genuine, long-term
peacebuilding comes in, with its emphasis on the
rule of law, observance of human rights, access to
effective judicial or other institutions and participatory
democratic governance. The result will, hopefully, be
institutional legitimacy and social cohesion. Ultimately,
we seek to build inclusive societies where differences,
whether ethnic, racial, religious, political or communal,
are accommodated and State protection is extended to
all individuals, and where recourse to violence and
reversion to conflict is not only unacceptable, but
unthinkable. Only then will countries that have been
devastated by conflict be able to transcend their own
histories.

