Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the People's Republic of China for having
organized this open debate on a very important topic.
We appreciate the concept note (see S/2015/87, annex)
prepared by the Chinese presidency, which deals
substantively with the fundamental areas that are
critical to the proper functioning of our Organization.

Since the inception of the United Nations 70 years
ago, the world has gone through significant and
complex changes. The important principles established
by the Charter of the United Nations, including
respect for State sovereignty and territorial integrity,
the peaceful settlement of international disputes and
non-intervention in the domestic affairs of other States,
together constitute the foundation of contemporary
international law and international relations.

In order to maintain international peace and security
we all need, first of all, to maintain and uphold the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter,
which provides a firm foundation for the universal
application of international law to all Member States.
Our Organization is an organization of sovereign States.
Sovereignty is the fundamental symbol and denotation
of a country's independence, and the embodiment and
reliable guarantor of national interests. The sovereign
independence and territorial integrity of States must
not be infringed upon and must be respected.

One of the main challenges threatening international
peace and security remains international conflicts.
The ongoing armed conflict between Armenia and
Azerbaijan continues to pose a serious threat to
international and regional peace and security. For
more than 20 years, Armenia has been using force to
undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Azerbaijan, in blatant disregard of international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
It has occupied around one-fifth of the territories of
Azerbaijan and has carried out ethnic cleansing against
almost 1 million Azerbaijanis. As a result, there is no
single Azerbaijani left in Armenia or in the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan.

The current impasse in the conflict settlement
process does not benefit anyone. No party is more
interested than Azerbaijan in finding the quickest
possible resolution to the conflict. My country shares the
view of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe Minsk Group and the wider international
community that the status quo is unsustainable and
has negative implications, including for Armenia itself,
which, due to its own policies, is sidelined from all
major regional development initiatives and finds itself
in dire economic and social condition.

The conflict can be resolved only on the basis of
full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Azerbaijan within its internationally recognized
borders. The military occupation of the territories of
the Republic of Azerbaijan and the continued presence
ofArmenia's armed forces there are major destabilizing
factors. Armenia must withdraw its armed forces from
the Nagorno Karabakh region and other occupied
territories of Azerbaijan, constructively engage in
the conflict settlement process and comply with its
international obligations.

The cautious optimism expressed by some after a
series of high-level talks vanished with the recent and
unprecedented large-scale military exercises conducted
by Armenia in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan.
The Armenian side continues to take provocative steps
by regularly and deliberately violating the ceasefire,
and by attacking and killing Azerbaijani military
personnel, as well as civilians residing in the territories
adjacent to the front line. In recent years, such violations
and armed provocations have become more frequent.

Armenia tries to mislead the international
community by speculating on the principle of the
right of peoples to self-determination. Nothing in the
United Nations Charter or the Helsinki Final Act can be
construed as authorizing or encouraging in any sense
the partial or total disruption of the territorial integrity
of sovereign and independent States. International law
is unambiguous in not providing for a right of unilateral
secession from independent States. Armenia itself has
never observed the self-determination principle and has
violated it by using force against Azerbaijan, occupying
its territories, expelling hundreds of thousands of
Azerbaijani civilians from their homes, including
in the Nagorno Karabakh region of Azerbaijan, and
committing gross violations of international legal
norms and acts of particular gravity that amount to war
crimes or crimes against humanity. Armenia's policy
has nothing in common with the realization of the right
to self-determination, and is actually the negation of
that principle. The sooner Armenia withdraws its troops
from the territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan and
engages in good faith and constructively in negotiations,
the sooner the conflict will be resolved to the benefit of
all.

