My delegation commends the President's initiative in convening today's very important open video-teleconference of the Security Council on "Ensuring transparency, efficiency and effectiveness in the work of the Security Council." My delegation would also like to express its appreciation to Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, and Karin Landgren, Executive Director of Security Council Report, for their informative briefings today. Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations emphasizes that the Council should act promptly, effectively and on behalf of the wider membership. That is why its working methods are so important and relevant. As such, my delegation especially welcomes the holding of today's open video-teleconference, with the participation of non-Council member countries. We believe that this, in itself, is a testament to the Council's commitment to continuing to promote transparency and efficiency, while holding itself accountable to the wider membership. We hope that, moving forward, the Council will continue to spare no effort in that regard. In the presidency's concept note (S/2020/374, annex), Estonia invites Member States to consider concrete proposals on improving transparency and efficiency and on ensuring that the Security Council acts on behalf of the wider United Nations membership. To that end, I now have the honour to highlight the following points. First, my delegation expresses its concern that exercising or threatening to exercise the veto power is repeatedly causing stalemates within the Security Council. We therefore hope that the Council will be able to engage in more serious discussions to limit the use of the veto. At the intergovernmental negotiation meetings on Security Council reform, we hear increasingly widespread and strong opinions on the need to abolish the right of veto, which has proven to be one of the main obstacles to the Council's actions and deliberations. At the least, we believe that there should not be any expansion of the right of veto in the future Security Council reform process. Secondly, we support efforts aimed at improving the Council's working methods so as to allow the permanent and elected members to work on as equal a footing as possible. Coordination and joint action among the elected members can be useful tools in overcoming stalemates, fostering the participation of civil society and shining a spotlight on cross-cutting issues. In this regard, we support calls for the fair distribution of work, including penholderships and subsidiary body chairpersonships, among both permanent and elected members. Moreover, we call on the Council to find ways to help improve the preparation of newly elected members that would enable them to hit the ground running upon assuming their seats. Thirdly, we encourage the Council to have more frequent, substantial and systematic engagement with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Based on our recent experience serving as Chair of the PBC in 2017 and Vice-Chair in 2018, we are of the view that the PBC plays an important and unique bridging role between the Security Council and other organs of the United Nations. The PBC is also well- positioned to help mobilize a wide range of relevant stakeholders with a view to sustaining peace from a longer-term perspective, encompassing the full peace continuum and providing advice to the Council for its due consideration. The coronavirus disease pandemic has affected the functioning of the Security Council in various ways, and this gives us much food for thought as we collectively contemplate ways to improve the Council's working methods. We believe that it should be a process that does not rush to conclusions, considering the sustained impact this pandemic will have on how the Council operates in future. My delegation commends the efforts made by Council members to keep the Council working during the past few months despite not being able to physically meet. We hope that the Council will be able to further strengthen its agility by agreeing on additional ways to improve its working methods under extraordinary circumstances, such as record- keeping, the participation of non-Council members and the formal announcement of meetings. My delegation believes that it is critically important that we continue our efforts towards Security Council reform to ensure that the Council becomes more democratic, effective, representative, transparent and accountable. Improving the working methods of the Council is an integral part of this endeavour. The Republic of Korea, in close cooperation with the United Nations and fellow Member States, will continue its strong support for the efforts of the Council aimed at better carrying out its guiding mandate of maintaining international peace and security.
