Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China commends the initiative taken by New Zealand
to convene this meeting on the protection of medical
personnel and facilities in armed conflict. I wish to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
China has listened carefully to the statements by the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and the representative of
Medecins Sans Frontieres, Ms. Joanne Liu.

Last May, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2286 (2016), which calls upon the parties
to armed conflicts to enhance the protection of
medical personnel and facilities in armed conflict.
This underscores the importance that the international
community attaches to the question of the protection
of medical personnel and facilities in armed conflict.
China pays tribute medical personnel and the relevant
humanitarian agencies for their humanitarian spirit
in healing the wounded and rescuing the dying in
extremely harsh conditions and at the risk of their own
safety. I would like to make the following points.

First, emphasis should be put on promoting
political processes to resolve regional hotspot issues.
Only by ending conflict will it be possible once and for
all to eliminate security threats to medical personnel
and medical facilities. The Security Council should
actively work to promote dialogue and negotiations
and facilitate efforts by the parties to conflict to end
them and resolve their differences through dialogue
and negotiations, thereby eliminating conflicts. The
international community should also adhere to a fair
and objective stance and play a constructive role in
promoting political solutions, so as to create favourable
conditions for protecting the safety and security of
medical personnel and facilities during armed conflicts.

Secondly, it is incumbent upon the Governments
concerned and the parties to the conflict to protect
medical personnel and facilities in armed conflicts. The
Governments concerned bear the primary responsibility
for protecting civilians within their borders, and
they should therefore strengthen their measures to
protect medical personnel and facilities. The countries
concerned should investigate, in accordance with the
law, violent acts, including attacks against and threats
to medical personnel and facilities in armed conflicts.
Parties to a conflict should adhere to international
humanitarian law and abide by Council resolutions
and fulfil their duty to protect and allow access to
humanitarian assistance. The international community
should provide support and assistance on the basis of
full consultations with the countries concerned.

Thirdly, humanitarian operations must win the
understanding and trust of the parties concerned. In
armed conflicts, as medical personnel and humanitarian
agencies carry out operations in the discharge of their
medical duties, they must adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, fully
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
countries concerned; adhere to impartiality, fairness
and independence; follow guiding humanitarian
principles and avoid getting involved in conflicts. Such
practices will help to protect medical personnel and
facilities in armed conflict.

Fourthly, the United Nations and humanitarian
agencies should work in synergy to protect medical
personnel and facilities. The United Nations should
conduct an in-depth study and comprehensive
assessment of humanitarian risks and challenges
in armed conflicts. On the basis of the views of the
countries concerned, it should establish effective
mechanisms for communicating with medical
personnel and humanitarian agencies and engage in
the timely exchange of information concerning the
situation on the ground, so as to establish conditions
favourable to the protection of humanitarian efforts,
medical personnel and their facilities. On their part,
medical personnel and relevant agencies also need to
exercise their own awareness of risks and enhance their
own safety and protection.

