Mr. Oshima (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Sir, and the mission of Qatar for the initiative of
holding this important meeting on the Middle East
situation. The region is going through another difficult
and dangerous crisis period and requires the Council's
close attention, given its serious, broad ramifications.

We thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and appreciate his comprehensive report. His report
includes observations and recommendations that reflect
the profound insight that he has acquired in dealing
with Middle East issues over his past 10 years in
office, and as such they merit our serious
consideration.

The September ministerial meeting on the Middle
East resulted in shared views among Council members
and the relevant parties on the following issues.

First, the Palestinian issue is the key; without its
solution there can be no comprehensive peace in the
Middle East.

Secondly, Violence cannot solve the problems;
direct negotiations and dialogue, based on moderation,
mutual tolerance and understanding, are the only way
to achieve progress towards a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the region.

Thirdly, the international community should
accelerate its efforts to move the peace process
forward.

However, it is regrettable that, three months after
the last ministerial meeting, the situation concerning
Palestine has seen further deterioration, despite the
strenuous efforts exerted by the relevant parties,
including countries of the region. Among other matters,
we are deeply concerned about the continuing violence,
which is creating a high number of casualties on both
sides, Palestine and Israel.

It is true that the international community cannot
serve as a substitute for the parties to the conflict
themselves, but that by no means diminishes the
importance of the international community making
efforts to create a conducive environment for the
parties to solve the conflict.

The crisis in Lebanon last summer reminded us
once again that nothing is more essential than
concerted and dedicated efforts and a strong will for
peace among the parties themselves, in order to
overcome the difficulties that divide Palestinians and
Israelis. We therefore welcome the recent agreement by
Israel and the Palestinian Authority on a mutual
ceasefire in the Gaza Strip. We highly appreciate the
leadership shown by President Abbas and Prime
Minister Olmert to produce that significant
achievement.

Japan reiterates its call upon both the Israeli and
the Palestinian sides to exercise maximum self-
restraint in order to ensure that the fragile ceasefire is
adhered to. We also urge both parties to make further
efforts to extend such an agreement to the West Bank
and to achieve a ceasefire there as well.

We call for the safe return of the abducted Israeli
soldier, as well as for the release of the Palestinian
ministers and parliament members held in custody in
Israel.

Direct talks at the highest level between the
parties are the only way to open a window to a solution
of the problems. It is also our hope - especially at this
critical moment - that a direct summit meeting
between President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert
will occur as soon as possible, with a View to the early
resumption of the peace negotiations. We take positive
note of the recent remark made by Prime Minister
Olmert, as it showed his will to break through the
current stalemate.

The political deadlock in Palestine continues to
be a matter of deep concern. We wish to emphasize
here again the critical importance of demonstrating
strong political will, backed by determined efforts on
the part of all the parties concerned. We wish to
express our fervent hope for the continuation of efforts
that will result in the formation of a new Palestinian
Authority government, as well as our firm expectation
that, once established, the new government will make
clear that it will pursue peaceful coexistence and
mutual prosperity with Israel. When that happens, the
international community should respond positively
with all the support such a welcome development
deserves.
We are particularly concerned about the
humanitarian plight of the Palestinian people, which
continues to deteriorate. In that regard, we must
impress upon Israel the need to take immediate action
on the transfer of tax and customs revenues to the
Palestinian Authority and to restore freedom of
movement for the Palestinian people.

Japan has been one of the major donors to
Palestinians for many years, and we wish to reaffirm
our determination to continue to extend assistance to
the Palestinian people. We have been steadily
implementing the assistance we have pledged,
including the emergency humanitarian assistance of
$25 million announced in July this year. We strongly
urge the international community to continue to
provide the humanitarian assistance urgently needed to
cope with the crisis facing Palestinians.

Japan is also working to implement the concept
of a corridor of peace and prosperity, which is a
development plan for the Jordan Valley through
regional cooperation involving Israel, Palestine and
Jordan, with a View to realizing coexistence and mutual
prosperity in the mid- and long-term perspectives.
Japan sent a feasibility study mission to the region in
November, and further action will follow.

With respect to the situation in Lebanon, the
recent domestic political upheavals notwithstanding,
we welcome the fact that the cessation of hostilities has
been maintained and that the overall situation has
further improved and stabilized following the adoption
of resolution 1701 (2006), in particular through the
extension of State authority in the south. We reaffirm
our commitment to the resolution's implementation.
There remain, however, many challenges to be
addressed, foremost among them Lebanon and Israel,
for full implementation of the resolution and lasting
stabilization of the situation in Lebanon.

Japan strongly supports the efforts exerted to that
end by the Lebanese Government under the leadership
of Prime Minister Siniora. Japan hopes that the parties
and factions concerned in Lebanon will engage
proactively - through dialogue and without resorting
to Violence - in the efforts aimed at stability and
reconstruction in the country and the region. No
actions that may contribute to destabilizing the
situation in Lebanon can be tolerated. We condemn the
assassination of Pierre Gemayel, Minister for Industry,
on 21 November.

In order to achieve a permanent ceasefire and a
long-term solution, it is essential for the international
community to address the issues of disarming and
disbanding all remaining militias and of the delineation
of the border. A comprehensive peace that includes
both the Lebanese and the Syrian tracks is the only
way to permanent peace there. In that connection,
Japan expects Syria to play a proactive role towards the
realization of peace and stability in the region.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate the need
for the international community to do its utmost to
revitalize the Middle East peace process. For its part,
Japan, under the new leadership of Prime Minister
Shinzo Abe, reaffirms its readiness and determination
to continue its proactive, constructive engagement in
the process and to extend the maximum assistance
possible to contribute to that end.

