Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and to all briefers for their presentations, which were
sterling. However I expressing thanks not only for the
presentations, but also for the splendid efforts carried
out each day in defense of our children, who represent
our future.
I do not think it is going too far to say that before
1999 the Council had forgotten, or at least not focused
enough attention on the issue of children, because the
first relevant Council resolutions post-date that year.
It was about the year 1996 when we saw two truly
important milestones in the General Assembly: first, the
creation of the Office now ably led by Ms. Zerrougui,
and then the issuamce of the splendid Graca Machel
report (A/51/306), which awakened our consciences.

Since then, progress has been made in a number of
areas, five of which I will address. First, the Security
Council has adopted six resolutions addressing in
monographic fashion the serious issue of children and
armed conflict. I believe that the Council must insist on
their full respect and implementation.

Secondly, we have been able to identify six serious
violations of those rights and four triggers. In that
context, I express my unqualified support for the
Malaysian proposal that abductions be identified as
triggers.

My third point concerns the language of the
mandates ofpeacekeeping operations. In my delegation's
View, the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is the mandate that best reflects the problem of
children in armed conflict. In that context, I wish to
make three specific proposals: first, that the Council
ensure that all peacekeeping operations are provided
with adequate language on the protection of children
in armed conflict; secondly, that an effort be made to
ensure that in peacekeeping operations the Council
has included special advisers on children's issues; and
thirdly, that we ensure optimal training of our Blue
Helmets in those issues.

The fourth area of progress relates to the funds
and programmes, which I believe to have accomplished
extraordinary work. I would highlight the work of
UNICEF as a very specific case in South Sudan, in
the Bentiu area, where, in a very short time they have
been able to ensure education accessibility for 11,000
children, largely due to the efforts of UNICEF and its
donors.

Fifthly, I highlight the recognition of two
delegations - that of Luxembourg, for its fantastic
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign and, of course,
that of Malaysia, for chairing the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

What is the current immediate challenge? In the
very short term, I would propose that it should be zero
tolerance. In other words, we must prevent non-State
actors from using children in armed conflict. In that
regard there has been much success in terms of national
armies, but progress is necessary in terms of non-State
actors. Spain therefore enthusiastically supports the
ability to access non-State actors in order to discuss
that very serious issue with them.

Finally, what tools are available to ensure success
in the face of this difficult challenge? I would quote
three in particular.

The first is public opinion. A few days ago I read
about a 15-year old child, Walid, who was not being
covered by the media. He was saying proudly how at 15
he had a machine gun and he controlled a border post in
Yemen. Nobody paid attention to that. What we should
be doing is looking at social networks. Social networks
should be used to condemn cases of this kind so that
they are not forgotten.

The second is dialogue and action plans. As several
delegations have said, 23 plans of action have been
signed, 12 with non-State actors and 11 with States. We
need to further work on those plans and, if necessary,
sign new ones, as was mentioned by the Ambassador of
the United Kingdom, with non-State actors that have
not yet signed up.

Thirdly, we need to promote interaction between
the International Criminal Court and the Security
Council. I think it is good to remember that article 8
of the Rome Statute establishes very clearly that it is a
crime to recruit children for armed conflict. I would like
to make a very specific proposal to promote interaction
between the International Criminal Court and the
Security Council, in particular with the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict.

Finally, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. I am convinced
that you, Sir, have been inspired by Victor Hugo's
celebrated hero, the young Gavroche, whom Mario
Vargas Llosa described as the most fascinating writer
of world literature. Today France has taken another step
in the right direction.

