Mr. Strommen (Norway): I would also like to
thank the Minister of Justice of Rwanda, Judge Jorda,
Judge Pillay, Prosecutor Del Ponte and the Permanent
Representatives of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and of Bosnia and Herzegovina for their interventions
this morning.

Our appreciation for the work of the two
Tribunals was expressed yesterday during Norway's
statement in the General Assembly's discussion of the
two Tribunals' reports. The judgements of the
Tribunals meet high standards and represent important
contributions to international jurisprudence regarding
the prosecution of the most serious international
crimes. The experiences obtained so far through the
work of the Tribunals constitute a stepping stone
towards the forthcoming establishment of the
International Criminal Court.

Our common goal is the timely fulfilment of the
mandates of the Tribunals. In that regard, I would like
to direct a few brief questions to the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
Judge Pillay, relating to the proposal before the
Council to supply the ICTR with 18 ad litemjudges.

We acknowledge the resource-consuming nature
of trying the most serious international crimes. We
accept that the turnover of cases cannot be expected to
be comparable to the administration of justice in our
own national systems with regard to ordinary crimes.
We also note with satisfaction the significant
improvement in the performance of the Tribunal after
the implementation of methods to streamline the
conduct of business.

As regards the proposal for ad litem judges, we
have a generally positive approach and are prepared to
consider carefully how such methods could be
implemented. My question in this regard is whether we
have seen the full effect of the administrative measures
already implemented. In other words, do we need ad
litem judges now or should we consider further the
effects of the measures taken? Along the same lines,
would we not need a somewhat more clear picture of
the number of new trials to be expected before deciding
on how to proceed?
My second point refers to paragraph 99 of the
Tribunal's report (A/56/351), regarding the relationship
between the ICTR and the authorities of Rwanda. The
Minister of Justice of Rwanda spoke today about the
national legal system in Rwanda and its relationship to
the crimes in question. Could the President elaborate a
little on the Tribunal's present and planned cooperation
with the Rwandan authorities aimed at preparing for
the situation after the Tribunal's mandate has been
fulfilled?

My third point has to do with the Outreach
Programme of the ICTR, which we feel is an essential
complement to the main public information activities
of the Tribunal. Norway welcomes the continuous
developments and improvements in the Programme.
We encourage all States to support actively the
continuing work of bringing the judicial process and its
results closer to the civilian population of Rwanda.
Could the President indicate what she sees as the main
challenges to the Programme in the future and what the
Council and the general membership of the United
Nations, in general, can do to help?

