Mr. Kolby (Norway): We had hoped that
disarming Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction
could be done peacefully through a united approach by
the Security Council. This was unfortunately not the
case.

A major task before us now is to ensure the
protection of the civilian population by all parties to
the conflict and to alleviate suffering through effective
humanitarian assistance. For the longer term, Iraq and
the Middle East must be ensured a stable future, based
on peace and prosperity for the peoples of the region.
As the war unfolds, the international community
must be prepared to meet the humanitarian needs of the
Iraqi people. Norway will shoulder its responsibility by

playing an active role in easing the suffering by
increasing our humanitarian assistance and
participating in the reconstruction of Iraq.

We will continue our close dialogue with the
United Nations, its specialized agencies and the Red
Cross system. We will also support Norwegian
humanitarian non-governmental organizations, already
active in the region. In addition to our contributions to
meet the acute humanitarian needs, we will also
consider assistance towards reconstruction of
infrastructure. Norway will contribute in the areas
where we have capabilities and competence on the
basis of assessed needs and in coordination with others.

There are considerable resources vested in the oil
for food programme. Norway joins others in urging the
Security Council to keep this programme running, to
meet the most immediate humanitarian needs of the
population. The oil for food programme should be used
to alleviate the growing humanitarian crisis and for
reconstruction. In this respect, we would like to appeal
to the Security Council to agree quickly on the
continuation of the oil for food programme, giving the
Secretary-General the necessary authority and
flexibility to respond to urgent humanitarian needs.

Iraq is a country rich on resources and human
capital and will, no doubt, also contribute to rapid
reconstruction once the present conflict is over. It is
important that the overall international assistance is
coordinated by the United Nations. We welcome the
Secretary-General's statement outlining such a role for
the United Nations.

If the Security Council is to play its role of
safeguarding international peace and security, as
envisaged in the United Nations Charter, it is
imperative that the unity of the Council is maintained.
This must be the lesson learned.

