Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation should like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having accepted the request of the
British delegation to convene this important open
meeting on one of the most sensitive regions of Africa
and the world. I also thank both of this morning's
briefers, Mr. Feltman and Mr. O'Brien, for their
presentations and for the updated information they
kindly brought to our attention.

The Lake Chad Basin is one of the parts of Africa
where the changes in the characteristics of the physical
environment have an impact not only on the daily lives
of people but also on the security and stability of the
countries that surround it. My country, Senegal, well
aware of the many benefits of the joint management of
shared natural areas, including rivers and basins, has
made inter-State cooperation on water a fundamental
pillar of its foreign policy. In that spirit, Senegal
launched its Water, Peace and Security initiative,
which it intends to promote at the international level,
including in the Security Council. Our meeting today
confirms the relevance of such an initiative.

Materially, the people of the Lake Chad Basin are
imperilled by the drastic shrinkage of the lake due
to drought, desertification, climate change and the
overexploitation of natural resources. Those phenomena
have increased the vulnerability of the inhabitants and
aggravated social conflicts over the access, use and
sharing of resources from the Lake Chad Basin. This
tragic situation has transformed the area into fertile
ground for the infiltration and extremist activity of
violent terrorist groups, the notorious Boko Haram first
among them. In that regard, my delegation recognizes
and supports the cooperative efforts of the countries of
the Lake Chad Basin Commission to address together
both the structural and cyclical challenges facing them,
in addition to the rampant insecurity, new threats and
duress caused by the ongoing attacks and kidnappings
perpetrated by Boko Haram.

The concerted response of the countries of
the region, with the support of the African Union,
subregional organizations and the international
community is beginning to show results, in particular
the meaningful military successes carried out by the
by the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF). But
the countries in the region require additional logistical,
financial and even human support, including in the
area of intelligence, if they are to more effectively
address the numerous challenges facing them with
respect to security, humanitarian needs and sustainable
development.

According to the latest report of the Secretary-
General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (S/2016/566), the number
of displaced persons in the Lake Chad Basin is now
2.4 million people. These displaced persons, most of
whom are women and children, are exposed to every
danger, including exploitation and abuse. Therefore,
along with military action, an appropriate humanitarian
response must be provided in confronting numerous
challenges, including, among others, migration owing
to the security crisis; the specific protection needs of
refugees and displaced persons, who number in the
millions; and the food insecurity and near-famine
conditions that are rampant in the Sahel and areas at
the centre of the security threat caused by Boko Haram.

In that regard, my delegation commends the
various activities carried out in response to the acute
humanitarian needs of the people, recalling the need
to harmonize initiatives and for ongoing cooperation
among the relevant actors. From that perspective, my
delegation welcomes the regional dialogue on protection
held in Abuja from 6 to 8 June, at the conclusion of
which the participants representing the Governments
of Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria, with
international partners and numerous non-governmental
organizations, adopted measures aimed at providing
additional protection and assistance to the population of
the Lake Chad Basin region. The tripartite agreement
on the voluntary repatriation of Nigerian refugees in
Cameroon, signed on 9 June by the Governments of
Cameroon and Nigeria and the regional representative
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, which deserves to be commended.

My delegation underscores the challenges associated
with funding and calls for greater mobilization to bridge
the gap, which remains considerable, with only 22 per
cent of the necessary funds having been received. That
is why my delegation has echoed the appeal made by our
two briefers this morning, as well as by our colleague
from the United Kingdom, for the $250 million pledged
to the Multinational Joint Task Force to be quickly
disbursed, and above all for more be done to balance
the $723-million budget proposed by the countries of
the subregion.

