Mr. Quinlan (Australia): We particularly welcome
the initiative of Rwanda and your presence here today,
Madam President, as we mark the terrible experience
of the Rwandan genocide. Rwanda painfully knows the
cost of the failure of us all to prevent conflict.
In its opening lines, the Charter of the United
Nations defines the purpose of the Organization as
being to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war. The prevention of conflict was the primordial
reason that we created the United Nations. Yet,
typically, we spend our time responding to situations in
which populations are already caught up in the misery
of conflict.

There has never been any question that prevention
is better than cure. Prevention can save countless lives
and untold trauma and grief. The World Development
Report 201] tells us that, on average, a civil war can
cost the equivalent of 30 years of lost gross domestic
product growth. No society in conflict has achieved
a single Millennium Development Goal. Regional
spillovers are inevitable. There are 42 million people
displaced today as a result of conflict, violence and
human rights abuses.

Today, we are focusing on the root causes ofconflict
in Africa. I will mention three issues.

First, let me turn to institution-building. The links
between strong and trusted institutions, development
and conflict-prevention are well known and well
understood. In Timor-Leste in 2006, four years after
independence, violence erupted between the military
and the police, causing further deaths and massive
internal displacement. Yet, just two years after that,
the country was able to withstand the shock of dual
assassination attempts on the lives of the President and
the Prime Minister, without further deterioration in
the security situation. Over the two intervening years,
Timor-Leste was able to develop stronger institutions
and to offer alternative tools to violence and handle
the shock. The Parliament, the security services under
civilian oversight, and justice institutions all played
their roles.

Secondly, with regard to economic opportunities,
the nexus between security and development is obvious.
We simply must work to create - and narrow the gap in
access to - economic opportunities, in particular for
young people, women and other marginalized groups.

Thirdly, with regard to natural-resource
management, natural resources can be a source of
conflict, as we know, but can also present decisive
opportunities for growth. Australia is sharing its own
experience and expertise to support African countries
in their efforts to maximize economic benefits from
their extractive sectors in a regulated and sustainable
manner that returns revenue to the State. Joint
development across borders can often be effective.
In addition to addressing root causes, we must also
work to minimize the impact of global challenges that
exacerbate conflict. I will mention just two.

First, let me turn to small arms and light
weapons - the weapons of mass destruction in Africa.
The adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty (resolution 67/234 B) two weeks ago was a historic step towards
controlling the proliferation of such weapons and their
ammunition, but we must work to ensure its robust
implementation by our own Governments and by other
States with our assistance.

Secondly, climate change is affecting Africa
disproportionately, increasing competition for scarce
resources such as food and water. We need to utilize
all the tools at our disposal to minimize threats. That
means bolstering our disaster risk-reduction efforts,
improving early-warning and response capacities,
and strengthening resource management and building
resilience.

I must highlight the responsibility to protect,
19 years on from the Rwandan genocide. Protection
from atrocities is not only a reason to strive to avoid
conflict, but is itself part of conflict prevention.
Likewise, combating impunity for the most serious
crimes - including through instruments such as
the International Criminal Court, a lynchpin of the
international criminal justice system - is essential.

I shall turn now to the role of the African Union
and other regional and subregional organizations. As
we know, such bodies can have unique comparative
advantages in addressing root causes, not least because
such causes often transcend State boundaries.

As Ambassador Tekeda Alemu said on behalf of the
Chairperson of the African Union (AU) this morning,
the AU is building a transformative peace and security
architecture. The Peace and Security Council and the
Peace and Security Department are complemented
effectively by the strategic use of representatives and
AU missions, the appointment of high-level mediators
and the dispatch offact-finding missions f for instance,
the joint pre-election observer mission to Kenya.

We commend the African Peer Review Mechanism
as an African-driven initiative that allows frank
messages on governance.
AU conflict-prevention mechanisms are evolving,
and there is a need to support their development. We
would, for example, welcome the full operationalization
of the Continental Early Warning System and its
integration with subregional and national systems,
as well as the strengthening of its relationships with
the Panel of the Wise and the African Peer Review
Mechanism.

AU-United Nations cooperation on prevention
has been growing. Its impact has been demonstrated
in efforts to avoid an outbreak of renewed hostilities
between the Sudan and South Sudan last year. However,
that cooperation has often been crisis-driven. Efforts
to move beyond a reactive approach have been helped
by more institutionalized meetings and dialogues at
the working level, through the Joint Task Force and
Security Council-African Union Peace and Security
Council meetings. We would suggest that we consider
conflict prevention at the next such meeting between
those two bodies.

In conclusion, we must acknowledge that the
Security Council is itself often crisis-driven. We
should make better use of preventive tools, including
horizon-scanning and increased responsiveness to
early warning signs. We welcome Rwanda's intention
to focus on root causes in the Council's Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa.

While many of the root causes go beyond the
Council's direct purview, the Council still needs to
be focused on those causes and their consequences.
Clearly, the cost in human suffering, wasted resources
and lost opportunity speaks to why this has to be done.

