Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her briefing and her
work.

I also associate myself with the statements to be
made by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

The situation in Haiti contrasts markedly with
that of most of the topics covered by the Council.
Not everything has been resolved in Haiti and many
obstacles remain, which are risk factors in the country's
progress. However, opportunities also exist. I have in
mind the proposals to address social inequalities and
human rights violations that were drawn up in Geneva
in February by the Independent Expert on the situation
of human rights in Haiti, Mr. Gustavo Gallon, who was
appointed by the Human Rights Council.

We are therefore pleased to see the country slowly
emerge from the acute crisis that led the Council to
deploy a peacekeeping operation there 10 years ago.
On the occasion of that anniversary, we are beginning
to see the success of our collective action, through
the Mission and the various Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General, and how it is paying off. I
will therefore limit my comments to two aspects that
lie at the heart of the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH): support
for political dialogue and the stabilization of the
security situation.

We are concerned by the growing delays in the
organization of the electoral process. None of the
elections scheduled for 2014 have been held, and despite
the agreement reached in June between the President
and opposition, it does not seem likely that the date of
26 October, on which the general elections had been
scheduled, will be respected. We know that democracy
thrives on elections. Their regularity is the hallmark
of a healthy democracy. Local, legislative and partial
senatorial elections have been postponed for too long,
while the major election - the presidential election of
late 2015 - is already on the horizon. It is therefore
essential that the organization of the electoral process
be resumed quickly, without any impediments and in a
spirit of democratic responsibility demonstrated by all
actors.

We note with satisfaction the elements of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2014/617) referring to the
gradual strengthening of the Haitian National Police.
The decrease in certain forms of crimes and the police's
growing territorial control are also positive signs.
The Haitian National Police, as we know, still needs
MINUSTAH'S support in conducting its operations.
However, we also note that it is now showing itself to
be more capable of dealing with public disturbances.
It may not yet operate completely independently,
but it has learned how to better control crowds and
prevent demonstrations from degenerating into violent
confrontations. For us, the strengthening of the Haitian
National Police must, of course, remain central to
MINUSTAH's activities.

We also should not question the quality of the
Mission's contact with the population, which depends
in particular on the ability of its staff members to
speak French. With that in mind, it seems clear that
MINUSTAH's reconfiguration should continue. Not to
change anything or to change things only on the margins
of the Mission's current scope would be to disregard
the tangible signs of progress, which have just been
noted. Similarly, to prevent MINUSTAH from adapting
to the changing circumstances would be tantamount
to underestimating the political risks and would also
reward those who reject democracy. By maintaining the
status quo, the international community would deny to
Haiti the opportunity to emerge from the crisis.

The Mission must evolve in size and nature. We
support the Secretary-General's recommendation to
renew the Mission's mandate by continuing to reduce
its military presence by three battalions. The police
component should remain at the strength it is now.
That scenario is the result of lengthy evaluations and
exchanges. MINUSTAH'S evolution has not been
taboo for almost a year, and, in his previous report
(S/2014/162) issued in March, the Secretary-General
already provided a number of reconfiguration options.

The Secretary-General has today fine-tuned
his analysis, thanks to the findings of the strategic
assessment mission that was conducted on the ground
in June. According to the Force Commander, who
briefed us yesterday ina closed meeting, the reduction
recommended by the Secretary-General is a prudent
reconfiguration of MINUSTAH that would allow it to
retain its capacity to act in military terms.

Significant work lies ahead, in particular that of
satisfactorily defining MINUSTAH's mandate within
the allocated resources. MINUSTAH's transformation
should be a catalyst for our reflection on the international
community's commitment in Haiti. The conditions for
its success are now known and they lie within a credible
time frame. We must also consider the United Nations
presence after the elections to consolidate our work.

