Mr. Garcia Margallo (Spain) (Spoke in Spanish):
This is the first time that I participate in an open
debate of the Security Council since Spain became a
non-permanent member on 1 January. It is a worthy
opportunity for me to do so since the matter that brings
us here today is of extreme gravity.

My first words are of emotion and respect. I was
moved by the testimony we heard, which will resonate
for years in this Chamber. The voices we heard are the
voices of people of goodwill, people immune to hatred
and the desire for revenge. Their words of brotherhood
are raised against the intolerable harassment, the
irreparable pain and the humiliation inflicted. These
voices speak for the elderly and for men, women and
children who have been persecuted, expelled from their
lands or massacred; they are the voices of the inhabitants
of the Middle East, the cradle of civilizations, the
source of spirituality and wisdom; they are the voices
of a region that is the heritage of all of humankind and
that today, more than ever, is being torn apart because
of the utter disregard for life and human dignity.

Their suffering does not leave us unmoved. Their
presence here today at the United Nations gives us
greater dignity, it humanizes us and makes us stronger.
We owe them our admiration and gratitude. They
embody the best of the human condition. On behalf
of Spain, which I am honoured today to represent
on behalf of its King, its Government and its people,
I want to reach out to them and extend my fraternal
greetings filled with affection to each and everyone of
the members of the communities that they represent.

Now let me ask: what is the reason for this debate.
Why are we here? I think the reason is that we run
the certain risk that the rich and pluralistic Middle
East will disappear. The Middle East is more than a
geostrategic space of the first order. It is also a melting
pot of races, cultures and beliefs. It is the cradle of the
three great monotheistic religions practiced by most of
the inhabitants of this planet. But it is also the region
that gave birth to Yazidism and the Baha'i, Druze and
Ismailist faiths and Mandaeism. Much earlier, the region
witnessed the rise of Zoroastrianism, Manichaeism and
Mithraism.

The jihadist terrorism of Daesh threatens to
annihilate the diversity that is inherent to the region.
Just as we express without any reservavtion our most
emphatic rejection and condemnation of jihadist
terrorism, we cannot and must not allow for that
phenomenon to be confused with Islam. jihadism has
manipulated and twisted the message of Islam. It has
kidnapped it and held it hostage, creating a violent,
cruel, totalitarian, oppressive and expansionist
ideology. Furthermore, the overwhelming majority of
the victims ofjihadist terror are Muslims.

The fight against jihadist terrorism is not the
manifestation of a conflict between Islam and the
West, nor is it a clash of civilizations. Rather, it is a
confrontation between civilization, with all of its
manifestations of freedom, creativity and diversity, and
mass barbarism, which aspires to reduce the individual
to an object subject to brutality. It is that simple; it is
that terrible.

Expressed in such terms, the debate affects not
only individuals living in the Middle East, but each and
every one of us, and each and every one of our nations.

The French presidency of the Council has most
appropriately convened this debate. Not only is it
timely. It is also a moral and political obligation. It is not
enough for us to express our indignation, or express our
regret or pain because of so many dreadful crimes. The
Victims and the entire international community expect
that the Council will act with unity, determination and
intelligence against barbarism and hatred. We have
been doing this. Today's meeting should lead to a new,
determined step forward in this endeavour.

I wish to express Spain's full support for the
important statement of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon. I fully endorse his statement. The guidelines
that he lays out for us are certain and necessary,
especially those that refer to the establishment of
an advisory panel of experts to advise on peaceful
coexistence among communities of different faiths. The
scourge of terrorism must be fought on many fronts. We
must make greater efforts to prevent the radicalization
and recruitment of young people. We must counter
the falsehoods in the terrorists' discourse. We must
close off their sources of financing. We must promote
harmony among peoples and communities of different
faiths. The action plan that the Secretary-General
has presented to us contains guidelines for the entire
international community. All of us, all of us members,
have to work for it to be implemented and we, especially
at the Council, must ensure that it is complied with.

For Spain,today'sthemeis anabsolutepriorityefirst,
because we have experienced at first hand the scourge
of terrorism. We are well aware of the suffering of the
Victims. We know how important it is to hear their
voices in devising strategies aimed at countering
terrorism. Secondly, Spain has set the protection and
promotion of human rights, the responsibility to protect
and the fight against terrorism as the essential axes of
its foreign policy.

Experience and effectiveness also counsel the
adoption of a multidisciplinary approach that addresses
the root causes of barbarity and injustice. Spain is
promoting various actions within the framework of its
foreign policy to promote intercultural and interreligious
understanding. The Alliance of Civilizations is an
instrument of dialogue among religions and peoples
in the fight against radicalism. Together with Austria,
we are among the founders of the King Abdullah Bin
Abdulaziz International Centre for Interreligious and
Intercultural Dialogue. It is urgent for both initiatives
to deploy their full potential.

The United Nations system must incorporate
those issues into its daily work in a cross-cutting
manner. Indeed, at the latest forum of the Alliance of
Civilizations, held in Bali, Indonesia, last September, I
made a series of specific proposals that, I believe, it is
appropriate to recall here. I proposed the creation of a
platform of religious leaders for peace in conflict areas,
where action is most urgently needed, including Syria,
Israel-Palestine and in Iraq. Religion, as I have stated,
must build peace rather than cause division.

Secondly, I proposed the establishment of a team
of expert mediators in intercultural and interreligious
affairs who can support the mediation, negotiation and
dialogue efforts of United Nations envoys and resident
coordinators and political missions on the ground.

Thirdly, I suggested, and now reiterate, the
inclusion of intercultural and interreligious experts
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
difficult transition from conflict to peace calls for
multidimensional operations adapted to the new
political challenges and realities.

Lastly, I proposed, and continue to propose, that
the peacebuilding agenda, which is closely linked
to the idea of reconciliation and is currently under
review, should incorporate aspects of intercultural and
interreligious dialogue.

The time has come to turn to a new page in the
fight against terrorism and violent extremism. Our
focus must be global, daring, flexible and fully
respectful of human rights and the most sacred
principles of humankind. We must ensure that mass
crimes and abuses of fundamental human rights do not
go unpunished, and must establish a solid foundation
to ensure accountability for perpetrators. We must also
cauterize, at its very source, the hemorrhage being
caused by fanaticism in many societies. We must use
the truth to combat lies and manipulation, and education
to fight ignorance, and we must undertake an active
campaign to unmask extremism.

I want to make two clear, specific proposals. We call
on the Secretary-General to immediately implement
the action plan that he has just presented. I also submit,
for his consideration, that he should appoint, within
the Secretariat and using existing resources, a Special
Representative endowed with a mandate to combat
violent extremism. The Special Representative could,
on his behalf, coordinate policies against the fanaticism
and extremism feeding terrorism. He or she would work
in close coordination with the High Representative for
the Alliance of Civilizations and take into account the
Alliance's valuable legacy.

We also propose the establishment ofa specialized
international jurisdictional mechanism to bring to trial
those responsible for crimes committed out of violent
extremism. The objective of justice and the fight
against impunity cannot be renounced, as highlighted
by resolution 2170 (2014).

I conclude by gratefully expressing thanks for
the convening of this debate. We are facing a conflict
between totalitarianism and humankind's plurality,
between intolerance and the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. Our commitment
must be complete, because we are facing a totalitarian
threat. Somebody must stop that madness, and that
somebody is us - the United Nations. Spain assures
the Council of its full support and willingness in that
task.

