Mr. Fowler (Canada): I would first wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the Security
Council presidency for the month of January. The Council
has already done a substantial amount of work under your
capable leadership. I also wish to congratulate your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Rwanda, for
the diligence with which he discharged his duties during
the month of December.

This being my first appearance before the Security
Council in almost 20 years, I would like to assure the
Council of my delegation's full cooperation in the pursuit
of our common objectives.
Mr. President, with your indulgence, allow me to
join my colleagues and, for my part, express the
sympathy of Canadians for the horrible tragedy which has
befallen the people of Kobe in Japan.

Canada warmly welcomes the Secretary-General's
presentation of the supplement to his Agenda for Peace.
He is doing so at an opportune moment in this, the
fiftieth year in the life of our Organization; it is indeed
time to take stock of the major questions facing the
United Nations. These have been clearly spelled out by
the Secretary-General in the Supplement and in his
Agenda for Development. We all recognize that the
questions raised in the Agenda for Peace and the Agenda
for Development are inextricably connected.

I am pleased to have this opportunity to express
before the Council a few preliminary views on the

 

Secretary-General's paper, a document which Canada is, of
course, examining very closely.

We agree in large part with the Secretary-General's
accurate and eloquent analysis of the quantitative and
qualitative changes in the activities of the Organization in
the field of international peace and security. It is true that
in just a short period of time our collective burden has
become much heavier.

We also endorse the main features of his findings and
recommendations concerning the instruments we must
acquire in order to deal more effectively with the numerous
ethnic, racial, religious and other conflicts which face our
world and which threaten to multiply in the coming years.

Spoke in French

Of course, it is important to improve the range of
instruments at our disposal to enable the United Nations to
fulfil its role. But it is of prime importance that we, the
Member States, decide collectively on the role we are
prepared to play in the face of the bloody conflicts breaking
out all over the world, and on what our Organization's role
should be. These are, without question, hard decisions.

What kind of a commitment are we, the Member
States, prepared to make to prevent the repetition of
tragedies such as Rwanda? We have been unable,
collectively, to provide an adequate response to this
genocide. Under what circumstances are we, the Member
States, prepared to lay the lives of our soldiers on the line
to try to prevent massacres of innocent people?
Obviously there is no easy or immediate answer to
these questions. Past experience has also shown that no two
situations are alike. In some cases, for example, it may be
preferable, despite our sense of urgency, to refrain from
intervening immediately in a conflict by way of a peace-
keeping operation. It may be more effective to try by other
means to help the parties concerned find long-term
solutions to their problems. In other instances a rapid,
significant intervention may be the best approach.

In any case, we can reaffirm our determination not to
remain insensitive to the misery caused by armed conflict,
and reiterate our commitment to try, to the best of our
ability, to find collective solutions more effective than those
used recently.

In the face of the difficulties encountered in various
recent operations, some will feel that the Security Council
should no longer intervene in complex intra-State
conflicts. For its part, Canada encourages the Security
Council to continue to be concerned in solving both
intra-State and inter-State conflicts. As pointed out by the
Secretary-General, intra-State conflicts are today the most
frequent and the most violent.

Others may feel that the United Nations should take
refuge in traditional peace-keeping operations. We cannot
share this kind of approach, which would limit the
international community's intervention to increasingly less
frequent situations. In fact, I would even add that
engaging in the "classical" type of operation is no
guarantee of success at the political level.

We have made some remarkable efforts in the field
of peace-keeping over the past few years and spent
considerable resources on numerous new types of
operations. We have lost a number of soldiers. We have
tried to respond to new world-wide challenges. But the
difficulties we have encountered, particularly in Somalia,
Bosnia, Croatia and Rwanda, have demonstrated that good
intentions alone cannot obtain the desired results. We
must respond to each new situation in an appropriate way
and give the Organization the means it requires to fulfil
its objectives.

I do not claim that I shall analyse the Secretary
General's report in detail today. We shall do so at some
later time and in the context of the General Assembly.
However, I should like to highlight now certain parts of
the Supplement which we feel are particularly important.

The activities of preventive diplomacy and
peacemaking are crucial; there is no longer any need to
demonstrate that they are necessary. As the
Secretary-General indicates, there is no lack of
information on potential conflicts, and it is rather the
reluctance of one or other of the parties to accept United
Nations preventive help that limits our capacity for action.
In order better to use the information at our disposal, we
feel that the Economic and Social Council should assist
the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General better to anticipate problems and
develop strategies to address the economic and social
causes of conflicts. As others have done, we have
supplied the Secretary-General with a list of eminent
personalities who might represent him in preventive
diplomacy activities.

As for peace-keeping operations, we must again
stress the need for clear, achievable mandates from the

 

Security Council, and the need to find practical ways to
institutionalize the Security Council's consultations with
troop-contributing nations. We must also ensure that the
roles of the Security Council, the Secretary-General and
regional organizations involved in the implementation of
peace-keeping operations are clearly defined and respected.
It is worth recalling that, in the final analysis, the Security
Council will always be accountable for the results of such
operations. The same can be said of the Secretary-General's
accountability for the execution of missions.

We have, moreover, come to realize that, as the
Secretary-General points out, it is always dangerous to
transform an ongoing peace-keeping operation which
depends on the consent of the parties into an operation
requiring the use of force. And we, the Member States,
must supply the Secretary-General with the necessary
troops, adequately equipped and trained to carry out their
assigned mandate. We must also give these operations a
sound basis and therefore meet on time our financial
obligations in this respect.

Concerning the Secretary-General's idea for a rapid
response force, Canada, as is known, has launched an
extensive study on practical short-, medium- and long-term
options to improve the rapid reaction capability of the
United Nations in times of crisis. The results of this study
will be available at the next session of the Assembly. To
this end, we have sought the assistance of numerous
international experts and are counting on the active
cooperation of the Secretariat.

We share the Secretary-General's views on
disarmament and the importance of the Conference of
parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, which we hope will be renewed for an indefinite
period. The same applies to the urgent need for the
Convention on chemical weapons to enter into force. The
control of conventional weapons also remains a priority
area of intervention, and we are convinced that better use
should be made of the Register of Conventional Arms, for
example where anti-personnel mines are concerned.

We must admit that to date our experience with
sanctions has produced mixed results. They are an
imperfect but essential instrument and are among the
various mechanisms available to influence the behaviour of
Governments that defy the international community. The
considerable efforts made by a number of States to lift even
partially the sanctions imposed on them show how effective
they are. Even if we could see the advantages of a prior
assessment of the impact of sanctions, we do not feel that
we should establish mechanisms that might unduly delay
their imposition.

We share the Secretary-General's comments on the
need to coordinate effectively international action in the
area of peace and security. We endorse his concept of the
role that regional organizations should play and the
parameters that should guide relations between the United
Nations and the latter. We also believe, like the
Secretary-General, in the usefulness of establishing groups
of "friends of the Secretary-General" to assist him in
meeting his objectives. Such small, well-balanced groups
of interested States have proved their usefulness by
having their members become more deeply involved in
the resolution of conflicts.

Let us hope that this fiftieth anniversary year will be
not only, as it should be, a year a celebration but also a
year of reflection for our Organization. In the coming
months the questions raised by the Secretary-General will
be the subject of discussions not only among States, in
which Canada will participate actively, but among the
general public as well. Let us all encourage a broad, open
debate that will help us set the course for future years.

