Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura for being here and for his
refusal to give up.

We have convened the Security Council today
because the Russian Federation and the Al-Assad
regime have launched an all-out air and ground offensive
against eastern Aleppo and its 275,000 civilians. Russia
and Al-Assad have reportedly launched more than 150
airstrikes over the past 72 hours, killing at least 139
people and injuring hundreds more and laying waste
to what is left of an iconic Middle Eastern city. These
are people who have suffered horribly in the five and a
half years of war, yet they call the attacks from the air
"unprecedented in quantity and quality." The Al-Assad
regime is explicit: it believes only in a military solution.
It says it is going to conquer militarily every last square
inch of Syria. And it does not care what is left of Syria
in pursuing that military solution.

Instead of pursuing peace, Russia and Al-Assad
make war. Instead of helping get lifesaving aid
to civilians, Russia and Al-Assad are bombing
humanitarian convoys, hospitals and first responders,
who are trying desperately to keep people alive. Russia
will argue today, no doubt, that those attacks are
meant to fight terrorism and that the people killed in
this offensive are terrorists or terrorist sympathizers.
That is absurd. Look at the facts. In the first 24 hours
of their assault on eastern Aleppo - an assault, I
would note, whose first strikes were carried out in the
middle of meetings here in New York in which Russia
was saying it wanted to recommit to a cessation of
hostilities - Russia and the regime struck not one,
not two, but three of the four bases used by the White
Helmet volunteers in eastern Aleppo.

The White Helmets are first responders who
bravely rush to the scene of bombings to dig through
the rubble for survivors. Every day, they save lives by
driving ambulances and fire trucks and, where there
are no roads left, running on foot to the homes, schools,
hospitals and markets that Russia and Al-Assad have
attacked. The White Helmets continue to do that even
though they know that the regime routinely carries out
now-infamous double-tap airstrikes - in which they
strike a target, wait for first responders to arrive and
then strike again. A month ago, the world was shocked
by the dazed stare of 5-year-old Omran Daqneesh as
he sat in the back of an ambulance after his home was
bombed. He was rescued by White Helmets. But because
of Russia and Al-Assad's attacks these past few days,

fewer kids like Omran are going to be rescued. Those
buried alive in rubble in eastern Aleppo are much more
likely to die in rubble.

Another target that the latest Russia/Al-Assad
offensive struck at its outset was the Bab Al-Nairab
pumping station, as we have heard, which supplies
drinking water to the people in eastern Aleppo. As a
result, two months after the Al-Assad regime cut off
eastern Aleppo from deliveries of food, medicine and
humanitarian aid, residents will now be at risk ofdisease
and infection as they drink whatever dirty, untreated
water they can find. I would note that an opposition
group also turned off a nearby pumping station that
supplies water to some of the more than 1.5 million
people in western Aleppo, which we condemn. Water
should never be used as a weapon of war, and Aleppo's
residents should not be forced to drink water that makes
them sick, wherever they live. This is obscene.

Eastern Aleppo remains under siege as we convene
here today. It seems the only items making it into eastern
Aleppo these days are barrel bombs and incendiaries,
which witnesses report seeing dropped by Al-Assad's
forces and Russian forces. The combined impact
on civilians of relentless airstrikes and blockades is
crushing. Fuel for diesel generators, the main source of
electricity, is running out. Within a week, there may not
be enough power to keep producing bread. Hospitals,
which have already relocated emergency rooms to
basements and bunkers in an attempt to protect their
patients from routine airstrikes, can barely keep the
lights on. Because the electricity is so often knocked
out, doctors have learned to conduct operations by the
light of their cell phones. Yet each new airstrike brings
them more and more maimed civilians, who they are
forced to treat with fewer and fewer supplies.

Look at the photos that people in eastern Aleppo
posted online in the past two days: Syrians slumped in
blood-spattered hallways; men, women and children
covered in rags and lying in pools of blood in makeshift
hospitals; unconscious babies who need someone to
pump oxygen into their lungs manually when generators
fail. And ifthose victims need specialist treatment, they
cannot get it. Even worse, they cannot leave eastern
Aleppo. They are trapped - savagely, medievally.
The United Nations assembled a convoy of trucks to
deliver aid to eastern Aleppo more than a week ago, but
it remains blocked by the fighting, unable to drive into
that inferno.

Russia, of course, has long had the power to stop
this suffering. The United States worked with Russia
for eight painstaking months to develop an arrangement
that included a renewed commitment to the cessation of
hostilities. Just last week, the United States sponsored
two ministerial meetings of the International Syria
Support Group aimed at halting the violence and
returning to a cessation of hostilities. We did so not
because we think Russia has acted in good faith in
Syria; we know as well as anyone that Russia has
consistently said one thing and done the opposite. We
did so because we know that there can be no peace in
Syria if Russia is determined to keep fighting this war.
We believe that we must do everything in our power
to find a way to halt the violence and get on the path
to a political transition, which is the only way to end
this conflict. That is why, even now, we will continue
to look for any way possible to restore the cessation
of hostilities.

But it is common sense: a one-sided cessation of
hostilities cannot hold. You cannot carry out a massive
military offensive and say you are for peace. That
might work on Russia Today, but it does not work when
the world has reams of evidence proving exactly what
Russia is doing. Last Wednesday, Russian Foreign
Minister Sergey Lavrov sat in this Chamber and
declared that, when it comes to Syria,

"Russia has consistently advocated an exclusively
peaceful solution." (S/PV. 7774, p. 6)

Yet given when the offensive began, it is not
unreasonable to think that Russian and Syrian forces
were literally loading the incendiary munitions and
barrel bombs onto their aircraft as Minister Lavrov
spoke here of making peace. The next day, after Russia
and the regime began to rain its bombs down on civilians
in eastern Aleppo, Minister Lavrov told the press that
plans for a cessation ofhostilities must be saved. This is
Russia's approach to saving the cessation of hostilities?
As the United Nations has said repeatedly, including
today, these airstrikes on residential neighborhoods
may well be war crimes.

Russia today will no doubt again accuse the United
States of causing all of this chaos. They might point to
the single airstrike in which the counter-Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant coalition appears to have struck a
Syrian military position - a strike that we immediately
acknowledged and committed to investigating in full.
Russia will likely try to divert from its own actions by
invoking United States actions elsewhere in the past.
What members can be sure that Russia will not do
today, or any day, is accept any responsibility for its
actions. What members can be sure that Russia will not
do is tell the truth.

I urge my fellow members of the Security Council
to look at the remarks that they have brought today
and to ask themselves, "Does what I am about to read
reflect the gruesome facts on the ground? Does it speak
candidly to who is unleashing this appalling violence?
Would I feel comfortable reading these remarks to a
Chamber packed with the residents of eastern Aleppo
being besieged by Al-Assad's forces and by Russia?" If
not, I urge them to speak directly to Syria's grim reality
and the people who must live with it day in and day out.

This is not the day or the time to blame all sides or
to draw false equivalencies. It is not the time to use the
passive voice that is so common here in the Security
Council. It is not the time to say that "airstrikes took
place" or that "civilians were killed". It is time to
say who is carrying out those airstrikes and who is
killing civilians.

Russia holds a permanent seat on the Security
Council. That is a privilege and it is a responsibility.
Yet in Syria and in Aleppo, Russia is abusing
this historic privilege. And while members of the
Council - certainly including the United States -
have a deep interest in having constructive ties with
the Russian Federation, history will not look kindly on
those Council members who stay silent in the face of
this carnage.

Russia would have the Council live in upside-down
land, where bombing first responders, cutting off
humanitarian aid and supporting a murderous regime
is billed as counter-terrorism. Let us be clear. There are
terrorists in Syria - lots of them -and all of us have
an interest in destroying them. They pose a threat to all
of our citizens. That is why the United States leads a
67-country coalition that has rolled back 40 per cent of
ISIL's territorial holdings in Iraq and Syria, and which
each week liberates more desperate civilians. That is
why the United States negotiated the recent agreement
with Russia, signaling that we were prepared to work
with Russia to fight Jabhat Al-Nusra and ISIL in Syria.
Nobody has to convince the United States of America
of the danger posed by terrorists. Our citizens are often
priority targets all around the world. But when Russia is
espousing fiction, we have to call that out. What Russia
is sponsoring and doing is not counter-terrorism; it
is barbarism.

Let me conclude. On Friday, footage emerged ofthe
aftermath of one of the many recent airstrikes in eastern
Aleppo. In the video, first responders dig through the
rubble of what was once a building, throwing aside
chunks of concrete, and then suddenly one hears on the
video the piercing scream of a child - a child literally
submerged in concrete and rubble. The first responders
then begin to dig more frantically, until the head and
blue and white shirt of the little girl emerges - a girl
crying out in pain and in terror. Eventually, tenderly,
the first responders remove the rubble from around her
and pull that girl - five-year-old Rawan Alowsh - from
the wreckage, her body covered in white dust. It feels
like a miracle, watching her come out alive.

And yet, everyone else in Rawan's immediate family
was reportedly killed in that airstrike: her mother, her
father and her four siblings, all killed. What chance
does Rawan have in this world? What chance does she
have with no family, but also with not even a single
sign that her attackers have a shred of empathy in them?
When Violent attacks against civilians are surging;
when norms of civilized behaviour that we have spent
more than 70 years trying to build are being trampled;
when there is complete impunity for targeting aid
convoys, civilian, residential neighbourhoods, children
and hospitals - impunity - what chance does Rawan
or any of us have?

One first responder said of the relentless assault of
the last few days: "People do not know what to do or
where to go. There is no escape. It feels like the end
of the world." The end of the world. It is apocalyptic,
what is being done to eastern Aleppo. Surely, for
Rawan - who at five years old has lost her entire
family ~ the Council can at the very least have the
courage to say who is responsible for this and, in a
single voice, tell Russia to stop.

