Mrs. Bangura (Sierra Leone): First and
foremost, let me start by warmly congratulating you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June. I also want to
register my sincere gratitude to you for inviting me to
participate in this open debate on the second quarterly

report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/267) on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL).

At the outset, I would like to convey the sincere
gratitude of His Excellency President Ernest Bai
Koroma, as well as of the Government and people of
Sierra Leone, to members of the Council for their
sustained engagement with Sierra Leone and for the
regular monitoring and stocktaking of current events in
the country, aimed at ensuring that the peacebuilding
process is on track.

My delegation's appreciation also goes to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-Moon,
for his comprehensive report on the activities of
UNIPSIL in the last four months. We acknowledge
with thanks his exceptional contribution to the task of
consolidating our hard-won peace and helping to put
the country on the path to sustained economic growth
and development. Our thanks also go to the Chair of
the Sierra Leone country specific configuration - the
Permanent Representative of Canada, Ambassador
John McNee - for his dedication and commitment in
building on the momentum nurtured and developed by
his predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands, Ambassador Frank Majoor.

We deeply appreciate the commitment, dedication
and dynamism of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg,
and the entire United Nations family, as well as our
bilateral and multilateral partners on the ground, for
their invaluable contributions to the search for lasting
peace and stability in Sierra Leone.

The present report validates the Security
Council's decision to adopt resolution 1829 (2008),
establishing UNIPSIL to engage the Government in the
implementation of the Sierra Leone Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework. We concur with regard to
many of the challenges outlined in the report and
acknowledge that more needs to be done to continue to
lay the foundation for sustainable peace and
development.

We have come a long way, and clearly, the recent
globally acclaimed electoral processes the country
undertook in the last seven years since the attainment
of peace should not be seen as end in itself. We are
delighted to reiterate that with the support of the
United Nations family as well as of our bilateral and
multilateral partners the Government reached

significant milestones in consolidating peace. Security
has been greatly enhanced across the country, thus
providing an enabling environment for the population
to engage in their day-to-day activities to improve their
quality of life without fear or hindrance.

Many of the provisions of the recommendations
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission are being
implemented in order to address root causes of the
decade-long conflict that has left the nation with deep
scars. On the question of the constitutional review
process, the Cabinet has considered the report and
referred the issue to the relevant Cabinet subcommittee
chaired by Attorney General, as most of the remaining
aspects consist of matters relating to the entrenched
clauses of the Constitution. We have made significant
progress in promoting the fundamental principles of
human rights and restoring the supremacy of the rule of
law as prerequisites for political stability, economic
prosperity and social values in the society and for
promoting positive general change as the underpinning
theme of the Agenda for Change, a concise strategic
framework conceived by the President to achieve
quicker and sustainable results in our national recovery
and peace consolidation process.

The Agenda for Change highlights key priority
areas of intervention. These include, among other
things, investment in the energy sector, agriculture,
transport and communications, social policy aspects
such as the health and education sectors, and
infrastructure. This policy framework focuses on
private sector development and macroeconomic
stability. The Government also welcomes the Joint
Vision for the United Nations family and is also in full
support of the framework as a viable strategy
complementing the Agenda for Change.

The International Monetary Fund recently lauded
the Government's economic and structural reforms that
have resulted in sustained macroeconomic stability, but
it lamented that it lacks sufficient fiscal space for its
development and poverty reduction programmes.

We are gratified by the collective decision of both
the Government and the Sierra Leone country specific
configuration to host a high-level special session on
Sierra Leone on 10 June to mobilize support and
resources for the implementation of the Agenda for
Change and the Joint Vision in the furtherance of goals
of the Sierra Leone Peacebuilding Cooperation
Framework.

The politically charged atmosphere that translated
into bitterness and violence between supporters of the
ruling All People's Congress and the main opposition,
the Sierra Leone People's Party, during the month of
March in Freetown and Pujehun District was certainly
a test of the endurance of our young and fragile
democracy. In this regard, the President sincerely
welcomed and gave his blessing to the timely and
calculated move by the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General to bring the two parties together to
sign a joint communique on 2 April 2009 in the
presence of the President, Cabinet ministers and
members of the diplomatic corps. That exemplary
innovative approach to conflict resolution has helped
enormously to reinvigorate our young and fragile
democracy, as well as the national reconciliation
process. As an immediate step, the Government has
since banned the radio stations that instigated the
skirmishes that led to the deterioration of the security
situation.

We deeply appreciate the Council's continued
engagement with the subregion, in particular the Mano
River Basin, and stress the need to strengthen the
revitalized Mano River Union, first in its effort to
consolidate peacebuilding in Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Cote d'Ivoire, and secondly to support the democratic
transition process in the sister Republic of Guinea.

I would like to conclude my intervention by
appealing for the Council's active participation at the
10 June high-level event at the required level. I also
want to reiterate our call for the Council's continued
support, understanding and patience.

Finally, I wish to reassure the Council of my
Government's determination to maintain the
momentum towards national recovery and peace
consolidation by striving to overcome the lingering
socio-economic problems of the country and to secure
its future development.

