Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French):
Bulgaria is grateful to you, Mr. President, for having
organized this open meeting on small arms and light
weapons. We also express appreciation for the
document distributed by the Cameroonian presidency
before our discussion today, which will allow us to
focus on our discussions on the key questions of
practical importance for the proceedings of the
Security Council. I also wish to thank Mr. Dhanapala,
the Under-Secretary-General, for his very clear and
specific briefing.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria fully aligns itself with the statement that will
be made by the Permanent Representative of Denmark
on behalf of the Union. My country agrees with and
supports the main thrust proposed by the European
Union aimed at guaranteeing the effectiveness of the
work of the Security Council in the area of small arms.
I would like to add the following comments in my
national capacity.

Bulgaria notes with satisfaction the fact that the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council,
attaches special attention to problems related to the
illicit traffic of small arms and light weapons. My
country welcomes and supports the comprehensive
efforts of the Secretary-General, whose goal is to
overcome this new phenomenon in the area of
international security.

As a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, Bulgaria attaches special importance to the
Secretary-General's report on small arms. The report
reflects the initiatives taken recently by the Council
and identifies the areas requiring the Council to adopt
further measures in order to combat that worldwide
scourge.

Taking into consideration the significance of the
issue of small arms and light weapons, and in response
to the request of the Secretary-General, the Bulgarian
authorities have given their viewpoint on the means
whereby the Council could contribute to combating the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. The
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report reflect to a large extent my country's views.

It should be noted that Bulgaria is participating in
actions to combat the illicit traffic in small arms that
are being carried out at the European and regional
levels. My country supports the collective actions of
the European Union on small arms and light weapons.
Bulgaria is also playing an active role within the
proceedings of Working Table III of the Stability Pact
for South Eastern Europe, which deals with security
issues.

After the United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, held in July 2001, the Security Council
undertook measures, some of which have been
innovative, in order to strengthen respect for the
weapons embargoes already in force and to prevent
access by terrorists and terrorist groups to small arms
and light weapons and weapons of mass destruction.
Groups of experts and monitoring mechanisms to
implement the sanctions play a very useful role in
implementing those measures.

As President of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) regarding
Somalia, Bulgaria has made its contribution to that
process, particularly by establishing a group of experts
on Somalia. It should be noted that the groups of
experts on Sierra Leone and Liberia have contributed
to restoring peace to Sierra Leone. The Monitoring
Mechanism on Sanctions against UNITA has also had a
very positive effect on the evolution of the situation in
Angola. Bulgaria supports and respects the Economic
Community of West African States Moratorium on the
Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small
Arms and Light Weapons in West Africa.

Security Council resolution 1390 (2002) was an
important step in the process of broadening the scope
of mandatory sanctions, including the arms embargo,
beyond the territory of Afghanistan, to target
individuals and entities linked to Osama bin Laden, to
the Taliban and to Al Qaeda regardless of where they
are located.

Another positive development in the work of the
Council that should be mentioned is the emphasis put
on the importance of measures to consolidate peace in
post-conflict situations, such as the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants,
including child soldiers. The Security Council has
emphasized the usefulness of incorporating in the
mandate of United Nations peacekeeping missions
measures to consolidate peace where that would be
appropriate.

Bulgaria is of the View that the principles and
measures contained in the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, as
well as the observations and recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on
small arms (S/2002/ 1053), provide the basis on which
the Security Council, the General Assembly and all
Member States must take and implement relevant
measures in order to resolve the problem of the illicit
trade, stockpiling and spread of small arms and light
weapons.

I cannot conclude my statement without
underlining the extremely important and useful role of
non-governmental organizations in combating the illicit
trade in small arms. Bulgaria welcomes their
significant contribution and thanks them for the
tremendous work that they do both on the ground and
within the United Nations and other international
organizations.

