Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco for his briefing.

Chad is deeply concerned by the violent acts
committed by armed men and separatist groups in
various cities in the east of Ukraine. The actions of
those insurgents, who are reportedly well-equipped
and well-organized, are aimed at taking possession of
public buildings in several cities, further destabilizing
Ukraine and compromising the search for a lasting
political solution.

Chad condemns every instance of violence that
occurred yesterday and today. As we have stated many
times in previous meetings of the Security Council on
the same matter, the solution to the Ukrainian crisis can
only be political, not military. Therefore, the attacks
by armed and clearly well-organized men in unmarked
uniforms are only making an already explosive situation
worse.

Given the dangerous turn that the situation is
taking, we call upon all the parties concerned to show
restraint and calm. We call on them to give priority
to a peaceful solution that respects the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity of Ukraine. In that vein,
a political settlement of the crisis necessarily requires
that the interests and concerns of all parts of Ukrainian
society, in all its diversity, be taken into account.
Neither the attempts of the armed insurgents calling for
parts of Ukraine to be integrated into Russia nor the
recourse to force against those insurgents - much less
a possible intervention by foreign forces - will help to
solve the Ukrainian crisis.
The age-old historical, geographic and cultural
links between Ukraine and the Russian Federation
should in principle serve as a basis for new and
healthier relations of good neighbourliness, mutual
respect and cooperation between them. In that context,
we encourage the Secretary-General and the entire
international community to pursue their mediation
efforts in order to align the positions of the parties
involved and find a peaceful solution that respects the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.

