Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): It is a
great honour to sit here today before you, Mr. President.
We are delighted that you have made the long trip from
Bangladesh to chair the Security Council and to continue
the tradition that the Foreign Minister of Argentina
conducted last month, and that Vice-President Gore and
Secretary Albright conducted in January.

This is a excellent opportunity to tell you, Mr.
President, what a fine job Ambassador Chowdhury and
your entire delegation from Bangladesh have done this
month, especially in producing today's important draft
statement. The fact that you are here today, Sir, illustrates
your country's deep commitment to humanitarian issues,
and your personal commitment to improving the ways in
which the international community deals with them.

On a national note, let me take this moment to
reiterate on behalf of President Clinton how much he is
looking forward to visiting Bangladesh ll days from today.
He looks forward to a fruitful and productive dialogue on
the ways our two countries can work together to advance
our mutual interests. I think that, if he is lucky, he will get
a chance to sample some of those fine Bangladeshi desserts
that we all did on 1 March, courtesy of Ambassador
Chowdhury, when Bangladesh took over the Council.

Today's draft statement is important because it
illustrates the Security Council's engagement in one of the
most tragic, intractable situations in the world today. From
Bosnia and Kosovo to East Timor, Sierra Leone and the
Congo, the United Nations faces the twin challenges of
keeping the peace and helping to provide humanitarian
assistance. These goals are not divisible; indeed they are
mutually reinforcing. The draft presidential statement
recognizes the inexorable relationship between conflict
and humanitarian crises. Although our first priority must
always be to prevent conflict, we must also be prepared
to deal effectively with humanitarian crises if we fail. It
is therefore imperative that we do as much as possible to
see to it that humanitarian needs are integrated with our
planning efforts.

We must define the needs and tasks of peacekeepers
and humanitarian workers respectively. Today we take an
important step forward. Peacekeepers need to be familiar
with humanitarian and human rights law. They must to be
sensitized to the need for prevention and control of
HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases. They also
need to know the fundamental facts in assessing human
displacement. To this end peacekeepers must also be
educated on, and familiar with, not only the Convention
on the Status of Refugees, but the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement produced by Francis Deng, the
Secretary-General's Special Representative on Internally
Displaced Persons.

I am delighted that the Secretary-General and Mrs.
Ogata, who is in New York today, and others are placing
more attention on this issue. We had a meeting on it with
Mrs. Ogata in the Security Council on 13 January, and I
will be making another major statement on this very issue
at the end of March.

We are deeply concerned about the inadequate and
uneven protection afforded to internally displaced persons.
We must re-assess and energize our institutional structures
to deal with this. It is unacceptable that legalistic
distinctions prevent people from receiving the same
assistance simply because they are classified as something
called internally displaced persons instead of refugees. To
them, as I have said many times, they are homeless
refugees whether they cross an international border or not.

United Nations humanitarian agencies have already
undertaken to integrate the Guiding Principles into their
doctrine; peacekeepers should do the same. I do not
personally believe that shifting responsibility by assigning
different agencies to head operations in different areas
will work. I believe that co-heads means no heads, and I
am glad that we have the opportunity to keep attention on
this enormous issue that affects tens of millions of people.

As we consider ways in which the United Nations
might effectively coordinate peacekeeping, we cannot

 

overlook the issue of the security and neutrality of these
refugee camps. My Government has stressed these points in
the past in the Security Council and in the Executive
Committee of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). I offer them again
today as we consider how we can comprehensively
approach this body's responsibility under the Charter.

The Secretary-General's recent report on civilians in
armed conflict and the resulting Security Council resolution
are further testimony to the continuing interest in refugee
security. Resolution 1208 (1998), on the security and
neutrality of refugee camps, is an important tool for dealing
with the problem of refugee security.

Resolution 1208 (1998) stressed the need for
refugee-hosting countries to develop institutions and
procedures to implement the provisions of international law.
This is the bedrock of partnership on which UNHCR and
the international community rely to protect and assist
refugees. It includes such fundamental elements as locating
camps away from borders.

The High Commissioner's "ladder of options" on the
security of refugee camps outlined last January is a
forward-looking and courageous initiative. Nonetheless, in
some cases, the problems of camp security are so serious
that the international community needs to consider measures
higher on that ladder. For example, we should explore the
use, in certain circumstances, by UNHCR of multinational
civilian police to establish basic security within refugee
camps or sites, and we should examine training
programmes, not only for host country police, but for
refugees themselves, to promote community policing.

Along with enhancing refugee security, we must also
do more to guarantee the safety of humanitarian workers.
The protection of these people who work so hard to assist
those in need is the primary responsibility of States.
Therefore, we call on all States where these attacks occur
to investigate and bring to justice those responsible. We ask
that the Security Council continue to explore proposals to
reduce the vulnerability of both relief workers and refugees
to attacks and intimidation.

The statement we have agreed upon today represents
the Security Council's acknowledgment of a direct
relationship between security and humanitarian crises. But
now we must act on what we have started. This means
concerted follow-up to improve planning and coordination,
both within the United Nations system and throughout the
wider humanitarian community. It means assuring that
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers are trained and
educated, and it means pressing our Governments and the
private sector for the necessary resources.

Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General and
Ambassador Chowdhury, I thank you for your efforts and
for your tremendous initiative in bringing us together
today. I congratulate you, and our Government looks
forward to working closely with you on this important
issue in the future.

