Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by expressing our thanks for the
briefings of the Under-Secretaries-General Malcorra
and Le Roy. We also welcome the presence of General
Agwai, Force Commander of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and thank him for
his briefing, which stressed the need for the Security
Council to improve its interactions with force
commanders in the future.

I would also like to thank your delegation, Sir, for
having organized this debate. I acknowledge your joint
initiative with the French delegation this year to
promote the discussion within the Council on how to
improve its ability to plan, mandate, manage and assess
peacekeeping operations.

The concept paper circulated by the delegation of
the United Kingdom allows us to take stock of the
progress made by the Council since January, including
the intensified effort to interact with the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs), especially through the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations chaired by Japan.
In many cases, we have seen improvement in the
interaction at the technical level between Council
members and the Secretariat, especially through the
meetings of political and military experts. We also
welcome the more consistent use of benchmarks, which
are valuable tools for assessing progress in missions.
Lastly, this open debate and those held under the
French and Turkish presidencies have given the
Council an opportunity to review the general
challenges of peacekeeping operations in conjunction
with the TCCs and PCCS, whose participation in these
debates is crucial.

The debate of 29 June (see S/PV.6153) made it
clear that there is a consensus on the need to broaden
and deepen interaction between the Council, the TCCs
and PCCs, and the Secretariat. Having determined that
this is a common objective, we must now discuss and
welcome practical proposals to improve consultation
among all actors and commit the Council, the troop-
and police-contributing countries, and the Secretariat
to making better and more consistent use of existing
mechanisms. We must continue the practice of holding
private meetings established in accordance with
resolution 1327 (2000) well in advance of mandate
renewals. We also must participate more actively in
these meetings on the basis of more operational and
timely information provided by the Secretariat. In that
respect, we support the proposals contained in the New
Horizon document for improving the quantity and
quality of communication and reports from the
Secretariat. We are grateful to Mr. Le Roy for his
commitment to these measures.

This year, we have observed that the level of
interaction and participation of the troop- and police-
contributing countries has been greater and more
substantial in the meetings of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations than in the private meetings
of the Council with the troop-contributing countries.
This experience leads us to suggest that the Council
make greater use of the consultation mechanism
identified in the note of the President of the Security
Council dated 14 January 2002 (S/2002/56) or of the
meetings between the Working Group and the troop-
and police-contributing countries on specific operations.

My country also supports the emerging practice
of holding meetings between the political and military
experts of the members of the Council and the
Secretariat, particularly the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the Department of Field
Support. Such meetings should also be planned in
advance of negotiating mandates in order to give the
opportunity to members of the Council to interact with
the Secretariat and receive inputs so as to ensure that
the mandates respond to operational, logistical and
political realities on the ground.

In recent weeks, we have worked alongside other
members of the Council to draft a presidential
statement that brings together many of the elements
that I have pointed out and proposes a series of steps
and commitments. As with other Council resolutions
and statements, the most important thing will be to
translate words into deeds. Costa Rica will work with
other delegations in order to make sure that these
commitments are fulfilled.

Costa Rica values the flexibility with which the
Council can operate and the many instruments it has at
its disposal. However, we would like to stress the need
to use more inclusive tools. The Council must be more
creative and seek tools that promote inclusiveness,
transparency and interaction. We believe that we must
consider how we can promote interaction with host
countries and increase communication with the force
commanders, as we have done today with General
Agwai. We must also use tools whose general purpose
would be greater interaction with other actors, which
would allow the Council to take more informed
decisions and ensure more effective implementation of
its decisions.

I would like to thank Mr. Le Roy and
Ms. Malcorra for their briefings on the New Horizon
document and the support strategy. Costa Rica believes
that the document is a solid basis for seeking a new
consensus on United Nations peacekeeping.

My delegation generally supports the valuable
and relevant recommendations outlined in the New
Horizon document, and we hope to discuss them in
greater depth in the future. In particular, we support the
recommendations aimed at defining a clear and
comprehensive vision for the responsible transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. From the initial
stages of the life cycle of a mission, the Council must
incorporate elements necessary to building sustainable
peace, such as the promotion of social and economic
development, security sector reform and strengthening
the rule of law, while it seeks to build and strengthen
national capacities. In this respect, we support greater
interaction between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission.

Costa Rica is working on and remains committed
to the need to strengthen consensus on policies that
define the implementation of mandates, such as the
protection of civilians. We intend to have substantive
discussions on this matter within the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, as well as
within the Council under the Austrian presidency in
November. We hope that we can review the
recommendations and conclusions of the joint study
that has been commissioned by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and DPKO on
the implementation of mandates for the protection of
civilians.

I conclude by highlighting the approach contained
in the New Horizon document with respect to the idea
of partnership. It is on the basis of this partnership that
the success and legitimacy of peacekeeping operations
can be better prepared.

