Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, and congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. We feel
we are in very good hands. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Rycroft and his excellent team for a very
effective presidency last month. Like everyone else, I
would like to express our sympathies and condolences
to my Russian colleague and to the Russian people, as
well as our strong condemnation of the attacks in Saint
Petersburg yesterday.

It is very nice to see my friend Ambassador
Kingsley Mamabolo back in the Chamber, and I would
like to thank him for the work he is doing on the ground
and for his briefing today.

Conflict and instability have stalked Darfur for
more than 13 years. In that time, several million people
have been displaced, many have lost their lives and
many more have sought shelter in camps for internally
displaced persons (IDPs), some for more than a decade.
We now see a glimmer of hope. The consolidation of
progress in some areas of Darfur, and the reports that
the ceasefire is holding, is therefore very welcome. We
now need to continue the steps towards consolidation
and addressing the root causes of conflict.

Dialogue and diplomacy are the only guarantees
of lasting peace and stability. The remaining armed
groups, especially the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid, must be persuaded to join the peace process. We
should all support the efforts of the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel and of President Mbeki and
other key regional actors, including President Museveni
and President Deby Itno, in that regard. In addition, we
welcome the efforts to implement the conclusions of the
National Dialogue and the preparations for forming a
Government of National Reconciliation. That process
must remain flexible and open to further input and
adjustment as a comprehensive agreement is developed.

Regarding the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), we welcome
the improvements in the Government of the Sudan's
cooperation during the reporting period. We expect
the remaining impediments to UNAMID's freedom of
movement to be addressed as soon as possible. That is
particularly important right now, as the Council needs
a balanced assessment of the mission's effectiveness
ahead of the renewal of its mandate in June. In order
to ensure that the mission is appropriate to its context,
the developments on the ground should be reflected in
its next mandate. We welcome the fact that the Council
will be able to consider input both from the strategic
review and the joint working group when reviewing
the mandate.

It is essential to take a holistic approach that
addresses the current situation and longer-term
development in Darfur, and it is therefore critical to
ensure that the renewed mandate addresses how the
United Nations as a whole can contribute to sustaining
peace in the Sudan. The United Nations country team,
together with UNAMID, must continue to identify areas
where development cooperation can effectively and
comprehensively address the root causes of instability,
including through building effective institutions. It is
important for UNAMID to have the capacity and the
right operating conditions to enable it to focus on the
remaining challenges, such as supporting the peace
process, protecting civilians, addressing the situation
of IDPs and monitoring, reporting on and advocating
for the prevention of human rights Violations.

We note with great concern the findings in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/250) that human
rights Violations and abuses continue to be committed
on a daily basis. We are particularly concerned about
the 44 reported cases of sexual and gender-based
Violence, including cases involving children. In that
regard, the joint efforts of UNAMID, the Office of the
Resident Coordinator, the United Nations Development
Programme and UN-Women to transfer tasks in the
gender area from UNAMID to the United Nations
country team are important. We encourage the United
Nations system to continue addressing such issues and
to report back, including in the light of the UNAMID
mandate renewal.

We welcome the Government of the Sudan's
continued commitment to implementing its action plan
for ending and preventing the recruitment and use of
children, and we encourage it to take the necessary
measures to address the loopholes that have enabled the
armed and security forces to recruit and use children.

Lastly, we need to be alert to tensions and challenges

at the regional level, which are aggravated by drought and
refugee flows. We welcome the Sudan's recent positive
engagement in South Sudan, including its facilitation of
relief efforts by opening a second humanitarian corridor
to the famine-stricken areas that will help to ensure that
food assistance reaches those in need before the rainy
season. It is also important to recognize that the Sudan
itself is also feeling the effects of the drought. Lower
than expected rainfall, exacerbated by the effects of the
El Nifio phenomenon, is resulting in food insecurity and
water shortage across the greater region of the Horn of
Africa. Addressing needs across borders will require
a comprehensive regional approach that builds the
resilience of individuals and communities throughout
the region.

