The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration of the item, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to a seat at the
Council table.

Mr. Nikola Spiric, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council I extend
a warm welcome to Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Miroslav Lajeak, High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It is so decided.

I invite the High Representative to take a seat at
the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2008/705, which
contains the text of a letter dated 13 November 2008
from the Secretary-General transmitting the thirty-
fourth report on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/2008/732,
which contains the text of a letter dated 25 November
2008 from the Secretary-General transmitting the
report on the activities of the European Union Police
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Excellency Mr. Miroslav Lajeak, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. I now give
him the floor.


