Ms. Rice (United States of America): Through
resolution 2009 (2011), the Council has unanimously
affirmed its willingness to support the Libyan people in
their efforts to restore order and bring about
democracy. In this resolution, as well as in the General
Assembly's approval earlier today of the Transitional
National Council's credentials to represent Libya, we
all stand witness to the birth of a new Libya.

The resolution responds directly to the request
from the Transitional National Council for
international assistance during this period of change.
We encourage the United Nations, including through
its newly established United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, to develop a close and collaborative
relationship with Libya's new leaders.
We look forward to the naming of a special
representative of the Secretary-General to lead the new

Mission, and we are encouraged by the Secretary-
General's determination to get United Nations
personnel on the ground as soon as possible. We wish
to express our profound appreciation for the service of
Special Envoy Abdel-Elah Al-Khatib, and we look
forward to continued close cooperation with the
Special Adviser to coordinate post-conflict planning
for Libya, Ian Martin, as he works with the Transitional
National Council on transition issues in the days ahead.

The United States particularly welcomes the
Council's decision to scale back and modify the
sanctions that it imposed on Libya seven months ago in
response to Al-Qadhafi's violence against his people.
As a result, the Libyan authorities will be able to
re-energize the Libyan economy while some measures
are kept in place to ensure that previously frozen funds
are released in a transparent and responsible way as the
situation normalizes and the transition proceeds, and
that they are released in the interests of the people of
Libya.

In the weeks and months ahead, we hope that the
Council, in close consultation with the new Libyan
Government, will respond to the situation on the
ground by adopting further resolutions to provide
support for the Libyan people. As Libya begins this
new era, the United States offers our very best wishes
to the Libyan people, who suffered for many years
under one of the world's most brutal dictatorships. We
stand fully ready to assist Libya's citizens in building a
new society based on democracy, pluralism and the
rule of law.

