Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Bernard
Kouchner, Minister of Health, who was the first
Special Representative to Kosovo, took advantage of
his presence in New York for the Global AIDS Fund to
sit at France's seat and listen to the statements of the
Special Representative and of the Deputy Prime
Minister, Mr. Covie. By that gesture, he wished to
indicate France's friendly and determined support for
his outstanding successor, Mr. Michael Steiner. Indeed,
that gesture is symbolic of French-German cooperation
to help Kosovo rejoin Europe, its values and its ideals
of peace, democracy and progress.

France associates itself with the statement that the
Permanent Representative of Spain will make later on
behalf of the European Union. In my statement, I shall
emphasize the issues to which we attach more specific
importance at the national level.

During the Council's debate on 27 March, several
speakers expressed their intention to contribute to an
evaluation of the action of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Mr.
Steiner also committed himself to that undertaking and
made enlightening comments.

After spending less than two and a half months in
Pristina, the Special Representative already has
important accomplishments to his credit. His role was
decisive in overcoming a persistent political deadlock
and in allowing the election of a President of Kosovo
as well as the formation of a coalition Government.
Subject to the nomination of the final members of the
autonomous Government team, the institutions of
provisional self-government are already in place.
Therefore, the necessary conditions for the effective
implementation of the provisions of the constitutional
framework for self-government are nearly in place. We
welcome the first decisions taken by the autonomous
Government, and we encourage the elected Kosovars to
exercise fully, with respect for law, the powers
delegated to them by the constitutional framework.

We are grateful to the Special Representative for
having charted the course by giving UNMIK and the
autonomous institutions clear priorities to ensure a full
application of the constitutional framework in
conformity with the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999). It is necessary to focus on the implementation
of those essential tasks. As the Secretary-General
emphasized in his last report on UNMIK's activities, it
would be useful to acquire the means to evaluate
precisely the amount of progress achieved. Using those
criteria, it would be possible to measure the respect of
the provisional institutions for the great principles of
democracy, the rule of law and regional stability set out
by resolution 1244 (1999) and the constitutional
framework with a view to encouraging the newly
elected Kosovar representatives to pursue that path.

Moreover, it is gratifying that the Special
Representative and the Yugoslav authorities have been
able to develop an extensive dialogue on issues of joint
interest. We welcome the presence at the side of the
Special Representative of an adviser of the head of the
Provisional Government at the most recent meeting of
the High-level Working Group. This will help towards
the establishment of relations of confident cooperation,
which we wish to see, between UNMIK and the
provisional institutions, on the one hand, and the
Belgrade authorities, on the other. The implementation
of the Common Document signed on 5 November by
Mr. Covie and Mr. Haekerrup must continue. That
Document is a cornerstone of the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), with which it is in full
conformity.

On the basis of that text, the Yugoslav
Government was able to decide to transfer to Kosovo
the Albanian prisoners detained in Serbia and to place
them under UNMIK control. That fruitful cooperation
should be expanded and the provisions of the Common
Document fully implemented. Further substantial
progress is essential, in particular with regard to the
return of members of minority communities, the
recovery of their freedom of movement and the issue of
missing persons.

In Kosovo, the rule of law, economic
development and the creation of an equal society for all
are imperatives that are inextricably linked. Progress
must be made simultaneously in those three areas, as
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
have called for. This is necessary if a multi-ethnic
future is to be built.

In Mitrovica, a comprehensive approach has also
been adopted, in accordance with the strategy laid out
last year by Mr. Haekerrup for the North Atlantic
Council. That approach, which enjoys our full support,
is the basis for the activities of UNMIK and KFOR in
that municipality. It has borne its first fruits, judging by

the reduction in the number of incidents in recent
months. In that context, the recent attacks on UNMIK
police personnel must be condemned. All those who
wield influence over the principal actors in that city
must use it to put an end to intimidation and violence
and to achieve the dismantling of parallel structures.
Generally speaking, we encourage all communities to
respect UNMIK's authority throughout Kosovo. It is in
their interest and in that of the peaceful conduct of the
process towards provisional autonomy.

