Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The assassination attempt
against the President of the Arab Republic of Egypt on
26 June 1995 caused considerable alarm worldwide. It
stirred up a great deal of indignation among African States,
as it occurred on the day of the opening of the Summit
meeting of the Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). That the culprits
chose to carry out their sordid act in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia, the headquarters of the OAU, fills many of us
with a deep sense of revulsion at this lack of respect for the
sanctity of Africa's political capital. It is for this reason that
we feel that this heinous crime was aimed at all African
leaders, which makes it doubly important that the suspects
should have been brought to book without delay.

It pains us to discuss this issue before the Security
Council, because it is an African problem that deserved
an African solution. Botswana would have preferred this
issue to be resolved without reference to the Security
Council. Even at this late hour, we still hope that the
results of the draft resolution we are about to adopt will
obviate the need for the Security Council to deal with this
painful issue again in future. We have more than enough
African items on the agenda of the Council.

We are, however, fully aware that any State Member
of the United Nations has the right to bring any issue to
the attention of the Security Council, and in this case
Ethiopia has exercised that right. It is indeed a matter of
profound regret and deep frustration for the Ethiopian
authorities that, six months after the assassination attempt
on President Mubarak, the suspects have not yet been
brought to justice.

We have noted the efforts of the Government of
Ethiopia to deal with the extradition of the three suspects
bilaterally and through the Central Organ of the OAU
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution. The Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism
considered the subject twice, and issued its decisions on
11 September 1995 and 19 December 1995, and what
happened thereafter is in the public domain.
It is the understanding of my delegation that the
draft resolution before the Security Council is in no way
intended to usurp the role and authority of the OAU in
this matter. Far from it. We are convinced that the OAU
would greatly welcome and appreciate an early
implementation of its decisions. In this respect, the OAU
needs the support of the international community. There
is only one Security Council in the world, and
international legitimacy and authority stem from it alone.
It is only natural, therefore, that the Council should
support the OAU in its efforts to bring the three suspects
to justice.

The draft resolution before us does not call for the
imposition of any measures against the Sudan. It simply
calls upon the Government of the Sudan to comply with
the requests of the OAU to extradite without delay the
three suspects to Ethiopia for prosecution. It is for these
reasons that Botswana unreservedly supports the adoption
of the draft resolution.

