Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ndiaye, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic; Mr. Matondo, African Union Special
Representative; and Mr. Vervaeke, Managing Director
for Africa at the European Union External Action
Service, for their briefings.

On 6 February, the parties to the conflict in
the Central African Republic signed the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, which represents an important,
indeed historic opportunity for the peace process in
the country. Significant progress has been made in the
implementation of the agreement during the past four
months. China appreciates the firm political will that
President Touadera has shown in leading the peace
process and the measures he has taken to implement
the agreement, including the establishment of the
follow-up monitoring mechanisms at the national and
prefectural levels. The 26 peace and reconciliation
committees established with the help of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
have helped to effectively enhance mutual trust among
the signatories to the agreement and to prevent and
mitigate conflicts.

At the same time, the Central African Republic
is still facing challenges on the security, political,
humanitarian and other fronts. China is concerned
about the violence that some armed groups continue to
perpetrate and urges all the parties to keep the overall
interests of the country and the people in mind, abide
by their commitments under the agreement and cease
actions that threaten the safety and security of civilians,
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers. China
supports the countries of the region and regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union,
in bringing influence to bear on the situation. We
encourage the parties in the Central African Republic
to continue their political dialogue, jointly promote the
implementation of the agreement and fully participate
in the follow-up monitoring mechanisms.

MINUSCA has played an important role in
promoting peace and stability in the country.
China supports Special Representative Ndiaye and
MINUSCA in actively performing their duties. We
expect MINUSCA to continue to help the Government
of the Central African Republic enhance its governance
capacity, promote security-sector reform and implement
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation programme.

Long-term stability in the Central African Republic
cannot be achieved without the continuing support of
the United Nations, the African Union, countries of the
region and international partners. All parties should
provide assistance tailored to the needs and situation on
the ground and on a basis of respect for the ownership
of the Government of the Central African Republic.
The Central African Republic will hold presidential
and legislative elections at the end of 2020 and the
beginning of 2021, which will be a crucial step for the
country in moving towards peace. The United Nations
should enhance its communication and coordination
with the Government of the Central African Republic,
assist it with its preparations for the elections and
continue to create conditions conducive to a resolution
of the issues in the Central African Republic as soon
as possible.

