Mr. Efendiev: I am honoured to speak on behalf
of the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development-GUAM, which is a regional initiative of
the Republic of Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine.

At the outset, let me thank the delegation of
Ukraine for having organized this high-level debate
on "Maintenance of international peace and security:
conflicts in Europe" and for providing us with an
opportunity to add our voice and share our vision
on this important topic from our particular region's
perspective.

This year GUAM. is celebrating its twentieth
anniversary. Since its establishment, the organization's
activities have been aimed at fostering stability and
regional cooperation in the Black Sea and Caspian
region by promoting democracy, trade and economic
development, and energy and transport links, as well
as tourism and culture among GUAM. member States
and their partners. This endeavour, in addition to the
joint initiatives to counter terrorism and transnational
organized crime, will ultimately contribute to the
attainment of the purposes and principles of the United
Nations.

The role of GUAM. as an observer organization
and its place in the network of regional cooperation
has been acknowledged through the respective General
Assembly biannual resolutions on cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization for Democracy

and Economic Development - GUAM. Let me assure
the Council that we remain open to active, multifaceted
cooperation based on shared principles and values.

The achievements and successes registered in the
fields of the major activities of the Organization have
been significantly overshadowed by the unresolved
conflicts in the GUAM. area, both protracted and newly
emerged, which erode the security and stability system
across Europe and beyond. Perhaps better than many
others in this Chamber, the GUAM. member States, with
their 60 million inhabitants, can testify to the threats
and challenges that accompany conflicts. The existing
conflicts on the territories of the Republic of Azerbaij an,
Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine
undermine their sovereignty and territorial integrity
and have adverse implications for peace, security and
cooperation at both the regional and wider European
levels. These conflicts have affected the lives ofmillions
of people in the GUAM. countries - whether forcibly
displaced, unable to return to their places of residence
or residing in conflict-affected territories - who are in
need of protection, assistance and support.

The GUAM. member States are convinced that the
peaceful resolution of those conflicts will contribute
immensely to comprehensive and lasting security in
Europe. The role of international mediation mechanisms
in conflict prevention and peaceful resolution therefore
become more critical. The GUAM. member States
strongly believe that the resolution of the conflicts
on their territories within, as appropriate, the Geneva
international discussions, the Trilateral Contact
Group, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe Minsk Group and the 5+2 talks on the
Transnistrian settlement, exclusively on the basis of the
norms and principles of international law - respect for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and inviolability of
the internationally recognized borders of States - are
vital and imperative for sustainable peace and stability
in the region.

Meanwhile, the international community should
be vocal and united in restoring the territorial integrity
of GUAM. member States, ensuring the de-occupation
of the temporarily occupied territories, as well as
safeguarding the fundamental right of internally
displaced persons and refugees to a safe and dignified
return to their places of residence, as a durable solution
for forcibly displaced persons remains a key challenge
to be addressed across the GUAM. area.

Resolving armed conflicts is also a principal
prerequisite for the successful implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
which underscores that there can be no sustainable
development without peace and no peace without
sustainable development.

In the face of daunting obstacles, the United
Nations remains an indispensable forum for addressing
the ever-complex challenges we are facing. For us, it is
very important to obtain support for GUAM. initiatives
under the General Assembly agenda item on "Protracted
conflicts in the GUAM. area and their implications for
international peace, security and development".

We fully support the appeal for peace by the
Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, made on
1 January 2017, and believe that through cooperation,
joint efforts and political will, we can overcome the
multitude of current challenges and pave the way for
sustainable peace and development.

