Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): We would also like
to welcome Mr. Ruud Lubbers to the Council today, but
I would like to begin with an apology. I am sorry, Mr.
Lubbers, that I was not here personally to hear your
briefing. One of the difficulties of being a
representative of a small State is that we have many
conflicting demands. I hope you will understand. One
of the most pleasant duties I had as the President of the
Council in the month of January was to welcome you
for your maiden briefing to the Council. I must say that
I am truly impressed at how, in the space of less than
two months, you have brought such great attention to
one of the biggest refugee problems that we face today.
We are also very impressed by the letter you wrote to
the Secretary-General on 21 February, to which we
believe the Council should give serious attention. As I
said, I was not present here when you gave your
briefing, but my colleagues have told me that the
briefing was impressive and that you have provided
both a realistic and a hopeful plan of action to move
the refugees out of the danger zones.

Like our colleagues in the Council, we too are
concerned about the deteriorating security situation and
its impact on the situation of refugees. We have
received reports of continued attacks, which only serve
to exacerbate the already grave humanitarian situation
of refugees and internally displaced persons. Moreover,
we have been concerned that the continuing violence
may have security consequences for the West African
region as a whole.

Given the situation, we agree with Ambassador
Durrant of Jamaica that we should have both an
immediate action plan and a long-term plan for the
future. By the way, in this respect we are intrigued by
the signs of willingness on the part of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) to cooperate on the
movement of refugees. We understand the reservations
and concerns that some Council members have about
working with the RUF; but we believe that, for
humanitarian reasons, we should work with them if we
are to achieve the goals. I believe it was the European
philosopher Max Weber who once said that to achieve
noble ends, one may sometimes have to use ignoble
means.

We certainly support the High Commissioner's
call for the strengthening of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone. We also support his revised
proposal regarding the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). ECOWAS being the
regional organization of the area, its continued
involvement is crucial for the success of any plan to
bring about durable peace in the region. Here, again, I
would like to agree with the point made by the
Ambassador of Colombia - if I heard him correctly -
that we should always work with regional stakeholders.

We would also like to express our deep
appreciation to the Government of Guinea for having
hosted - I would not say a large number - an
enormous number of refugees on its territory for so
long. This is an unusually generous move on the part of
the Government of Guinea. We urge the regional and
international community to give full assistance to the
Government of Guinea, and to the efforts of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) to reduce the burden that Guinea has been
carrying for so long.

Finally, we remain concerned over the safety and
security of United Nations and other humanitarian
personnel working in Sierra Leone and in the refugee
camps in Guinea. We call on all parties to allow
UNHCR to proceed with its work unimpeded and in
security.

