Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to start by expressing our gratitude to Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations

Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and to
the other United Nations staff in that Mission, for their
firm commitment and valuable dedication to
strengthening peace and stability in Afghanistan. The
central role of the United Nations in coordinating
international efforts in Afghanistan is of paramount
importance and enjoys our full support.

We are very glad of the political progress
achieved by the Government and people of
Afghanistan, including the recent successful Afghan-
led and -managed parliamentary election. Those
achievements and progress are attributable to the
people and Government of Afghanistan, who want to
freely take their destiny into their own capable hands
and bring to an end the past sombre years under the
presence of foreign forces in their homeland.

Nine years have passed since American and
NATO forces entered Afghanistan with the aim of
establishing peace and security and reconstructing the
country. The main justification for the military
excursion was, of course, eliminating the threat of
terrorism. However, it is very hard to assess the
achievements attained so far or the prospects for the
future. Even the newly unveiled military strategy
review issued a few days ago by the United States
Government casts some doubt on the possibility of
attaining the desired goals, as originally set forth, for
the so-called Afghan war.

What is clear is that the suffering of Afghan
civilians not only has not diminished, but is even on
the rise. For instance, a few days ago the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) issued a warning
about the dire situation on the ground. The Red Cross
says that conditions for delivering aid in Afghanistan
are at their lowest point in the 30 years since the ICRC
first entered the country under Soviet occupation. In
this regard, a Red Cross official said in an interview:

"Our assessment is that we are worried. We are
worried about more displacement, we are worried
about more civilian casualties, we are worried
about more difficulties with people to access
health care, and we are worried about more armed
groups being around. If you say that we are
expecting more of the same for 2011, that would
be putting it mildly."

I doubt that we can call this situation an
achievement for the military forces in Afghanistan.
Putting the lives of innocent people at the mercy of
drone attacks - yes, prima facie, there have been
some achievements in that regard. In one instance
alone, which took place on December 18, more than 50
civilians were massacred. How can we justify such
wild and indiscriminate attacks as counter-terrorism
operations? As a result of the foreign military
operations in Afghanistan, we should stress that not
only has the threat of terrorism not been curbed, but its
evil effects have rather spread to other parts of the
region, including my own country. The recent suicide
bombing on 15 December at a mosque in Chabahar, a
city in southern Iran, left scores of people dead and
many more injured. We consider this abhorrent terrorist
act the result of wrongful policies deploying foreign
military forces in our region. Such policies have
exacerbated tension and violence in neighbouring
countries, with frequent spillover to our own.

Our approach should be based on true knowledge
of the realities on the ground, as well as on an
understanding of the social, political and cultural
structures and historical experiences of the region. It is
now clear that the hearts and minds of the Afghan
people, who have undergone many hardships and so
much suffering in recent decades, cannot be won by
relying on the operations of an increased number of
foreign military forces. Instead of dispatching more
troops and increasing the number of private
contractors, there is an urgent need for foreign forces
to leave Afghanistan, for seriously continuing to
strengthen the capacity of the Afghan National Army
and National Police with a view to enabling them to
take charge of security in the country and for handing
over control and management of Afghan affairs to the
people and Government of Afghanistan.

The narcotic drugs problem is still one of the
most serious challenges facing Afghanistan. That
menace has hindered the advancement of the country
towards development and has put the security of
Afghanistan and that of the region in real danger.
Moreover, narcotic drugs, as the financial source of
terrorism in Afghanistan, have served to create a
breeding ground for terrorists, extremists and illegal
groups that attempt to destabilize the Afghan
Government. For decades, Iran has been at the
forefront of a full-scale war against narcotic drugs
smuggling. Thousands of Iranian law enforcement
personnel have lost their lives or been injured. Billions
of dollars have been spent to combat drug traffickers.
We have shouldered a great burden in that fight. We
again call strongly on those who bear the responsibility
to combat narcotic drugs on behalf of the international
community to take firm and measurable steps to curb
this threat as soon as possible.

In the area of regional cooperation, Afghanistan's
neighbouring countries share critical interests in that
country's security and long-term stability. They should
therefore play a more active role in promoting
Afghanistan's socio-economic development. In recent
years, we have undertaken a number of developmental
projects aimed at rebuilding the country that have been
focused on infrastructure, including road and railway
development.

In conclusion, we are willing to continue to hold
our well-established joint meetings with the
representatives of Afghanistan's neighbouring
countries in order to elaborate more concrete measures
that are necessary for strengthening a regional
framework in helping Afghanistan in the areas of
development projects and security issues. The support
of the international community in that endeavour could
help us to strengthen this approach. In that regard,
UNAMA's involvement in encouraging countries of the
region to cooperate in halting the illegal trade in
narcotics and the illegal movement of people, as well
as in supporting Afghanistan in its efforts to achieve
security and stability, are very much welcomed.

