Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful to the Government of Rwanda for
having organized this briefing and for the concept note
(S/2013/204, annex) that it prepared on a topic of such
relevance for the Security Council. Madam Minister,
we welcome your presence among us. We also wish
to thank the Secretary-General for the statement he
made this morning, and we welcome Ambassador
Tekeda Alemu, who on this occasion is representing the
African Union.

To speak about Africa in the abstract always entails
risks. Africa is a vast, diverse and heterogeneous
continent. Perceived from the vantage point of the
Security Council's agenda, the continent appears
highly problematic. However, perceived from the
broader vantage point of the United Nations as a
whole - including the initiatives emanating from the
New Partnership for Africa's Development - a much
more promising image emerges, as noted by Ambassador
Alemu. Africa has indeed achieved notable progress
in all areas: democratic governance, economic and
social development, the consolidation of peace and
interregional cooperation.

In other words, it is simply that our limited agenda
focuses on situations of instability, conflict, crime,
human rights violations and failed States, when,
in fact, we are dealing with a region that, in spite of
the difficulties and obstacles it faces, has achieved
considerable progress over the past 10 to 15 years. That
is another way of saying that even the most worrisome
situations on our agenda are not necessarily condemned
to sink into chaos and desperation.

Somalia, with the progress that has been achieved,
is a specific example in that respect, but the African
continent as a whole is a source of inspiration for those
countries lagging behind, showing them that they have
better alternatives.

This issue is a broad one and can be addressed from
many different perspectives and national situations. I
will limit my remarks to five specific points.

First, I would like to offer some thoughts on one
of the most abused phrases in our lexicon: the root
causes of conflict. It is clear that it is not enough to
send peacekeeping troops to restore stability and peace
to a conflict situation if the root causes of a conflict
are not addressed. That is, of course, true, but the root
causes of conflicts vary from case to case, and some
of those causes - such as in the context of conflicts
based on tribal, inter-communal, ethnic or religious
divisions - are linked to deeply ingrained cultural
traits that are very resistant to change in the short term.
The social sciences are far from understanding how to
persuade populations with long-standing divisions to
find paths towards reconciliation. However, one aspect
that we have noted in situations of conflict in Africa, as
well as in the Balkans and the Middle East, is that those
conflicts tend to intensify in two specific instances.

The first is related to competition for the use of
natural resources, especially water, land and pasturage.
The second is related to the demarcation of political
boundaries that ignore the geographic distribution
of certain ethnic populations and tribes. While this
observation may not be particularly original, it does
offer hints on how we can mitigate those root causes by
including in the peacekeeping toolkit issues such as the
facilitation of cross-border migrations, especially those
of a transitory nature, and by paying more attention to
land-tenure issues.

That brings me to my second point: that other root
causes of conflict, including social marginalization
and exclusion, extreme poverty and vulnerability
to systematic violations of the human rights of a
population, can be mitigated or corrected by policies
tailored to that end. That is why we support the broader
concept of peacekeeping that has evolved over the
past two decades with a view to addressing complex,
multifaceted conflicts. That concept acknowledges that
while the resolution of a conflict requires a military
presence in order to re-establish stability, it is also
important that, in order to bring about lasting peace,
concerted efforts be made in multiple areas. Among
those areas, we would stress the need for governance
systems that the population perceives as representative,
as well as transitionaljustice systems, building a system
grounded in the rule of law, promoting the reform of
the security sector and strengthening State institutions
so that they fulfil their role effectively and efficiently.
Undertaking peacebuilding activities together with
other peacekeeping activities also makes a lot of
sense. Among many other aspects, it requires a closer
partnership among the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and
the multilateral financial institutions.

Thirdly, in that context, we would stress the
importance of the role of justice in achieving peace and
security in Africa, especially as part of the preventive
actions that are incumbent upon the Council. Our
delegation organized an open debate on that issue
during our presidency of the Council last October (see S/PV.6849), and I do not wish to repeat the contents
of the concept note that we prepared on the occasion
(S/2012/731, annex). But we do firmly believe that the
simple fact that actions that threaten peace, including
incitement to violence, can have consequences within
the framework of international jurisprudence is proof
of progress in the fight against impunity. We believe
that the International Criminal Court is an adequate
mechanism in that regard. On that particular point,
we regret the fact that a reference to the International
Criminal Court as an element in conflict prevention
could not be included in the draft presidential statement
before the Council, as we and other delegations would
have preferred. Even more important is to strengthen
universal access to justice in each country as a general
approach, in particular for victims of conflicts who have
suffered all sorts of humiliation, especially members
of the most vulnerable groups, women and children.
The application of justice involves sanctions for the
perpetrators and reparations for the victims.

Fourthly, perhaps more than any other, the African
continent has multiple regional and subregional
institutions at its disposal, starting, of course, with the
African Union. The manner with which the Council
interacts with those institutions within the framework of
Chapter VIII would produce more than enough material
for a separate debate. But it should be noted that, in all
the agenda items that the Council has before it, there is
a noticeable proactive participation on the part not only
of the African Union but of other subregional actors.
The Council's partnership with one or more regional
institutions is different in each case, ranging from the
African Union Mission in Somalia, which is basically an
African Union operation, to the African Union/United
Nations hybrid operation in Darfur, and to various
intermediate solutions with subregional partners.
The point is that the multiplicity of partnerships
is complex and sometimes poses difficulties with
respect to jurisdictional and operational questions,
which requires better coordination among the parties
and greater conceptual clarity with regard to "who
does what". However, on balance, the strong presence
of African institutions complementing the Security
Council has been highly positive for peacekeeping and
peacebuilding in Africa.

That brings me to my fifth and final point, which
is most timely at present. I am referring to our recent
debate on extending our peacekeeping activities
to incorporate elements of peace enforcement (see S/PV.6928). The creation of an intervention brigade
within the framework of United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic People's
Republic of the Congo in support of the central mandate
of the Mission to protect civilians in that country, and
the current proposal of the Secretary-General to create
a force in Mali that

"would operate under robust rules of engagement
with a mandate to use all necessary means to
address threats to the implementation of its
mandate" (S/2013/189, para. 75).

They may be justifiable on their own merits, but, as
we have stated on previous occasions, we are concerned
at what we perceive as a continuous erosion of the basic
principles of impartiality and non-use of force in a
peacekeeping operation. Although that concern is not
Africa-specific, since it is part of what we could call a
doctrine of peacekeeping, the only specific cases that
have surfaced are located in that region.

In conclusion, it is in Africa where we have derived
most of the lessons learned on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, and that is where the most significant
progress has been achieved, without forgetting that
those achievements also come together with great
challenges still awaiting resolution.

