Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We thank
the Secretary-General for his important briefing
this morning.

We are grateful to our Russian colleagues for this
opportunity to explore the root causes of conflict in
the Middle East. This meeting is timely because today
Russia has the ability to stop the military escalation
that is happening in the region as we speak. As noted
by the representative of the United Kingdom, in Syria
the Al-Assad regime has launched an offensive in the
south-west de-escalation zone negotiated by Jordan,
Russia and the United States. Yet again we are seeing
the Syrian regime launch airstrikes and artillery,
barrel-bomb and rocket attacks that are displacing tens
of thousands of people. Russia itself launched airstrikes
in that zone over the weekend, in clear violation of an
agreement that was meant to save lives and promote a
political solution in Syria.

The ceasefire reflects a commitment between
President Trump and President Putin, and the United
States remains determined to uphold our commitment.
On a day when Russia has asked us to talk about the
root causes of conflict in the Middle East, we expect
Russia to do its part to uphold the ceasefire that it
helped establish.

Before going further, it is worth noting the
enormous positive contributions that the peoples of the
Middle East have made to the world. It is a region of
ancient civilizations that has given us all so much. In
the arts, in language, in science and in philosophy, in
religion, the world owes a great deal to the people ofthe
Middle East.

Conflict has many roots, and in the Middle East, for
too many decades, brutal dictatorships and authoritarian
Governments have denied basic human rights to their
people. That has inevitably caused conflict. Violent
religious fanaticism from non-governmental groups,
as well as from some Governments, has also caused
conflict. Lack of economic development and economic
opportunity is a source of conflict.

This is, of course, not a new topic for the Security
Council, though it is my first chance to participate in
this debate. Each month the Council has a meeting on
the Middle East, at which the United States tries to
drill down on precisely this question of root causes.
In these debates, the United States has raised the issue
of the humanitarian crisis in Gaza and the suffering
of the people there. What is at the root of this crisis?
Hamas, a terrorist group that took power in 2007, has
since served as the de facto authority in Gaza. In the
11 years that followed, Hamas has demonstrated far
more interest in initiating violence than in caring for
the Palestinian people.

The United States has also taken the opportunity
in these debates to talk about the widespread and
unacceptable use of civilians, including women and
children, as human shields in conflicts throughout the
Middle East.

At the root of these conflicts are groups such as
Hamas and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
which are willing to make a ruthless, bloodthirsty
tradeoff: they sacrifice innocent civilians in order to
accomplish their political objectives. Children and
families are either used to provide cover for their
military infrastructure or become victims of attacks
intended to rally the international media to their
overlords' cause, either way ensuring that emotions
harden and conflicts continue.

The United States has also used this monthly
meeting to talk about the key missing ingredient for
peace in the Middle East. That ingredient is leaders
with the will to do what is needed to achieve peace. The
Middle East needs more leaders like Egypt's President
Anwar Sadat - leaders who are willing to step forward,
acknowledge hard truths and make compromises. The
Middle East needs more leaders like Jordan's King
Hussein, who in 1994 created a peace that survives to
this day.

We have raised another major cause of conflict
in the Middle East, namely, the role of Iran and its
partner militia Hizbullah. In war zone after war zone
and terrorist act after terrorist act, we find Iran and
Hizbullah at the root of violence in the Middle East. We
have talked about the arsenal of war being amassed in
Lebanon. Its source is Iran and Hizbullah.

We have talked about Bashar Al-Assad's and
the Syrian regime's war against the Syrian people.
These were people who protested peacefully in 2011
for economic opportunity, political rights and basic
human dignity. Their noble pursuit, however, was met
with brutal violence in the form of torture, starvation,
barrel bombs, chemical weapons and the denial of
humanitarian and medical assistance. Standing behind
Al-Assad, and fighting alongside his troops, are
Hizbullah, Iran and Russia.

The United States has also used these monthly
meetings on conflict in the Middle East to highlight
Iran's repeated and blatant violations of resolution 2231
(2015) and others. The Security Council unanimously
prohibited Iran from transferring weapons to other
countries, and yet Iran is the source of weapons in
conflicts across the region, from Yemen to Syria to
Lebanon. The Security Council unanimously called on
Hizbullah to disarm, but the leaders of Hizbullah talk
openly about the continuing support they receive from
Iran. In the words of one Hizballah leader,

"Everything Hizbullah eats and drinks, its weapons
and rockets, comes from the Islamic Republic
of Iran".

Later this week, the Council will meet to talk
about the Secretary-General's latest report on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). The findings
of the report provide even more evidence of Iran
fuelling conflicts with the supply of banned weapons.

These are the root causes of conflict in the Middle
East: leadership that is unwilling to compromise; Hamas
terrorists who sacrifice the well-being of civilians for
their own militant objectives; Hizbullah terrorists who
roam the Middle East like a rogue, mercenary army;
and a regime in Iran that seeks political, military and
territorial advantage through the spread of violence and
human misery. What ties it all together is the people's
lack of voice in their own governance. The people who
pay the price of conflict have little or no say in when or
if it ends. And those who stand to gain from conflict,
such as the regime in Tehran, pay no penalty for the
suffering they cause.

And when the people of Syria and Iran have
risen up to demand that their Governments respect
their rights, they have been met with arrest, torture
and murder. It is this oppression - these violations
of human rights - that are the ultimate root of the
conflicts. And yet there is reason to hope. The desire
for human dignity and fundamental human rights is a
powerful force.

As the sponsor of today's meeting, the Russian
Federation itself a testament to this phenomenon. Its
predecessor State, the Soviet Union, was among the
most oppressive and brutal Governments in the world.
After more than 70 years of being denied their basic
human rights and human dignity, the Russian people,
as well as the Ukrainian people, the people ofthe Baltic
States and the people of the Central Asian republics,
finally had their say.

The great American columnist Charles
Krauthammer, who, tragically, passed away a few days
ago, once wrote that discussions of root causes can lead
to despair, because root causes are difficult to change,
if they can be changed at all. While I appreciate this
analysis, I urge that we not walk away from today's
meeting in despair, but instead that we go with a
broadened understanding of the sources of conflict
in the Middle East and a renewed determination to
change them.

The United States believes peace is possible
because we believe in the right of people to govern
themselves. We will continue to pursue the causes of
peace, freedom and human rights in the Middle East,
and, with these, an end to the conflicts that have for too
long plagued the people of this great region.

