Mr. Muita (Kenya): I have the honour to
participate in today's debate. At the outset, let me
express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important debate. I also thank Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
comprehensive briefing this morning.

My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
latest report (S/2009/277) on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. This year marks the tenth
anniversary of the first consideration by the Security
Council of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
as a thematic issue. The Council's continued
consideration of this agenda item, including its
integration of protection concerns into peacekeeping
mandates, indicates the Organization's commitment to
protect civilians in conflict situations. It has also
resulted in concrete proposals and decisions intended
to improve the lives of countless men, women, girls
and boys affected by the horrors and indignities of war
through increased efforts to fight impunity at the
national and international levels.

While words have not matched actions on the
ground, some achievements have nevertheless been
realized in this area. Thy include increased engagement
by the Council through the adoption of relevant
resolutions - including resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296
(2000), 1674 (2006) and 1738 (2006) - on the
protection of civilians, the adoption of the aide-
memoire on the protection of civilians and the
establishment of the Council Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians to mainstream protection into
the Council's action and the prioritizing of civilian
protection in peacekeeping mandates. Nevertheless,
there some considerable challenges remain. I would
like at this juncture to highlight a few of those that are
of concern to Kenya.

First, with regard to civilian protection mandates,
my delegation appreciates that the protection of
civilians is currently mandated in a number of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. However, it remains
largely undefined as both a military task and as a
mission's wider task. The Council therefore needs to
provide clear guidelines that underline the importance
of a comprehensive approach involving all components
of a mission on how to deliver on the task. There is
also a need to ensure that available capacity and
resources are deployed for the task at hand and made
available in a timely manner. It is also necessary to
emphasize that peacekeeping missions should conduct
this task without prejudice to the primary responsibility
of host nations to protect civilians.

Secondly, with regard to humanitarian access,
access during conflict is a fundamental prerequisite for
life-saving assistance. It is therefore important to
provide a secure environment in order for humanitarian
workers to have access to civilians in need, including
displaced persons. While current efforts to enhance the
capacity of peacekeeping missions to provide
protection to humanitarian providers are commendable,
significant challenges remain at the operational level,
where peacekeepers lack the capacity to reach the
entire threatened population. There is, in this regard,
urgent need to address and streamline this aspect to
avert large-scale population displacements and
widespread human rights violations.

Thirdly, sexual violence is no longer a simple by-
product of armed conflict. It has turned into a tool of

warfare aimed at dehumanizing and instilling fear in
the civilian population in order to achieve political and
military objectives. While the adoption of resolution
1820 (2008) against sexual and other forms of violence
against civilians in conflict situations, in particular
women and children, was a step in the right direction, a
lot is still required to enhance its implementation. We
need to move from words to deeds so as to ensure the
protection of sexually vulnerable populations in armed
conflict situations.

As I conclude, my delegation reaffirms Kenya's
commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and to guaranteeing their rights in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. Together, we
need to create a culture of protection in which
Governments fulfil their responsibilities, armed groups
respect the norms of international law and the private
sector recognizes the impact of its commitments to
countries in conflict.

Finally, Kenya urges this Council, the entire
United Nations, Member States and regional and
international organizations to act in a swift and
decisive manner when civilians are threatened in armed
conflicts.

