Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and for
the briefings by Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. David
Beasley, as well as the concept note prepared for this
occasion. We especially want to welcome the presence
of Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Minister for Foreign Trade and
Development Cooperation of the Netherlands.

Peru notes with deep concern the increase in
humanitarian crises throughout the world and in famine,
which threatens millions of people in conflict-affected
countries, such as Yemen, Somalia, South Sudan,
Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as in the Sahel and parts of Syria. Clearly, today's
conflicts, which are taking place in a globalized and
interdependent world, have increasingly devastating
and complex humanitarian consequences and are a
major cause of the alarming increase in famines. It is
also clear that famines and situations of extreme poverty
and neglect by institutions in general may become
root causes of conflicts. They generate conditions
conducive to violent extremism and terrorism, as well
as to the recruitment of young people and children by
armed groups.

The Vicious cycle of poverty and hunger, violence
and conflict is reflected in dramatic increases in human
vulnerability. Children are especially vulnerable to the
impact of malnutrition. Women are exposed to sexual
blackmail for food, among other abuses. Displaced
persons and refugees generate additional challenges.

The theses ofAmartya Sen and other social scientists
indicate that good governance and accountability could
prevent famines. That perspective is also consistent
with the concept of sustainable peace, which aims to
build inclusive institutions in order to prevent conflicts
and address their root causes. In that vein, we believe
that the promotion of labour-intensive agricultural
development is key, especially in rural areas, to ensure
food security and prevent the outbreak, escalation and
recurrence of conflicts.

We highlight the need for more consistent and
coordinated action by the United Nations system, in
particular with regard to its humanitarian assistance
operations, support for sustainable development and
peacekeeping on the ground. As far as possible, food
assistance must rely on locally produced foods.

In accordance with international humanitarian
law, the Security Council has the responsibility of
ensuring sustained, safe, rapid and unhindered access
to assistance in areas affected by conflicts and famines.
That includes essential imports and the protection of
the civil infrastructure needed for their distribution.

In addition to promoting political solutions to
conflicts, the Council must respond firmly to violations
of international humanitarian law involving obstacles
to access to humanitarian assistance and to the
atrocious crime of using hunger as a weapon of war. To
that end, the Secretariat should inform the Council in
a systematic and timely way about the risks of famine
associated with conflicts and about any obstacles to
access to humanitarian assistance and identify those
responsible. That should trigger specific sanctions,
including criminal punishment, within the framework
of due process. We also believe that food should be
distributed by women in order to prevent cases of
sexual blackmail and other abuses.

We wish to conclude by welcoming international
efforts to provide humanitarian assistance and indicate
the urgency of immediately disbursing the promised
funds. We also want to highlight the professionalism
and commitment of the humanitarian workers of the
United Nations system and other agencies.

