Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: Credible progress in
the search for peace between Israel and the Palestinians
is more urgent than ever, but it has remained elusive in
the context of tensions on the ground, deep mistrust
between the parties and volatile regional dynamics.
Over the past month, violent incidents erupted at a
worrisome rate. Another dangerous round of escalation
also occurred in Gaza. The realization of the two-State
solution has not advanced, eroding hopes and
underscoring the urgent need for both sides to engage
without further delay in serious substantive
negotiations to resolve all permanent status issues.

Efforts to help the parties resume direct talks
continue. On 14 December, Quartet envoys and Quartet
Representative Blair held their third round of separate
meetings with the Israeli and Palestinian negotiators.
They reiterated the 23 September statement by Quartet
principals (see SG/2178) and stressed the important
objective of a direct exchange between the parties
without delay or preconditions, beginning with a
preparatory meeting and leading to the presentation of
comprehensive proposals on territory and security. The
envoys called on the parties to create an environment
conducive to restarting talks and urged both sides to
refrain from provocative actions.

We continue to believe that de-escalation is
necessary to facilitate the resumption of direct,
meaningful engagement between the two sides. It is
encouraging that, at the last meeting with the Quartet
envoys, both Israel and the Palestinians signalled a
willingness to think constructively about reciprocal
2
actions that may help reduce tensions. Envoys will
intensify their efforts to help the parties in that regard.

It is worth noting that, while the Palestinian flag
was raised at UNESCO headquarters on 13 December,
the Palestinian Authority has not taken further steps
towards membership in other United Nations organs or
specialized agencies. The Government of Israel
decided on 30 November to renew the transfer of tax
and customs revenues owed to the Palestinian
Authority, which had been withheld after the vote at
UNESCO. It is critical that such transfers continue
regularly and predictably, so as to safeguard the
achievements of the Palestinian Authority's State-
building agenda.

The reporting period witnessed a series of
developments that are cause for continued serious
concern. Several new settlement constructions have
been announced. On 27 November, a plan for the
construction of 119 housing units in the West Bank
settlement of Shilo was approved. On 7 December the
construction permit process for 14 housing units in the
East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Ras al-Amud
advanced closer to completion. On 12 December,
approval was given for the construction of 40 homes
and a farm near the West Bank settlement of Efrat,
close to the Palestinian town of Bethlehem, impeding
the natural development of that Palestinian urban
centre. On 17 December, the Government of Israel
announced its intention to issue construction tenders
for 1,028 housing units in the settlements of Har
Homa, Beitar Illit and Giv'at Ze'ev. As the Secretary-
General reaffirmed on 12 December, all settlement
construction in the occupied Palestinian territory is
contrary to international law and Israel's obligations
under the road map, prejudices final status negotiations
and should stop.

During the reporting period, 57 Palestinian
structures, comprising 28 residences, were demolished
in the West Bank owing to the lack of permits. Six of
those demolitions took place in East Jerusalem,
marking the resumption of demolitions of residential
structures in the city following a period of relative
restraint.

Throughout this year, we have repeatedly warned
about the increase in settler violence. It is deeply
troubling that attacks by settlers on Palestinians and
their property have become a systematic occurrence -
often, but not exclusively, in the context of anticipated
11-64536

Government action against illegal settlement
construction. Six Palestinians, including two children,
were injured by settlers during the reporting period. On
14, 18 and 19 December, cars and other Palestinian
property were set on fire. Several mosques were also
targeted. On 7 December, an arson attack was carried
out against a mosque in the West Bank village of
Burqin. On 15 December, a mosque in Burka village,
close to Ramallah, was set on fire. On 19 December, a
mosque was desecrated near Hebron. In addition, on
13 December, a mosque that is not currently in use was
desecrated in West Jerusalem. During the night of
12 December, several dozen Israeli extremists stormed
an Israel Defense Forces (IDF) base and blocked
adjacent roads in the West Bank. In parallel, a group of
Israeli extremists approached the border with Jordan
and was stopped from crossing by the IDF. We
welcome Prime Minister Netanyahu's strong
condemnation of such violent acts and his stated intent
to prevent such incidents from reoccurring. It is critical
that those statements be translated into swift and
decisive action, including for the protection of
Palestinians and their property.

Demonstrations against the barrier in the
occupied West Bank continue on a regular basis, as the
barrier's route deviates from the Green Line in
contravention of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. On 10 December, a
Palestinian protesting the takeover of privately-owned
land by Israeli settlers died from wounds sustained the
day before in the West Bank locality of Nabi Saleh,
when an IDF soldier fired a tear gas canister at close
range from an armoured IDF vehicle at which the
protester had been throwing stones. Sixty-one
Palestinians and three IDF soldiers were also injured
during similar protests. We await the results of the
investigation that was launched by the Israeli
authorities. Allow me to stress that the right to peaceful
protest must be upheld and that protests should be kept
strictly non-violent.

During the reporting period, citing security
reasons, the Israel Defense Forces conducted 337
operations in the West Bank, during which 154
Palestinians were injured, including six children, and
233 arrested. On 18 December, 550 prisoners,
including 55 minors and six women, were released as
part of the second phase of the agreement to exchange
prisoners for captured Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit.
11-64536

Palestinian security forces have continued
working to uphold law and order in the West Bank,
including seizing and defusing unexploded devices on
21 and 23 November and 3 December. Close
cooperation has continued with Israeli security forces,
leading to the arrest of a number of suspected
perpetrators of violence against Palestinians and their
properties.

In East Jerusalem, Palestinian residency rights
remain a serious human rights concern. On 6 December,
the second of four Hamas-affiliated members of the
Palestinian Legislative Council from East Jerusalem,
who had been sheltered by the International Committee
of the Red Cross since June 2010, was deported from
East Jerusalem to Ramallah. In a separate
development, the Mughrabi Gate ramp to the Temple
Mount/Haram al-Sharif, through which tourists and
non-Muslims access the compound, was reopened on
14 December after a temporary closure over safety
concerns raised by the municipality.

In Gaza and southern Israel, we once again
witnessed a dangerous deterioration in the security
situation. On 7 December, an Islamic Jihad militant
was killed and another critically wounded by an Israeli
Air Force missile. Israel has said that the two militants
were planning to launch an attack along the buffer
zone. On 8 December, an Israeli air strike killed two
militants in Gaza City and injured 10 civilians. Israel
stated that one of the militants had been involved in
attacks against Israel before and was planning more.
The firing of projectiles from Gaza into Israel
intensified in the wake of the air strike, with no
reported damage or injuries. The Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process has actively supported Egyptian efforts to
restore calm.

During the entire reporting period, 45 projectiles,
including five Grad rockets, were fired from Gaza into
Israel. The IDF conducted nine incursions and 13 air
strikes, resulting in the deaths of three Palestinian
militants and three civilians, while five Palestinian
militants and 21 civilians sustained injuries. We
condemn in the strongest terms any indiscriminate
firing of projectiles towards civilian areas and call on
Israel to show maximum restraint. Obligations under
international humanitarian law must be respected for
the protection of civilians.
3
The implementation of United Nations projects
with a total value of approximately $365 million
continues in Gaza and construction materials for those
projects are entering through the Kerem Shalom
crossing. Special Coordinator Serry recently visited
Gaza and noted the progress being made in the Khan
Younis housing project and a number of United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) schools. While
three major UNRWA housing projects are still pending
approval, that progress improves the lives of people in
Gaza and must be sustained and expanded. We are
encouraged by a limited resumption of agricultural
exports to Europe, worth an estimated $25 million
during the reporting period.

However, extensive restrictions remain in place,
and the needs of Gaza's civilian population remain
significant. We continue to call for the full
liberalization of imports of construction materials as a
means of enabling the legitimate economy and
replacing the illicit tunnel trade. It is important that
exports be allowed to resume at scale, including
transfers to the West Bank. Those changes could be
applied with due consideration for Israel's legitimate
security concerns, in line with Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009) in all its aspects, and could
make a significant difference in the lives of many
Gazans. We will continue to work with the Government
of Israel and the Palestinian Authority in that regard.

We are concerned by the de facto authorities'
intent to tax the Bank of Palestine and the Palestine
Islamic Bank, as well as the subsequent travel ban on
senior bank staff. The regular functioning of the
banking sector is vital to the Gazan economy.
Furthermore, the United Nations relies on the financial
services of those institutions for its operations in Gaza.

This past weekend, a series of meetings among
the Palestinian factions began in Cairo as part of
efforts to advance Palestinian reconciliation. The
finalization of many of the key provisions of the
reconciliation accord remains outstanding, and
meetings will continue throughout this week. We
continue to support reconciliation efforts within the
framework of the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the positions of the Quartet
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Finally, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on
the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of
opinion and expression, Mr. Frank La Rue, visited the
occupied Palestinian territories and Israel from 6 to
17 December, the first such visit. He shared his initial
findings and recommendations in Jerusalem on
18 December.

Allow me now to turn to Lebanon, where a
number of incidents in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
have raised concerns since we last briefed the Council.
On 9 December, the detonation of a roadside explosive
device targeting a UNIFIL patrol in the suburbs of Tyre
injured five peacekeepers and two Lebanese civilian
bystanders. The Secretary-General and this Council
condemned the attack, which was the third direct attack
against UNIFIL this year, and the first one in the
UNIFIL area of operations since June 2007.

Two rocket-launching incidents have occurred in
recent weeks. The Council has already been briefed on
the rocket-firing incident of 29 November. On
11 December, one rocket was fired from the general
area of Qaissiyeh valley towards Israel. The rocket hit
a private home in the Lebanese village of Houla, just a
few kilometres from the Blue Line, causing serious
injuries to a woman inside the house. In addition, on
19 December, four rockets, ready to be fired, were
found by the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) in the
UNIFIL area of operation. The Secretary-General
condemns all indiscriminate rocket attacks and urges
all parties to exercise maximum restraint. He reminds
them of their obligation to fully adhere to resolution
1701 (2006) and to respect the cessation of hostilities.

The Lebanese authorities and politicians across
the political spectrum in Lebanon have condemned all
of those incidents, which represent attempts to
undermine resolution 1701 (2006) and destabilize the
situation in the south of Lebanon. Investigations into
all of them are ongoing. The LAF and UNIFIL have
also stepped up their individual and joint operational
activities to prevent the occurrence of similar
incidents. Meanwhile, Israeli flights over Lebanese
airspace have continued on an almost daily basis, and
there has been no progress on other outstanding issues
in connection with resolution 1701 (2006).

In a positive development, Prime Minister Najib
Mikati announced on 30 November that he had
transferred Lebanon's share of the budget of the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon for 2011. The Secretary-
General welcomed that important step and expressed to
Prime Minister Mikati his confidence in Lebanon's
continued respect for its international obligations.

The situation inside the Palestinian refugee camp
Ain el-Hilweh in Saida/Sidon remains tense, following
two recent assassination attempts on bodyguards of
local Palestinian Liberation Organization leaders and
subsequent infighting between Palestinian factions.
Two bodyguards of the leader of the Palestinian Armed
Struggle, Colonel Mahmoud Issa, were killed on
14 and 18 December as a result of those attempts.

The situation in Syria remains a source of deep
and growing concern for the United Nations. On
12 December, High Commissioner for Human Rights
Navanethem Pillay briefed the Council on the
continued widespread violations of human rights in
Syria, after which the Secretary-General transmitted
the report of the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Syria to the Council. In recent days,
popular protests have continued to be met with violent
repression, resulting in numerous deaths, injuries and
detentions. Instances of armed confrontation between
the Government forces and the opposition have also
increased. We have growing concerns about the
humanitarian impact of the crisis on civilians inside
Syria.

The League of Arab States has continued its
commendable initiative to end the violence and
promote a political solution. In that regard, we are
encouraged by the signing yesterday in Cairo of a
protocol to dispatch monitors from the League of Arab
States to Syria, and we continue to hope that the
international community will be able to act in a
concerted and coherent manner in support of those
efforts for a peaceful resolution of the crisis.
11-64536

The United Nations continues to monitor the
influx of displaced Syrian nationals into northern
Lebanon. As of 16 December, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
Lebanese Government had registered 4,510 displaced
persons, up from 3,581 the previous month. The
increase is largely due to refugees who had crossed
into Lebanon earlier but who registered only recently.
The number of wounded individuals admitted to
Lebanese health facilities as a result of fighting on the
Syrian side of the border has also increased. Turkey
and Jordan now host about 8,500 and 2,000 displaced
Syrian nationals respectively. The United Nations
continues to coordinate closely with those
Governments on providing assistance to the displaced
persons.

Turning back to the Middle East peace process,
let me conclude by reiterating our worry that as the
year draws to a close, the situation on the ground is
deteriorating and the path towards peace remains
dangerously uncertain. We must not allow such
negative dynamics to prevail; too much is at stake. Our
challenge remains to help the parties overcome them,
and I urge them to utilize the opportunity provided by
the framework laid out by the Quartet to de-escalate
the situation, return to direct talks with serious
proposals on borders and security, and stop
provocations. The Quartet remains focused on
achieving progress in the coming period, and the
parties can be assured that the United Nations will
continue to play its role in support of their efforts to
achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East.

