Ms. Bangura: I thank you, Madam President, for
extending an invitation to me to brief the Security
Council on matters related to the important cross-
cutting issue of security sector reform (SSR). It is a
pleasure to join my colleagues from the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in
addressing the Council today.

For a number of years, as we have progressively
shifted the conflict-related sexual violence agenda to
the operational level, we have recognized the critical
nexus between sexual violence crimes and dysfunctional
security sector reform processes, or the incomplete
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) of former combatants. Indeed, the Security
Council has already articulated the crucial connection
between security-sector reform and conflict-related
sexual violence in a number of resolutions, including
resolution 2106 (2013), on sexual violence in conflict
in 2013, as well as resolution 2151 (2014), the first
thematic resolution on security-sector reform, which
was sponsored by Nigeria in 2014.

Essentially, a comprehensive response to conflict-
related sexual Violence must include proactive and
purposeful engagement with the security sector,
particularly in settings where the security services
may have been involved in the commission of sexual
Violence. Such engagement with the security sector
has now become part of the modus operandi of our
mandate. I welcome this opportunity to highlight some
of our emerging experience and practice in that regard.

Through our monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements, mandated under resolution 1960 (2010),
we have been able to verify that a number of national
security services, including national armed forces and
national police, are among the perpetrators of conflict-
related sexual violence crimes. Therefore, we have
encouraged national authorities to respond accordingly,
and are supporting them in a process to strengthen
their institutional capacity to monitor and ensure
accountability within the security forces.

As I have stressed repeatedly, the essential starting
point is to ensure national ownership, leadership and
responsibility. Accordingly, I have focused especially
on gaining commitments at the highest political levels
through my advocacy. Over the past two years in
particular, we have been able to report consistently
to the Security Council with regard to commitments
obtained from political and military leaders in a number
of our priority countries.

For example, in the past few years we have
signed political-level agreements in the form of joint
communiques with the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Somalia and South
Sudan. Those agreements form the basis for ongoing
engagement at strategic and operational levels, for the
practical implementation of the commitments made.
The Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict supports the Governments with
technical and logistical assistance to turn those high-
level political agreements into concrete actions and
activities to be undertaken by the Governments. The
Team of Experts reports to me and - with members of
the team from DPKO, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United
Nations Development Programme, led by a Director
in my Office - represents one of the best and most
innovative examples of the One UN initiative.

The commitments they help to operationalize
entail some fundamental reforms of the security sector,
in line with resolution 2106 (2013). They include,
first, issuing clear orders to all defence and security
forces through chains of command prohibiting sexual
violence and providing accountability measures for
breaching such orders in accordance with international
standards; secondly, ensuring that all elements joining
the army, the police or other security institutions are
vetted so that no element involved in the commission
of serious Violations of human rights and humanitarian
law, including sexual violence, is allowed to join
those institutions; thirdly, prohibitions against
sexual violence in codes of conduct and military and
police field manuals or their equivalents; fourthly,
developing action plans specific to the national army
and the national policethat include, respectively, the
reinforcement of the military justice system and the
establishment or strengthening of special police units
on sexual violence; fifthly, ensuring that perpetrators
of sexual violence crimes are excluded from amnesty
provisions in the context of conflict-resolution
processes, and that all those who have perpetrated or
are responsible for acts of sexual violence are excluded
from the security institutions; sixthly, ensuring that the
military and police speaks out in the strongest terms
against sexual violence in conflict, including through
internal and public campaigns; and, finally, ensuring
that security services establish mechanisms for the
protection of Victims, witnesses and others who report
crimes committed by the army or the police, including
civil society and judicial actors engaged in the fight
against conflict-related sexual violence.

The elements I have just elaborated on have formed

the basis for the development of concrete operational or

implementation plans, which we refer to as action plans

to prevent conflict-related sexual Violence, in countries

such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Cote
d'Ivoire.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where
we have focused consistent attention since the
establishment of the mandate, the joint communique
signed with the Government and the action plan
developed with our support by the Forces arme'es de
la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) have
begun to yield some tangible results. For instance, in
the 2014 reporting period, military tribunals convicted
135 individuals of sexual violence crimes, including
76 members of the armed forces, 41 members of the
national police and 18 members of armed groups.
Crucially, the FARDC action plan includes specific
undertakings signed by senior commanders, whereby
they personally commit to prevent and respond to sexual
Violence through a series of actions. That has served to
reinforce both individual and command responsibility.

In a number of cases, the actions undertaken to
address sexual violence have resulted in significant
institutional and structural reforms within the
security institutions, as well as an increased number
of prosecutions and convictions. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the national army has
established a high-level and dedicated infrastructure
in the form of an armed services commission to
ensure the implementation of the action plan on sexual
violence. Similarly, the national army of Cote d'Ivoire
has established a committee on conflict-related sexual
violence that includes senior commanding officers from
the army, the gendarmerie and the police to oversee the
institutional response.

Since 2013, the Team of Experts has deployed
an expert to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to support military justice efforts, including in the
framework of the Prosecution Support Cell. In Guinea,
the Team of Experts has provided technical support to
a domestic panel of judges established to investigate
and prosecute crimes committed against opposition
supporters on 28 September 2009, including at least
109 cases of sexual violence. That has resulted in 16
indictments, including against high-ranking military
officials, and, most recently, former president Dadis
Camara. That represents one of the rare times that a
former Head of State has been indicted by a fully
national process.

In a number of priority countries, police have
established or strengthened specialized units dealing
with crimes against women and children, including
sexual violence crimes - for example, our mandate is
supporting the establishment and functioning of such
a specialized unit in the gendarmerie in the Central
African Republic. Such initiatives may be Viewed as an
entry point and provide avenues for more fundamental
reforms within those institutions. Vetting during
recruitment drives and prior to the integration of armed
groups into the armed forces to exclude those who have
committed or commanded sexual violence represent
crucial shifts in attitudes and practice, and contribute
to the professionalization of the security sector.

It is also evident that where SSR or DDR
processes have failed, it has sometimes contributed
to the commission of sexual violence crimes. For
example, we have received reports of sexual Violence
being committed in the post-conflict setting within
communities by so-called civilians. However, in a
number of such cases the perpetrators are former
combatants who were demobilized under hurriedly
conducted DDR processes.

Another significant challenge relates to the informal
integration of militia groups into national armed
forces. For the most part, such armed groups are poorly
trained and have often committed gross human rights
violations, which is a significant threat to the integrity
and professionalism of national security institutions
and hinders accountability for sexual violence crimes.

In addition to the specific points of action I have
outlined here, I wish to conclude by proposing four
overarching recommendations related to security-
sector reform and sexual violence in conflict.

First, the role of security institutions in preventing
sexual violence crimes may be enhanced by striving to
mainstream sexual violence considerations consistently
in security-sector reform processes, in View ofthe nexus
between SSR and conflict-related sexual violence. That
includes a specific reference by the Security Council
to the prevention of sexual violence in provisions
related to SSR and DDR in all relevant country-specific
resolutions, as well as in the relevant provisions of
peace agreements and ceasefire frameworks.

Secondly, preventing sexual Violence crimes
and ensuring accountability should be considered
fundamental indicator criteria of success of SSR
programmes as a whole and, as such, should be
included in SSR programme monitoring and evaluation
frameworks.

Thirdly, we should ensure that multilateral and
bilateral SSR support and assistance include targeted
resources and training to support national security
institutions in enhancing their capacity to prevent and
address crimes of sexual violence.

Fourthly, we should ensure a proportional
representation of women in security institutions at all
levels as the basis for the creation of security forces
who respect and protect women and children in times
of war and of peace.

The linkage between SSR and sexual violence will
continue to be a priority focus of my mandate and a key
aspect of the work of our programme, as well as that
of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which has played a central role in
supporting our engagements with national authorities
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, Cote d'Ivoire,
the Central African Republic, South Sudan, Guinea and
elsewhere.

