Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, I would like
to state that with regard to the latest development in the
region, it is in my View both timely and necessary that
the Security Council react vis-a-vis the situation in the
Middle East. I therefore welcome the opportunity to
share views in an open debate with Council members
and with all other interested delegations. I would also
like to point out that I associate myself with the
statement to be made by the Irish Presidency of the
European Union at a later stage in this meeting.

My Government is gravely concerned about the
recent escalation of violence in the Middle East,
especially with regard to the consequences of the
targeted killing of Hamas leader Sheikh Ahmed Yassin
and six other Palestinians in Gaza yesterday. Germany,
along with the European Union, has always strongly
opposed extrajudicial killings. They are, in my
Government's view, unacceptable. Yesterday, the
ministerial Council of the European Union stated
unanimously and unequivocally the European Union's
grave concern. The EU has repeatedly condemned the
terrorist atrocities committed by Hamas, which have
resulted in the deaths of hundreds of Israelis.

The EU recognizes Israel's right to protect its
citizens against terrorist attacks. Israel is entitled to do
this under international law. Israel is not, however,
entitled to carry out extrajudicial killings. Furthermore,
the assassination that was just carried out has inflamed
the situation.

In this situation, it is of utmost importance to end
the spiralling cycle of violence and counter-violence.
Extrajudicial killings and terrorist suicide bombings
must both stop. Violence is no substitute for political
negotiations; only negotiations can lead to a just and
lasting settlement based on the acceptance of both
sides. My Government therefore calls on all sides to
exercise restraint and to refrain from all acts of
violence and terrorism, which will not only lead to
more bloodshed, but will make a peaceful settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict ever more difficult.

As difficult as it may be, given the circumstances,
we must not let the recent surge in violence permit us
to lose sight of the road map. The road map is the
relevant document for peace in the region. There is no
alternative to a just and lasting resolution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict based on the two-State solution and
leading to an Israeli State and a Palestinian State
existing side by side in peace and security.

