Mr. Moratinos (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): First
and foremost, allow me to join with all those who have
conveyed their solidarity and condolences to the
peoples and authorities of China and Myanmar for the
natural disasters that they have recently been affected
by. And above all, allow me to express my pleasure at
participating in this debate on strategies for post-
conflict stabilization on the eve of the celebration of
the sixtieth anniversary of the launching of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

Spain is firmly committed to global
peacebuilding and to the enhancement of civilian
aspects of crisis management. It is for that reason that
Spain also chose this issue for the thematic debate
organized by Spain in this Council during the Spanish
presidency in 2004.

Peacebuilding is the most important challenge
that the international community faces, and we must
spare neither commitment nor efforts in order to
achieve it. As the sixteenth century Spanish humanist
Juan Luis Vives wrote, the first condition for peace is
to have the will to achieve it. That is why a peace
process must lead to a rapid implementation of its
terms so that the population may immediately benefit
from its dividends. For this reason, we must pay
preferential attention to rapid upfront support
mechanisms that alleviate the suffering of local people
and that meet their most urgent needs. The driving
force behind these actions must be reflected in mission
mandates as well as in public communication strategies
that favour mutual understanding with the affected
populations within which they operate.

Post-conflict management must also tackle the
deep roots of confrontation in order for peace to be
durable. This requires prolonged efforts on the past of
the international community, even though the primary
responsibility lies, as has been said here earlier, with
the authorities of the country recovering from conflict.
To this end, peace and coexistence require the firm
commitment of Governments, and harmony and
inclusion are the bases upon which a social State and
the rule of law must be established.

The concept of the peace mission is a living,
evolving concept. Peace missions are increasingly
complex, and some of the latest operations authorized
by the Security Council have shown that they no longer
correspond to the limited notion that inspired the
operations of 60 years ago. Terms such as "hybrid
operation", "multidimensional", "peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding", are applied ever
more frequently, although the international community
is still not able to respond adequately to the challenges
posed by these complex situations.

One of the areas in which the international
community has been unable to keep pace with reality is
the incorporation of civilians, as was mentioned by the
representative of the United States. Civilians play an
essential role in missions, given the nature of the
majority of violent conflicts, as well as the challenges
and particular aspects involved in reconstruction. We
must not only include a greater number of civilian
experts in missions, but we must also legitimize their
functions and provide these experts with the means to
carry out their tasks, in accordance with the relevant
mission mandate. All in all, we should move towards
the establishment of a body of experienced and
specialized civilian experts, providing them with
promotion and career opportunities within this
Organization, in order to be able to fulfil a variety of
tasks such as contributing to the strengthening of
institutions of a post-conflict society and advising
central and local authorities on the establishment of the
rule of law, on the true separation of powers and on
security sector reform. These challenges demand
greater efforts by donor States and must be realistically
reflected in peace mission mandates. In this regard,
Spain is committed to updating and improving its
contributions in police matters.

For these reasons, it would be advisable to have
stable civilian teams, along the lines of the
Secretariat's recently established Standing Police
Capacity. It is essential that we launch a unit to identify
experts, train them and ensure their effective
availability so that they can join the mission from the
first moment. This perspective applies, in particular, to
experts in the field of the administration of justice.

The success of these tasks hinges on civilian
capacities and on the availability of greater economic
resources - hence the importance of linking more
closely with national organizations for cooperation and
development. Therefore, the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission and its Fund point in the
right direction.

With this goal in mind, Spain will soon adopt a
cooperation strategy for peacebuilding, which will
consolidate our action in peace processes and present
lessons learned from the Spanish experience in places
such as Central America, the Balkans and Southern
Africa where our country has participated. In spite of
the achievements that have been made, a great deal
remains to be done.

It would be desirable, as has been said frequently
this morning, for there to be a new focus in the
formulation, mandating, implementation and follow-up
of peace missions, as well as in all efforts geared
towards post-conflict reconstruction, bearing in mind
that, ultimately, ownership of any post-conflict
reconstruction process belongs to the country that has
suffered the conflict.

