The President: I thank Mr. Miyet for the answers and
clarifications he provided in that very comprehensive
further statement.

I should like now, in my capacity as President of the
Council, to draw some brief and informal conclusions from
this meeting for the Council's consideration in its later
consultations. The debates of yesterday and today have left
one very clear message: the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is the major challenge facing Africa, the United
Nations and the international community as a whole at the
end of this century. One in five African States are involved
in the conflict; a vast region of Africa is affected; and the
stability and future development of the region are at stake.

Expectations of the international community are
correspondingly high. The Lusaka Agreement, brokered by
the region with the involvement of the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity, is predicated on major
international support, without which it cannot succeed. It is
clearly the view of the Security Council that there is no
alternative to Lusaka. It is a good Agreement. As
Ambassador Holbrooke and others have made clear, it
addresses the key issues at the heart of this conflict, the
foreign military presence on the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the dangers posed to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo's neighbours by
armed groups and the urgent need for a national dialogue
to work towards a more inclusive and representative
political system in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The need for the international community to act
quickly to help implement the Agreement through, inter
alia, further United Nations deployment in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has been widely stressed here
today. So has the urgency of building on the steps we
have already taken to facilitate the speedy deployment of
observers and their support elements through resolution
1279 (1999). The Council will have taken these points to
heart.

The point has also been strongly made that the
parties must show their determination to meet their
commitments before it would be right or sensible for the
United Nations to deploy more widely. These
commitments include, first, the ending of ceasefire
violations and agreeing on workable withdrawal
arrangements, most particularly through an effective Joint
Military Commission (JMC); secondly, full consent by all
the parties to a United Nations presence including
assurances of security and cooperation; thirdly, the
commencement of meaningful national dialogue in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo under an agreed
facilitator; and fourthly, progress on tackling the external
security issues, including realistic proposals for the
disarmament, demobilization and peaceful reintegration of
armed groups.

So, the clear message from today's discussion has
been that the Security Council and the Secretariat must
stand ready to do their part in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and not shirk this enormous challenge. But in
practice they can only do so as part of a credible peace
agreement and a wider process in which we all -
international community and regional players - have key
roles to fulfil and resources to contribute. This may in
due course lead up to an international conference on the
Great Lakes. All those with responsibilities in the
Democratic
Republic of the Congo under the Lusaka Agreement must
take them up urgently. The Security Council will in parallel
act as effectively and rapidly as it can. The Council must
return to this subject soon, analyzing and acting on the
import of this debate. It is welcome that the next presidency
of the Council is planning in that sense.

There are no other speakers inscribed on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its

consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.55 pm.
