I thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, and Mr. Saad Mohseni, for their insightful briefings. I would also like to thank Ambassador Adela Raz for her statement. Germany, our co-penholder, has said a great deal, so I shall just add some points. Although the present moment presents certain challenges, it also abounds with the hopes of the Afghan people for a peaceful, united and prosperous homeland. Despite years of conflict, terrorism, displacement, poverty, natural disasters and, now, the coronavirus disease exacting a heavy toll, the people of Afghanistan have been remarkably resilient. The potential commencement of the peace process is a ray of hope - not only for the Afghan people, but for the world. The Council and Afghanistan's partners must also play their role effectively to help ensure that the sacrifices of common Afghans are not in vain. In response to the briefings, let me focus on three points. First, we need to advance intra-Afghan negotiations. It is undeniable that the world is now waiting for intra-Afghan negotiations to start. In our view, that would be historic, as negotiations would finally open the door of opportunity for the parties to discuss what a future stable and prosperous Afghanistan will look like. It is very encouraging that all main Afghan parties have expressed their willingness to engage in meaningful intra-Afghan negotiations. Indonesia underlines that Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace negotiations should commence without delay. It is crucial that the plurality of Afghan society, including women and minorities, are reflected in those negotiations. Over the last 19 years, vibrant change has taken place in Afghanistan. Women and other groups increasingly participate in public life. The gains in human rights must not be reversed. As the peace process shapes up, the role of media, human rights defenders and civil society will be extremely important. Secondly, priority must be given to reducing violence and protecting civilians. Despite the fact that the main parties have expressed support for intra-Afghan negotiations, violence and civilian casualties remain very high. All sides must make the protection of civilians their top priority. This is important for restoring the trust of the Afghan people and for providing space for peace talks. Indonesia strongly condemns all attacks against women and children, critical infrastructure such as hospital and schools, and humanitarian and human rights workers, media and other innocent parties. Perpetrators must be held accountable. We also call on parties to abide by resolution 2532 (2020), which has called for a global ceasefire. Furthermore, we are concerned by terrorist activities and narcotics cultivation. We support increased cooperation among all relevant entities in order to combat terrorism and narcotics, including through the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Thirdly, we stress the important role played by countries of the region and the international community, including the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). As the road for reconstruction and post-conflict recovery commences, sustainable economic growth is required for a stable and secure post- conflict Afghanistan. Regional cooperation and international support will be crucial, including from UNAMA. For its part, Indonesia continues to support capacity-building programmes in various fields, including women's empowerment in Afghanistan. We will continue with determination to assist the country, including in facilitating the peace process. As a penholder in the Council - together with Germany - on Afghanistan, we will also continue to garner effective support for the country, including with the timely renewal of a high-quality UNAMA mandate.
