Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me thank Assistant
Secretary-General Bintou Keita for her very useful and
informativebriefingontheactivitiesoftheUnitedNations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).
We welcome the appointment of Ms. Helen Meagher La
Lime as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of MINUJUSTH. We Wish her and
the Mission every success in their efforts to assist the
Government of Haiti in strengthening the rule of law,
reinforcing the Haitian National Police capacities and
engaging in human rights monitoring.

We agree that the violent events that took place
early July in Port-au-Prince and other Haitian cities
reflect the ongoing volatility of the situation in Haiti
and the need to ease the daily hardships faced by the
Haitian people. Poland strongly encourages all parties
to abstain from the use of violence to achieve political
goals, to respect the rule oflaw and to find a consensual
solution to the problems the country is facing. It is
extremely important to build broad political support
to implement key economic reforms, which are basic
prerequisites for the long-term stability of Haiti.

Poland welcomes the appointment by President
Moise of Mr. Jean Henry Ceant as the new
Prime Minister. We look forward to the formation of
a new Government that will continue to lead Haiti
towards the consolidation of peace and stability. It is
worth emphasizing that the Government of Haiti has
taken steps to reform the criminal code and the code of
criminal procedure, fight corruption in the civil service
and strengthen the justice sector. The improvement
of the capacity of the Haitian National Police is also
remarkable. Those efforts may lead to major political
stabilization and respect for the principles of the rule
of law.

We welcome the contribution of MINUJUSTH to
improving public security by building the capacities of
the Haitian National Police in a wide range of police
work and providing equipment and operational support.
We are also pleased to note the role of MINUJUSTH in
the improvement of the Haitian justice system.

When considering the situation in Haiti, it is
essential not to forget that the conditions of the precarious
political situation and the fragile economy often lead to
the creation of an environment in which guarantees of
human rights may turn out to be ineffective and where
fundamental rights may be exposed to the risk of abuse
and violation.

As underlined in the recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/ 795), much remains to be done to ensure
a smooth and effective transition to a non-peacekeeping
presence in Haiti in the coming year. Haitian institutions
still need the support of the international community.
We should not limit the United Nations presence in Haiti
excessively or too early, bearing in mind the fragility of
the situation and the vastness of the work to be done
by the Haitian authorities. We need to assure Haitian
society that the Security Council will work closely to
find the best way to build long-term stability and to
strengthen the rule of law in the country.

Poland welcomes the benchmarked exit strategy
and transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations
presence in Haiti. MINUJUSTH is a crucial actor in
that process, helping the Government of Haiti to meet
those benchmarks by providing technical expertise and
financial assistance.

