Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): What
I say in response to this debate today is in my personal
capacity as Chairman, but I think members of the
Committee will not find difficulty in what I am about
to say.

All of us on the Committee are extremely grateful
for the support of the membership as a whole for what
we are trying to do under resolution 1373 (2001). We
have had a series of very clear expressions of that
support during the debate today. I find it very effective
that we are able to interweave in our debate
interventions with statements by members of the
Council. Transparency is important in what we are
doing, not as a gesture or a way of advancing the wider
interests of the Security Council, but because it is
necessary and in the interests of all to make the
counter-terrorism fight effective. The point is that we
are working together in this effort, and there is no
doubt that we shall continue doing so - here we wish
to reassure the representative of Nepal, among others.

The fact that we are building a consensus on this
subject and the fact that it is now a practical
proposition that we have a global approach to
combating terrorism is a very real instrument in
suppressing the horrendous use of violence that we
have seen in the past, particularly in the recent past. I
felt that in the debate today the overwhelming majority
of those who spoke had this in their minds as a very
clear concept: that we should maximize our area of
consensus on what we are dealing with and how we
deal with it, and focus on making the efforts of our
Committee as effective as possible within that area.

I think that it would be right to add one or two
points of advice to all Member States about what is
coming up in the next period. The process of going
through the reports - which, as members of the
Committee know, we are evolving as we go along with
the already extraordinarily effective help from our
experts - is going to be a rolling, ongoing process.
That is why we want States to attend the meetings with
the subcommittees, which Ireland, among others,
referred to in its statement. It is not that we are looking
for immediate answers from Member States at that
point, but that we want Member States to be as familiar
as possible with the process that we are entering into. It
is going to go through several stages. Nobody is likely
to avoid questions and follow-up from the Committee.
I think Member States need to expect, over the coming
months, quite an exchange with the Committee in
making sure that their capability to meet the
obligations of resolution 1373 (2001) is improved and
enhanced to the greatest extent possible.

A lot of speakers, in that context, asked about
assistance. Ambassador Navarrete has just enlarged on
that point and asked for further orientation. We are
putting together a directory so that Member States can
be self-starting in seeking assistance. But the
Committee itself will also be a guide for putting
Member States in touch with the most relevant areas of
assistance, which include the international institutions,
including parts of the United Nations, the bilateral
agreements and arrangements that are in place and may
be increased as a result of resolution 1373 (2001) and
our efforts, and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
itself, including its experts, who will be evolving
advice on the assistance that will be available.

Money is part of that, but the most important
sources of advice and assistance are really the
models - the model legislation for each cultural
area - and the examples of process and of machinery
that Member States can find in their own region or
from like-minded Member States. It is in that area that
the Committee intends to increase its liaison
arrangements, perhaps by appointing further experts, so
that we know what other institutions are going to do,
we know in more detail what is available for Member
States and we have a follow-up with Member States
themselves as to precisely how they can use those
areas. So in the weeks and months to come, there will
be further advice coming out on assistance, in addition
to the directory, which I think will be of real practical
help to Member States that need to turn to others to
make their own performance as effective as possible.

There is also a very strong emphasis in resolution
1373 (2001) on financial control. Ambassador
Valdivieso majored on that in his statement - I think
absolutely rightly - and we will be liaising with the
financial institutions, not least with the Financial
Action Task Force. The Hong Kong meeting of the
Financial Action Task Force and the meeting in the
margins of that particular conference to talk about
group arrangements to take forward the area of
financial control will be a matter of attention for this
Committee, and we will link in with it.

But I think that the most important expression we
have heard today of further organization to meet
obligations has been at the regional level. I counted 12
expressions, formal or otherwise, of regional interest:
the European Union; the Rio Group; the Arab Group;
the Warsaw Group; the Caribbean Community; the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
Association of South-East Asian Nations; the Group of
Eight; the Pacific Islands Forum; the Organization of
the Islamic Conference; the South Asian Association
for Regional Cooperation; and the Central Asian
States. I think that is a marvellous response.

In that area as well, I think the Committee should
think of particular points of liaison. It may be that
there, too, we should have in mind experts who can
link in with the regional organizations, particularly
experts with experience in those regions who can do
work for us, or part-time work for us, in taking forward
regional cooperation, because maximizing the
operational capability of regions to help each other and
to work together to keep terrorists and support for
terrorists out may be where we make the most
advances. I think the Committee is going to need to
concentrate on that area very effectively.
So, as many have said - I think I noted
Bangladesh said it first - there is no room for
complacency in what we are doing. There are some
very hard tasks, not least in making sure that we
maximize cohesion rather than division in how we
approach this politically. The Committee has made a
wonderful start in doing that, because members of the
Committee have wanted to do it that way. Again, I
thank them and the members of the Bureau in
particular for making that possible. There is a huge
amount of work to do in the coming weeks. That is
going to be quite a test for everybody, and we will
report back to the Security Council gladly when we
have gone through that searing experience.

