I thank the Estonian presidency for convening this timely debate. I am also grateful for the statements by the Secretary-General and other briefers. We note with serious concern the continued suffering of civilians in armed conflicts in 2019, when more than 20,000 civilians were killed or injured in 10 countries. Civilians continue to account for the vast majority of deaths and injuries in armed conflicts. Women and children remain targets of violence and abuse, accounting for 42 per cent of casualties and injured. Millions of people remain displaced, facing the increased risk of starvation and fatal contagion. The protection of civilians in armed conflicts has been an arduous task for the international community and for the Security Council. Last year, the Security Council marked the twentieth anniversary of the addition of the protection of civilians on its agenda. It was highlighted that the Council's actions had undoubtedly saved civilians' lives, yet much more needed to be done. One year later, we are saddened to hear that the reality on the ground tells a vastly different story. It is high time we redouble our efforts and transform our political will and commitments to actions. In this regard, I would like to make the following observations. We continue to stress the paramount importance of conflict prevention and peacebuilding. An ounce of prevention in this case may save hundreds or even thousands of lives. Addressing the root causes of conflicts and ensuring equity, justice and development are the best ways to prevent conflicts from occurring or recurring. We support the full and meaningful participation of women in conflict prevention and sustaining peace. Regional organizations should play a leading role in promoting preventive diplomacy and confidence-building measures. In that regard, we are proud to share that the Association of Southeast Asian Nations has made a major contribution to turning Southeast Asia into a region of friendship and cooperation. When an armed conflict breaks out, it is the primary responsibility of States to protect their own citizens. States should not start addressing this responsibility from scratch. We support enhancing national ownership of this issue, including through strengthening awareness among national entities regarding their obligations under international humanitarian law, and through building national capacity. United Nations peacekeeping operations, while abiding by the principles of peacekeeping, can assist in certain cases. It is essential that they be given clear protection of civilians mandates and have adequate resources and training to meet the mandate's expectations. Enhancing and ensuring respect for international law, including international humanitarian law, by all parties to armed conflicts, especially the principles of distinction, necessity and proportionality, is crucial. We strongly condemn attacks against civilians and civilian objects. Those violations must be addressed appropriately at the national and international levels, in accordance with applicable laws and the Charter of the United Nations. It is extremely distressing to hear reports of attacks against health-care facilities and schools. Other infrastructure critical to the survival of civilians and communities should also be protected, such as that linked to water and food security. With increased urban warfare, extra care should be given to ensuring the well-being of innocent civilians in densely populated areas. It is imperative that all civilians have access to assistance. We call on all parties to armed conflicts to ensure unhindered access of humanitarian agencies that operate in accordance with the guiding principles of humanitarian assistance. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is exacerbating the vulnerability of civilians in conflict situations. Access to and supply of necessary assistance should take precedence. We reiterate our support for the Secretary- General's call for a global humanitarian ceasefire to allow for an adequate response to COVID-19. All parties should join forces to fight this common enemy, and make every effort to plan and implement concrete and meaningful steps to peace and recovery. As a country whose people have first-hand experience of such suffering, we fully empathize with the plight of civilians in armed conflicts around the world. The protection of civilians will remain among the top priorities of Viet Nam during its membership of the Security Council and beyond.
