Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Sir,
your presidency of the Security Council comes at a
very difficult time in the international situation, one
which has required consultations and resolutions. The
Colombian presidency has demonstrated its wisdom,
perceptiveness and vision. This does honour to your
friendly country and its work, which deserves all
possible praise.

My delegation associates itself with the
statements made by the representatives of Saudi Arabia
on behalf of the Arab Group, Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and Tajikistan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), and
would like to express the concerns of the Kingdom of
Morocco over the delays in the efforts to breathe new
life into the peace negotiations and over developments
in Gaza and the other occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem.

Only a few months remain before the
international community's deadline for enabling the
Palestinian people to achieve their legitimate
aspirations to establish an independent and viable
Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side in
peace and security with Israel. In that context, my
delegation would like to express its appreciation for the
efforts of President Barack Obama of the United States
to honour the commitments he made in his statement to
the General Assembly on 23 September 2010 (see A/65/PV.11) concerning the right of the Palestinians to
establish an independent Palestinian State within a
specific time frame. We also feel very optimistic about
the continued efforts of the United States to fulfil those
commitments, based on the established terms of
reference of the peace process and in accordance with
international law, the principle of land for peace, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map.

We look forward to continued international and
regional efforts, based on the same vision, to achieve
the same objectives. Such efforts would support and
complement the positive dynamism that emerged for an
unfortunately brief period in the wake of the
resumption of direct negotiations last September in
Washington, DC, under the auspices of the United
States. In that context, the role of the Quartet, with all
its elements and international influence, remains
extremely important to the task of launching a new and
effective impetus for the negotiations that would
bolster the Quartet's credibility and be judged on the
basis of its concrete results in September.

While we must voice our deep regret that the
Quartet's meetings in March and April have been
delayed, we value the constructive ideas produced by
the delegations of France, the United Kingdom and
Germany during the Security Council's meeting on
18 February (see S/PV.6484) on the objectives that
must be attained, the most important of which is
enabling the Palestinian people to establish an
independent State in the territories occupied since
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. This vision is
consonant with the Arab Peace Initiative and
appropriately lays the ground for overcoming the
obstacles to direct negotiations.
Since the suspension of direct negotiations, Israel
has continued to forcibly annex more Palestinian
territory, build more settlements, demolish houses and
expel their owners from their ancestral cities and
villages. Israel's persistence in building settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories is an illegal act that
cannot lead to sincere negotiations for a comprehensive
and just solution on the basis of international efforts.
Settlement construction is an obstacle that cannot be
overcome or circumvented; it must be eliminated.

Occupied Jerusalem and adjacent areas are no
exception; not only have they not been spared such
practices, they have been targeted more heavily than
others. Israel has continued its illegal policy of
Judaizing that city, which is sacred to all revealed
religions. It has sought to change its original character
and to build more housing units for its settlers,
depopulating it of its Palestinian residents through
forcible expulsions, home demolitions and revocation
of their residency rights, in blatant violation of
international humanitarian law and various Security
Council resolutions. The Israeli authorities have
continued to attack Islamic shrines; the international
community must reject that policy, for it can only lead
to increased religious friction both inside and outside
the area.

Given its responsibilities as an Arab and Islamic
State, and the responsibilities of His Majesty King
Mohammed VI as Chair of the Jerusalem Committee of
the OIC, Morocco denounces such acts, which affect
the special legal status of that holy city and the rest of
the Palestinian territories in blatant violation of
international legitimacy and the foundations necessary
to a just peace. We appeal to the international
community to shoulder its responsibilities and to call
unequivocally on Israel to end its unilateral actions and
respond sincerely and positively to international efforts
to resume negotiations forthwith in a way that will lead
to their success.

The Gaza Strip is still enduring the frequent
escalation of Israeli military operations, exacerbating a
situation that was aggravated from the start by the
blockade imposed on the civilian population,
preventing them from enjoying the bare minimum of
humanitarian assistance and the infrastructure
necessary for survival. In this regard, we pay tribute to
the continuing vital role of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and its support for the Palestinian
people inside the occupied territories and in
neighbouring countries. We welcome all initiatives to
provide UNRWA with the financial and human
resources needed to pursue its vital mandate to ensure
the basic living conditions for an extremely important
segment of the Palestinian population.

It is no secret that all the elements of a just and
comprehensive peace based on two functioning, viable
States can be implemented. No one questions the
Palestinian people's resolve and sincere desire to live
in peaceful coexistence and national reconciliation.
The only thing remaining is for Israel to demonstrate
political will and a vision of a future free of hegemony.
International efforts must be made to move the
dynamics of the peace process forward in a region that
has seen enough wars and tragedies, and in which all
people can look forward to freedom, dignity and peace.

The Kingdom of Morocco, based on its support
for peace, international law and legitimacy, the
relevant resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, still
supports and holds fast to the two-State solution
providing for an independent, viable Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side in
peace and security with the State of Israel. We also
urge Israeli withdrawal from the Syrian Golan and all
remaining occupied Lebanese territory.

Every country and people of the region has had
enough of the obstacles blocking the road to peace, the
violence and counter-violence, the victims, tragedies,
destruction, mistrust, hatred and alienation. It is high
time to effect real and drastic change in the situation
through the firm implementation of international law. It
is high time for Israel to demonstrate genuine resolve
and will to respond to the Arab Peace Initiative and a
commitment to living side by side with its neighbours
and to building a cooperative, prosperous, secure and
safe future for all.

