The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Guinea-Bissau, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration of the item without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mutaboba to take a seat at the
Council table.

As this is Mr. Mutaboba's first briefing to the
Security Council in his capacity as the Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-
Bissau, on behalf of the Council I wish to congratulate
him on his appointment. We look forward to working
closely with him and wish him good luck and success
in his new and challenging assignment.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
2

Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Brazil.

It is so decided.

I invite Ambassador Viotti to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/169, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, the new
Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti.

I now give the floor to Mr. Joseph Mutaboba.


