Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic ofKorea): I would like to
begin by congratulating the delegation of New Zealand
on its successful presidency of the Security Council. As
Member States prepare to adopt an ambitious new set
of sustainable development goals, it is high time that
the Council consider the peace and security challenges
faced by the people residing in the areas that we identify
as small island developing States (SIDS).

From the Pacific across the Mozambique Channel
and the Gulf of Guinea to the Caribbean, SIDS, owing
to their unique geographical characteristics, are indeed
more vulnerable to a series of security challenges. The
Republic of Korea fully recognizes those challenges,
and has engaged with partners around the world that
can be identified as SIDS in order to help them address
their needs in various ways.

As a member of the Combined Task Force 151 in
the Gulf of Aden and Chair, until last year, of Working
Group 3 of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia (CGPCS), the Republic of Korea remains
committed to fighting the problem of piracy and
transnational organized crime that exploits the vastness
of the open sea. Recognizing that there is a great need
for capacity-building, the Republic of Korea has been

making contributions to the CGPCS trust fund and the
Djibouti Code trust fund of the International Maritime
Organization in order to adequately strengthen the
capacities of the directly affected States. In addition,
we are working with the Friends of the Gulf of Guinea
to encourage implementation of the code of conduct
adopted at the first Gulf of Guinea Maritime Security
Summit Meeting.

Recognizing the importance of the effective
conservation and management of natural resources, the
Republic of Korea is working closely with Pacific island
countries on the sustainable development of marine
and fisheries resources in the Pacific Ocean. The
scope of our cooperation extends to marine scientific
research, exploration for deep-sea mineral resources
and renewable energy, including ocean thermal energy
conversion.

Climate change constitutes a critical economic,
social and security threat to the international
community, including SIDS. To help to address that
threat, we recently hosted the World Water Forum,
aimed at exploring policy options for preventing
water security crises, following the 2013 International
Conference on Climate Security in the Asia-Pacific
Region. Korea is committed to international efforts
to establish a new climate regime that can enable us
to pursue a path towards low-carbon and sustainable
development.

Finally, as a nation that is often cited as a rare
example of a least-developed-country-turned-donor,
the Republic of Korea has a unique take on what it
takes to overcome poverty and promote sustainable
development. Through initiatives such as the Korea-
Pacific Island Cooperation Fund and an annual high-
level forum on the Korea-Caribbean partnership, we
renew our commitment to expanding our overseas
development assistance in order to meet the specific
needs of our SIDS partners.

Those are just a few examples of our efforts to
respond to the problems faced by our SIDS partners.
However, given the vast scope and complexities of
those problems, only by harnessing the collective will
of the entire international community can we hope
to find genuine solutions to them. In that regard, my
delegation appreciates New Zealand's initiative in
bringing this important issue before the Council, and
we will take due note of all the statements made today
in this Chamber.

