Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Chile, Mr. Heraldo Munoz, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), for submitting the report (S/2003/669)
that is before the Council.

While congratulating the Committee ON the work
that it has accomplished over the past year, the
Government of Colombia would like to comment on a
number of recommendations and observations that
appear in the report presented in the month of June by
the expert Monitoring Group established pursuant to
resolution 1455 (2003). These are contained in part IV
of the report and relate to the freezing of the financial
and economic assets of the Al Qaeda terrorist network.

The good news that there has been a significant
decrease in the funding of that terrorist network and
that international cooperation has made it more
difficult to acquire funds from sympathizers and to
transfer them to other parts of the world has been
overshadowed somewhat by serious evidence that
points to the fact that, with increasing frequency, such
terrorists are using international drug trafficking as a
source of funding. Of the $6 billion profits produced
last year from drug trafficking, $1.2 billion came from
the traffic in opium and heroin originating in
Afghanistan. Those profits remain in the hands of the
warlords of that country, some of whom are remnants
of the Taliban and Al Qaeda network. However, those
figures are all the more alarming when one takes into
account that, to date throughout the world, economic
assets have not been frozen; that only $125 million in
financial assets have in fact been frozen, mostly from
bank accounts; and that only $59.2 million of that
amount actually belonged to the Taliban-Al Qaeda
network and its associates.

In addition, the report of the Monitoring Group
pointed out that profits from the illicit drug trade not
only funded the activities of the Al Qaeda in
Afghanistan - where coalition forces have suffered a
total of 167 terrorist attacks this year - but also in
Chechnya, Georgia and other areas of Central Asia.
Given that the report recognizes that Al Qaeda has
developed new techniques to acquire, use and
distribute funds around the world, we should
investigate whether money from illicit drugs has also
financed the terrorist attacks in Indonesia, Saudi Arabia
and Morocco and whether such funds are similarly
being used to finance associated terrorist groups in
Algeria, Kenya, the Philippines and elsewhere.

The Monitoring Group's experts have also
reported that the drug trade in Afghanistan and its
neighbouring countries channels its revenues through
the so-called hawala banking system and other
informal remittance networks. Around $80 billion
moves annually throughout the world through those
systems. In a single Asian country $3 billion enter the
State annually through the hawala system, while a
mere $1 billion enter the country through the formal
banking system. Those numbers give us an idea of the
amount of money from drug trafficking that is at the
disposal of terrorists.

However, the link between terrorism and illicit
drugs exists not only in that region of the world and in
the Al Qaeda network. Links between terrorism and
illicit drugs exist around the world, and they can also
be found among one third of the international terrorist
organizations on the list compiled by the Department of
State of the United States. Those links occur naturally,
as both terrorism and drug trafficking take place in
poor regions, where State control is difficult to impose.
They also develop into transnational phenomena that
take advantage of globalization, free trade and
integrated financial systems.

Colombia therefore emphasizes the essential need
for the Organization, and specifically the committees
of the Security Council established to combat terrorism
by resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001), to
promote efforts to strengthen mechanisms intended to
identify and sever the link between terrorism and the
traffic in illicit drugs.

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) in particular, we
suggest a broadening of the guidelines for the
preparation and submission of national reports to
include information about suspicious transactions in
order that particular attention may be given to
transactions that may stem from the traffic in illicit
drugs. Effective steps must be taken to control such
transactions in national and international banking
systems. There is also a need to strengthen
international cooperation to combat money-laundering,
to control the sale of chemical precursors and to
combat trafficking in explosives and small arms and
light weapons. Doing so would merely be a logical
result of the many resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly and the Security Council underscoring the
link between terrorism and illicit drugs.

We therefore support the proposal made by
Ambassador Mufioz, Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
regarding the need to strengthen the Committee's
technical capacity, which will make it possible to carry
out an effective assessment of the implementation of
related resolutions by Members States, particularly
with regard to the freezing of financial and economic
assets. To that end, the time has arrived to further study
the serious evidence that exists with regard to the
financing of the Al Qaeda network with money from
the illicit drug trade.

