Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join other Security
Council members in expressing appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Spain as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) for his briefing on the
Committee's work during the reporting period.

The agreement reached on the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action last July augurs well for international
diplomatic efforts to enhance nuclear security. In the
longer term, its implementation could be among the
possible catalysts needed for sustained peace, security
and stability in the Middle East region. At this juncture,
I reaffirm Malaysia's full and continuing support of
resolution 2231 (2015). We look forward to the full and
speedy implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action by all the relevant parties.

Along with establishing a framework for monitoring
and verification of Iran's nuclear programme by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the
Plan of Action sets in motion a change of events and
activities that will, over time, provide the necessary
assurances concerning the peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme. In that regard, we look forward to
the upcoming commencement of the IAEA's compliance
verification activities with a view to declaring
the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme, thereby paving the way for the full lifting
of all United Nations sanctions against the country. The
prospect of Iran's rejoining the community of Nations
that possess nuclear and nuclear-related technology
for purely peaceful purposes is something we should
welcome and endeavour to achieve without delay, not
least with a view to alleviate the situation of ordinary
Iranians who have had to bear the brunt and stigma of
sanctions that have been imposed on their country.

We regard the role of the 1737 Committee and
the work of its Panel of Experts, Malyasia shares the
view that both the Committee and the Panel of Experts
continue to perform an important role in investigating,
monitoring and reporting to the Council on compliance
and allegations of possible violations of the United
Nations sanctions regime.

During the present interim period before the full
application of the provisions of the Plan of Action, we
believe that the Committee and the Panel of Experts
continue to share a critical bridging function. In
addition to its ongoing activities, the Panel of Experts
might also consider undertaking a more vigorous
outreach in order to explain and clarify provisions of
the Plan of Action to all Member States and relevant
partners and stakeholders. We commend and support
the Panel of Experts for taking initial steps to that end,
as indicated in its recently adopted annual programme
ofwork. Mindful of the significant wealth of knowledge
and expertise accumulated by the Committee and by
the Panel of Experts over the years, we also believe that
there is potential and scope for continued cooperation
between the Panel of Experts, the IAEA and
relevant partners and stakeholders with regard to the
implementation of Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.

The agreement on the Plan of Action is a significant
landmark, as it seeks to address concerns about nuclear
proliferation. It also serves to reaffirm the principle
of the peaceful uses of nuclear technology, which
is in line with the regime set up by the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). On that
note, Malaysia reaffirms the centrality of the NPT
regime in stemming the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and related technologies. We continue to strongly
believe that the pursuit of nuclear non-proliferation
must be matched by a similar pursuit of general and
complete nuclear disarmament. We note that the efforts
towards nuclear disarmament by the nuclear weapons
States have stalled somewhat in recent years, and we
call upon them to reverse that trend. While achieving
a nuclear-weapon-free world may not be possible in
our lifetime, it is our collective responsibility to strive
towards removing the threat of nuclear holocaust from
succeeding generations to the furthest possible extent.

