Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank you, Madam, for having
convened this emergency meeting on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. We
would also like to thank Ms. Angela Kane for her
briefing to the Council today.

Over the past two days, Israeli military forces
have conducted a large-scale military operation
involving air bombardment and the use of ground
forces, leading to the total destruction of infrastructure.
Bridges, universities and power stations were
deliberately targeted, paralysing daily life in the Gaza
Strip. The Gaza Strip was totally closed to access by
air, land and sea, thereby isolating about 1.5 million
Palestinians from the outside world and restricting the
movement of citizens, leading to the economic
strangulation of the Gaza Strip and to grave food
shortages.

The Beit Hanoun crossing point, which is used by
international relief workers, was also closed, which
constitutes an obstacle to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. The Israeli air force is flying low over the
Gaza Strip, breaking the sound barrier and causing
sonic booms in an attempt to intimidate and terrorize
the civilian population. The occupying Power has
detained 64 members of the Legislative Council and
Palestinian Government ministers - about one third of
the elected Palestinian Government.

The military campaign is by no means
proportionate to its declared objective. Rather, it
represents the punishment of Palestinian civilians
through the destruction of civilian property far
removed from military targets and which do not in any
way contribute to military activities. Such measures
represent acts of collective punishment, which are
banned under the terms of article 43 of the Fourth
Geneva Convention.

These latest practices are but a link in a chain -
the Israeli Government's escalation of policies that
harm the Palestinian people, including extrajudicial
killings and the indiscriminate bombardment of the
civilian population. Such irresponsible Israeli practices
constitute a grave violation of international treaties,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention. They
constitute a violation of international humanitarian and
human rights law. Furthermore, they will only
exacerbate the violence in the region and lead to the
abandonment of the road map, thereby dealing a severe
blow to any chance to bringing about peace in the
Middle East, as will the provocative flights being
carried out by the Israeli air force in the airspace of a
neighbouring Arab State.

It is incumbent upon the international community,
represented by the Security Council, which has sole
responsibility for international peace and security, to
adopt a responsible attitude and put an end to such
violations.

Last week, we held an open debate on
strengthening international law and the rule of law and
preserving international peace and security (see S/PV.5474). This week, we discussed the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (see S/PV.5476). We
listened to all of the speakers in those debates reaffirm
the importance of those two issues. However, today

one Member of the Organization is totally ignoring the
initiative whose importance we emphasized only
yesterday. This is, indeed, a test of the credibility and
determination of the Security Council regarding its
commitments in that respect. If the Council does not
take firm and robust measures to deal with this
situation, its authority in the area of international law
and the protection of civilians will be eroded.

The right of Israel to defend the lives and security
of its citizens is not in question. However, the life of
one soldier should not be counted at the expense of an
entire people. If we follow such formulas in
international relations, the world will face true
catastrophe.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the State
of Qatar believes that the peace process must continue
and that all parties must renounce violence and respect
the resolutions of the international community, notably
the commitment to the road map, as proposed by the
Quartet, relevant Security Council resolutions and the
Arab peace initiative.

