Mr. Alfassam (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing. I would also like to thank the Force
Commanders of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali for their valuable briefings.

I would like to address the following four points:
threats, performance, exit strategies and agreement
among stakeholders. First, with regard to the threats
that peacekeeping forces face, over the past five years
there has been a regrettable increase in the number
of fatalities among peacekeepers. The Security
Council has supported the Secretariat in addressing
that serious issue. The dynamic nature of conflict
and the need to address more than one conflict at a
time, as well as the plethora of combatant parties,
make us greatly appreciate the major role played by
the military components of peacekeeping operations.
They should receive greater support from the Council
through realistic and flexible mandates. In that regard,
we would like to commend the effective role played
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Field Support and the Secretariat in
implementing the action plan outlined in the Santos
Cruz report with regard to the increase in the number
of fatalities among peacekeepers, whose sacrifices in
the cause of maintaining peace and protecting civilians
is recognized and appreciated.

Secondly, with regard to performance, we welcome
cooperation between peacekeeping missions and the
Secretariat to identify performance-measurement
criteria. We stress that such criteria must measure
tangible, concrete budget-related aspects as well as
measurable indices. However, peace remains a lofty,
priceless goal that cannot be measured in monetary
terms. The Council bears a great responsibility for
identifying the requirements of the mandates it designs
in order to achieve and maintain peace and protect the
lives of civilians and peacekeepers while measuring
and improving performance. Discipline-related
issues, including the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse, are of paramount importance.
The Council has repeatedly supported that policy and
expressed its appreciation for the troop-contributing
countries that have addressed incidents of sexual
exploitation and abuse in a decisive, immediate and
responsible manner.

Thirdly, with regard to exit strategies, the role of
military components in peacekeeping missions is not
limited to situations where there is ongoing fighting or
where ceasefires must be maintained among warring
parties. It covers every stage of a mission, from
downsizing and reconfiguration to agreement on an
exit strategy that can ensure a smooth transition to post-
conflict peacebuilding. The peace continuum requires a
flexible and gradual transition from military functions
to tasks related to stabilization and peacebuilding,
as in the case of UNAMID. The role of the military
component is the linchpin that holds the mission's other
components together. Moreover, continued cooperation
between the military and police components of a
mission ensures peacekeeping and support for capacity-
building, as currently exemplified in the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti.

Fourthly, with regard to agreement among the
parties contributing to peacekeeping missions, during
our March open debate on peacekeeping operations
(see S/PV.8218), we spoke in depth about the role of
parties contributing to peacekeeping operations, and
stated that the military component is a key pillar for
cooperation among them. From the very beginning, the
host countries are our first partners in peacekeeping
operations, followed by the troop-contributing
countries, which play a crucial role in triangular
cooperation with the Secretariat and the Security
Council. After the troop-contributing countries come
regional and subregional organizations, which are
playing an increasingly important role, particularly in
Africa, as we heard earlier from the briefers. We stress
the need for consistent and concerted efforts among all
those parties. The Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations has made available its annual draft report
(A/AC.12l/2018/L.3), which covers the military
component, and this month it is discussing the financial
and administrative aspects of peacekeeping operations.
All the parties that I have mentioned are essential
in reviewing both the mandates and the military
components of peacekeeping operations, and continued
cooperation among them is therefore urgently needed.

In conclusion, we are pleased that the Council
has heard briefings from the Force Commanders on
their missions, and we welcome continued interaction
with them under the auspices of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. We would once again like to
acknowledge the sacrifices that peacekeepers make in
extremely dangerous environments, and to thank troop-
contributing countries and all contributing parties, to
whom we express our gratitude for the sacrifices that
they have made to maintain peace.

