Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to start by conveying my congratulations to all the
new members of the Security Council - Chad, Chile,
Jordan, Lithuania and Nigeria - and would like to
congratulate the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan upon
your assumption of the presidency, Sir, to preside over
the work of the Security Council this month. I should
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
today.

My country's delegation wishes to align itself with
the statement to be delievered by the representative
of Djibouti on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. I should like to add the
following points.

First, Tunisia wishes to reiterate its firm position
in favour of the legitimate aspirations and yearnings of
the Palestinian people to realize their liberty, freedom,
dignity throughout the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, in the framework of the two-State solution
pursuant to the Arab Peace Initiative, the resolutions on
land for peace and the Madrid agreements. We reiterate
the importance of the Palestinian issue as part of the
Middle East as a whole and that continuing to work for
historic justice for the Palestinian people, which has
evaded them for the past four decades, is the reason
for all the tension and conflicts that have wracked the
region.

Second, my delegation therefore wishes to
stress that the year 2014 should be one of solidarity
with the Palestinian people, in the search for a fair,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the issue of
Palestine so that peace and security prevail in a lasting
way throughout the region.

Third, convinced as we are that there is no other
solution than that of peace, that should happen through
new prospects being opened up for the people of the
region. For that reason, we support the negotiations
under way between the Palestinians and Israelis under
the aegis of the United Nations. We hope that the
negotiations will achieve a fair and lasting solution to
the Palestinian issue, enabling the Palestinian people to
again enjoy their full rights, ending the occupation by
Israel of Palestinian occupied territories and resolving
a number of other issues, such as borders, security, East
Jerusalem, refugees, settlements, water and the fate of
Palestinian detainees.

Fourth, my Government places on Israel the
responsibility for the obstacles to peace - by way of
provocative statements, the actions of the occupation
forces and of Israeli settlers targeted at Palestinian
citizens, and the building of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories in the West Bank, and especially
in East Jerusalem.

Tunisia condemns the repeated aggression in
Jerusalem targeted at the Al-Aqsa Mosque. In that
regard, we reiterate the statement at the end of the
twentieth session of the Jerusalem Committee, which
took place on 15 and 16 January. We also condemn
Israeli practices aimed at changing the very identify of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque. We encourage the international
community assume its responsibilities Vis-a-vis
Jerusalem.

Fifth, we wish to point out the danger inherent
in the practices and violations that run counter to
international law and international legality. We call
on the international community, including the United
States, the sponsors of the negotiations currently under
way and the members of the Quartet and the Security
Council as a whole, to prompt Israel, the occupying
Power, to put an end to those practices and end its
settlement activities, which are the main obstacle to
the peace process, so as to ensure that we do not lose
the historic opportunity of these negotiations, which
should enable us to reach a lasting settlement regarding
all outstanding issues.

Sixth, we reiterate the importance of lifting the
blockade that is asphyxiating Gaza, putting an end to
the very serious consequences that stem from it and
which deprive the Palestinian people of the necessities
of daily life. Especially affected by this are women and
children.

Seventh, my country also wishes to reiterate the
importance of putting an end to Israeli incursions into
Syrian and Lebanese territories.

Eighth, we express our concern regarding the
situation in the sisterly State of Syria and its impact on
neighbouring States at the humanitarian level. In that
respect, we reiterate our support for the second Geneva
Conference on Syria to achieve a political settlement
of the crisis through an agreement among all Syrian
parties to put an end to the suffering of the Syrian
people, to ensure that they are able to achieve their
yearning for freedom and democracy while preserving
Syria's sovereignty and unity.

Ninth, Tunisia would like to reiterate its firm
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons during
the conflict under way in Syria. We urge that those
responsible for those crimes be brought to justice. In
that regard, we welcome the joint mission of the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons aimed at putting an end to the use of
such weapons. My delegation hopes that this will serve
as a positive step towards convening an international
conference on the Middle East becoming a zone free of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
as soon as possible, in order to promote peace and
stability in the region and around the world.

