Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): As
we stated yesterday, while all parties have
responsibilities in bringing peace to the Middle East,
ending terrorism must be the highest priority. The draft
resolution put forward today was flawed in that it
failed to include the following three elements: a robust
condemnation of acts of terrorism; an explicit
condemnation of Hamas, the Palestinian Islamic Jihad
and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade as organizations
responsible for acts of terrorism; and a call for the
dismantlement of infrastructure that supports these
terror operations wherever located, consistent with
resolution 1373 (2001). This draft resolution did not
take a clear stand against the actions of these terrorist
groups or call for decisive action against them.

The Palestinian Authority must take action to
remove the capability of extremist groups to conduct
terrorist outrages. In addition, Israel must move
forward and fulfil its obligations and commitments
under the road map and the Aqaba summit, including
improving the daily lives of Palestinians.

As we said yesterday, we will not support any
draft resolution that evades the explicit threat to the
Middle East peace process posed by Hamas and other
such terrorist groups. The United States opposed the
draft resolution, as it failed to do just that.

We note once again that the Government of Israel
is already aware of the Views of the Council members
on the issue of Mr. Arafat. Moreover, Secretary of State
Powell stated that the United States does not support
either the elimination of Mr. Arafat or his forced exile.
While Mr. Arafat is part of the problem, we believe
that this problem is best solved through diplomatic
isolation, and we have made that View clear.

For its part, the United States, along with Quartet
partners, will continue to work towards the
implementation of President Bush's vision of a two-
State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as set
forth in the road map.

Our diplomatic personnel, including Secretary of
State Powell, Ambassador Wolfe and our missions in
the region, are intensively engaged with both parties at
the highest levels. We remain committed to the road
map as the way forward towards the goal of the Israeli
and Palestinian peoples living side by side in peace,
security and freedom.

