Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting. We
also thank Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya; Ambassador Juergen
Schulz, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya; and Mr. Smai'l
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, for their excellent briefings.

Peru reiterates its deep concern about the armed
conflict ravaging Libya, which claims lives every day
and is causing tragic humanitarian consequences and
having a devastating effect on the country's economy.
Given the situation, there is no better alternative than
immediately devising a political solution, in line with
the progress made at the Abu Dhabi conference. As
such, we believe that the institution of an immediate and
unconditional ceasefire and the return to the dialogue
table are priorities. It is clear that the aggressive
rhetoric and individual interests must be transformed
into concrete measures for the welfare and protection
of the civilian population. To that end, the support of
the international community is necessary, especially
that of the countries with the ability to influence the
parties, while transcending strategic and economic
considerations and avoiding the power vacuum that
terrorist and extremist groups have taken advantage
of, as mentioned by the Special Representative and
other delegations.

We are particularly troubled by the manifest
violations of the arms embargo in ungoverned territory.
One need only observe - with alarm - the recent
offloading of armoured vehicles at a Tripoli port. These
are situations that serve only to prolong the conflict,
to the detriment of the direct interests of the civilian
population. Most of Libya's current revenues are mostly
directed towards weapons purchases.

In that context, and faced with the forced
displacement of tens of thousands of people and
hundreds of deaths, we emphasize the responsibility
of the Council to protect the civilian population from
the occurrence of atrocious crimes. That implies,
among other things, ensuring mandatory compliance
with the provisions of international humanitarian law
in all conflicts, including the Libyan conflict, without
distinction or double standards. It also implies the
necessary attribution of accountability for those crimes,
starting with the deliberate and reprehensible attacks
against the civilian population and vital infrastructure.
Those crimes should be tried within the Libyan justice
system and, in a complementary manner, by the
International Criminal Court.

In conclusion, Peru reiterates its firm support for
the efforts aimed at preventing further fragmentation
of the country and, through a political solution, at
returning to the path on which progress had been made
following the tireless efforts of Special Representative
Salame, to whom we reiterate our strongest support.

