President Mohamud: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council. It is an
honour to do so.

A tragedy has been unfolding in the waters of the
Mediterranean Sea, one that many believe concerns
people from my country and neighbouring countries.
If all the reports are confirmed, it could be the worst
tragedy since the current migration crisis began. We
must make every effort to recover the bodies of those
who perished and to care for those who survived. I
applaud the efforts made by many nations to safeguard
and care for migrants and refugees escaping their
home nations because of the misfortune of insecurity
and hopelessness.

We request that the Governments in the region, and
others that have the capacity to do so, investigate the
crimes that have been committed by those who lure
young people to undertake unsafe journeys on the high
seas. The pain, misery and misfortune of all illegal
migration and its painful physical and mental costs
for all concerned will end only when we have peace,
stability and real inclusive economic development in
source countries.
Let me begin by thanking the Council for its long-
standing support for peace, stability and development
in Somalia.

It has been almost four years since my Government
was appointed and since Somalia emerged from two
decades of war - two decades without a functioning
Government in place, and without schools, hospitals
or any form of public services. In Brussels in late
2013, I made a pledge on behalf of Somalia to pursue
peace and prosperity. That pledge had been central
to my original six-pillar policy, which provided a
foundation for the subsequent New Deal Compact for
Somalia. At the heart of my Brussels pledge lay the
pursuit of three imperative elements, namely, a secure
Somalia, a democratic Somalia and a progressive and
prosperous Somalia.

In 2013, the Somali Government agreed to pursue
the political transformation of the nation by drafting
and agreeing on a federal constitution, adopting a
federal model of governance and holding democratic
nationwide elections by September 2016. We laid
out that ambitious agenda knowing that we faced the
enormous challenge of trying to transform Somalia
politically while fighting a war against terror on our
own soil and lacking robust capacities or instruments
of State. When we first laid out those historic plans,
Somalia had limited functioning ministries and human
resources, limited domestic revenue streams to speak
of and no domestic planning or management capacity
to drive forward and sustain the desired reforms in
the country.

Along with the necessary political transformation,
we needed to build a secure Somalia. Our national
armed forces were decimated. Our soldiers, police and
security personnel lacked formal training, capacity-
building or salaries for almost 22 years. Al-Shabaab
had emerged from the conflict, taking advantage of
non-existent State institutions, and began its campaign
of terror in Somalia and neighbouring countries.
Security must provide the conditions for development to
flourish, and Somalia needed development desperately.
We had lost two generations of people who had not even
been able to go to school. There were no jobs, no public
services and very little hope among our young people,
who make up the majority of our population.

Somalia has lived a lifetime over the past four years.
Our transformation has been rapid. Despite all of the
challenges, Somalia has made extraordinary progress,
of which we are proud and which ought to make our
partners proud too. With the end of the constitutionally
mandated terms of the Federal Government and
Parliament, the latter half of 2016 will be a decisive
time for Somalia. Last week, we successfully agreed
the implementation road map for the 2016 electoral
process. That means that we are on track to undergo
the historic first democratic electoral process in 47
years in Somalia. I will not go into all the details of the
2016 election. However, let me draw attention to several
important facts.

First, the process will be uniform throughout
Somalia to ensure national legitimacy. Secondly, a
dispute-resolution process will support the elections to
ensure that we are able to respond to any concerns and
immediately address them to avoid conflicts. Thirdly,
a lower- and an upper-house will be elected. Fourthly,
30 per cent of the seats in the electoral process and
emerging ninth Parliament's Federal members will
be identified and specifically reserved for women.
In 2012, when my Government was elected, just 135
elders were involved in the selection of our members of
Parliament. In 2016, while elders will still play a pivotal
role, an electoral college of almost 14,000 people will
ultimately make the decision about who will represent
the nation. That is great progress.

We are committed to ensuring that there are no
impediments to the timely implementation of the
electoral process, including with regard to the freedom
of expression, or any extension of the constitutionally
mandated term limits of the legislature and executive.
This year's electoral process takes us one step closer
to universal suffrage. We recognize the importance of
a clear political Vision and path and have engaged in
twin-track planning in support of one-person/one-vote
elections, supported by a capable national independent
electoral commission in 2020. Somalia's Federal
Constitution sets out the foundation for peaceful politics
in Somalia. We are pushing ahead to complete the
review of priority chapters of the Provisional Federal
Constitution by the end of 2016.

Nationwide consultations with Somalis in all
Federal and emerging member states will be essential
to ensuring broad-based consensus and ownership. Our
Government is genuinely committed to that and strongly
believes in its value. During the past three years, we
successfully established three out of the four Federal
member states. We are working hard to complete the
state-formation process in Hiraan and Middle Shabelle
and to reach agreement on clarifying the status of the
region of Benadir, the capital city of Somalia.
While substantial progress has been made on the
security front, with almost 80 per cent of the country
liberated from Al-Shabaab, we acknowledge, with great
sadness and frustration, that the security environment
at present is an inhibiting factor for the development
of both the Government institutions and the people of
Somalia. Furthermore, the current security environment
remains a root cause for the significant humanitarian
situation and the ongoing assistance requirements
in Somalia.

I wish to recognize and commend the valiant efforts
of the Somali national security forces and the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in the fight
against AI-Shabaab. That fight is not over. We cannot,
and will not, quit before it is successfully completed.
Further resources and commitment are needed now
more than ever to chop off the head of the venomous
snake of terror once and for all. We strongly reiterate
the need for international support for reinvigorated
AMISOM. and Somali National Army (SNA) operations.
The February Djibouti Declaration was unequivocal
in that partners must continue to provide sustainable
funding for both AMISOM. and the SNA forces to fulfil
their mandates. The Declaration was also clear on the
urgent need for a structural overhaul of how AMISOM
is commanded. We must be confident that a central
command structure will be put in place to support a
coordinated and successful offensive in the near future.

My Government has been working hard to
strengthen the capacity and accountability of Somali
security institutions throughout the country so that we
are ready to assume control of our own security and
release AMISOM. from its current commitment. We
are in the process of developing financially sustainable
plans for the army - the Gulwaade plan - and
the police - the Heegan plan - under a national
security architecture, which is informed by the public
expenditure review conducted by the World Bank and
the United Nations. Articulating and agreeing on the
State structures that will oversee the development of our
security services has been the focus of my Government
over the past several months. I am very pleased that
the draft national security policy, endorsed by the
National Security Council, is scheduled to be discussed
through consultative meetings in each regional member
state capital. The first meeting will commence next
week, with a culminating national forum scheduled for
mid-May. That includes a reinvigoration of the National
Security Council to include regional representation
at the highest level of decision-making. The national
threat assessment has been completed, and the
national security architecture planning is under way.
Its completion is predicated on the completion of the
national security policy that outlines guiding principles
on Federal and regional security-related institutions'
roles and missions.

International support to the Somali security
sector is essential. My Government has taken steps
to ensure increased transparency in security sector
reform, including enhanced monitoring systems, the
registration of all personnel and their regular payment.
We are pushing ahead with national force integration.
The National Commission for Somali National Army
Integration has integrated four SNA battalions in the
Jubbaland region and one headquarters company of
female soldiers. I am pleased to report elements of
the newly integrated battalions have conducted joint
operations with Danab forces in coordination with the
AMISOM. and other international partners. Two more
battalions are in the pipeline for integration by July in
Jubbaland and, thanks to the recently approved United
Nations support package to Puntland, the National
Commission for Somali National Army Integration is
scheduled to start a process for the integration of 3,000
Puntland soldiers within the next month.

However, we cannot ignore the one element that
would have the most rapid and greatest impact on
the development of Somalia's own forces, that is, the
lifting of the United Nations arms embargo. We have
made solid improvements in weapons and ammunition
management and compliance with notification,
reporting and controls. In the past six months, we
marked more than 4,500 weapons, established a weapon
and ammunition technical working group and agreed
upon the terms of reference for the joint verification
team. We have held consultative meetings to initiate
the drafting of a road map to develop a comprehensive
national framework governing the full life cycle of
weapons and ammunition, and we have made significant
improvements in complying with Security Council
arms notification requirements.

Despite that improvement and the calls of
the different Security Council resolutions to our
international partners to provide non-lethal weapons to
Somalia, we are still hindered by the partial embargo.
We therefore request members of the Security Council
for the total lifting of the arms embargo on Somalia.
That will enhance our national capabilities to confront
and defeat international terrorism at home and provide
the best protection for our citizens, while safeguarding
our democratic and developmental future against
violent and radicalized spoilers. The arms embargo,
and indeed the Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring Group,
was put in place for good reasons and in the interests
of Somalia - and we are very grateful for that - but
Somalia has changed dramatically. Those instruments
are outdated and restrictive at best, and misleading and
undermining at worst

Today the threat in Somalia is not so much due to a
lack of institutional capacity or oversight mechanisms,
but to terrorism and violent extremism. Let us focus on
mechanisms that deal effectively with the disastrous,
international phenomenon that is terrorism. If Somalia
is to successfully defeat Al-Shabaab once and for all
and effectively rebuild an inclusive nation, then the
Security Council must support its efforts through all
possible means. We therefore request once again the
complete lifting of the arms embargo and a review of
the mandate of the Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring Group.
Such a review should take place in the light of the
regenerated political, security, economic and financial
progress made by my Government towards the peace
and stability of Somalia. The outcome of the review
should reflect the understanding that Somalia is no
longer at war with itself, but that Somalis are fighting
alongside all concerned Member States to make our
world a safer place for all.

Somalia's progress is illustrated clearly in the area
of public financial management reform. Today, Somalia
has a working Central Bank, overseen by a functioning
Board of Directors. The offices of the Accountant-
General and the independent Auditor-General
are functioning. Furthermore, the internationally
recognized Financial Governance Committee of
Somalia is in place, which reports regularly and
publicly and includes representatives of members from
the international financial institutions, including the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
African Development Bank.

In parallel to robust governance and oversight
progress, the public financial management legislative
environment is also being developed. The Federal
Parliament recently ratified three important bills,
namley, the Public Procurement, Concession and
Disposal Bill, the Anti-Money-Laundering and
Combating the Financing of Terrorism Bill and the
Audit Bill. And the Cabinet has approved the Public
Finance Management Bill.

I draw the Council's attention to the significance
of Somalia's first article IV consultation by the
International Monetary Fund in 25 years. The
consultation confirmed Somalia's 2015 economic
growth of 3.7 per cent. That is clear evidence that
Somalia is on an aggressive path towards reform,
and we are very grateful for the support that our
international partners have provided over the years.
Somalia has agreed with the International Monetary
Fund to a reform programme for the period from May
2016 to April 2017, which focuses on implementing
prudent fiscal policies while strengthening institutional
capacity for macroeconomic financial management.
The programme will enhance governance and economic
statistical capacity, strengthen fiscal discipline, rebuild
capacity for monetary policy management and foster
financial sector development as a basis for supporting
economic growth. It will be a key step in the process
liquidating the arrears and the normalization of relations
with international financial institutions as a whole.

Those achievements clearly demonstrate that the
Federal Government has developed both the capacity
and the proper oversight mechanisms to handle public
finances responsibly, transparently and in accordance
with international best practicesln addition, last
February, I launched the Open Government initiative
to ensure that information relevant to Government
activities was made available to the public in order to
promote transparency, accountability and participation.

Of course, systems are not the only thing that
Somalia needs. I draw the Council's attention to the
urgent need to develop key economic sectors that will
provide all Somalis with greater opportunities for
sustainable livelihoods. I welcome the international
community's efforts to expand support for high priority
economic sectors and youth employment, including
through vocational training and skills development.
Generating support for regional economic initiatives,
especially for infrastructure development, will be
essential for regional economic growth and cooperation.

I cannot urge strongly enough the need for a
comprehensive approach to equipping Somali youth
with tools that will enable them to play a positive
role in bringing peace, social progress and economic
prosperity to Somalia. In that regard, in line with
resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security,
we welcome the development of a national youth policy
and the United Nations Strategy for Youth in Somalia.

The year 2016 marks the final year of the Somali
Compact established in Brussels in 2013. The Compact
has played a crucial role in improving the partnership,
with mutual accountability between the Government
and the international community, and in furthering
the political, security and development progress in
Somalia. We look forward to developing that next
phase of international engagement in Somalia, based
on a shared set of principles and a renewal of the joint
partnerships within Somalia and with its partners.
Work is now progressing on a three-year national
development plan, which will include political and
security elements so that the holistic approach forged
through the Somali Compact is not lost. The principles
that guide the partnership between the Government and
the international community after the Compact ends will
be developed and agreed upon in the corning months.

Programmes and resources must be further aligned
to Somalia's national priorities. In particular, concrete
steps must be taken to deliver more assistance through
country systems, in response to improvements in the
Government's budget, expenditures and financial
governance systems. I am proud to say that Somalia is
a beautiful country with great economic opportunity,
both at sea and on land. Our newly adopted foreign
policy has investment at its heart, and in the past few
years our Government has been working to create an
environment conducive to investment in all our key
priority sectors.

Tackling terrorism, rebuilding an inclusive State
and playing a meaningful role in our region and the
wider world requires sustainable development, which I
am certain we can nurture and sustain with the wealth
of our nation. While we are grateful for the aid that our
partners have provided, and continue to provide, to us,
we strongly encourage them and their entrepreneurs to
invest in Somalia for the social and economic benefit
of both themselves and the Somali people. Indeed, with
the wealth of our resources, Somalia is truly a place
where investment will most certainly meet with great
profitable opportunities.

In conclusion, let me once again thank the Council
for its unwavering support for Somalia. The strength of
the Council members' commitment, combined with our
people and the Government's support and partnership
on the ground, has today brought forward a Somalia at
one, a Somalia at peace with itself and focused on the
collective achievement of national stability, progress
and prosperity. Somalia has turned the corner, and
there is absolutely no turning back to the dark past. It
is my most earnest desire that what is discussed here
and the decisions taken will be in the best interests ofa
united Somalia, once again one Somalia - a sovereign,
secure, democratic and Federal Somalia at peace with
itself and the world, for the benefit of its people.

I would like to conclude by reiterating my gratitude
and that of the Somali people for the engagement of our
international partners, including the AMISOM. troops
on the ground, with the support provided to them by
partners. Today, Somalia is holding elections after 47
years. The last election that took place in Somalia was
in 1969. The people who participated in that election
are today retired, at best. A new nation is experiencing
a new, good beginning.

