Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate your country, Mr. President,
on beginning its non-permanent membership of the
Security Council for the period 2019-2020 and on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to welcome the States
that have recently become non-permanent members
of the Security Council, namely, Germany, Belgium,
Indonesia and our sister country South Africa. My
delegation affirms its commitment to cooperating
with them and with the Security Council in all matters
pertaining to the Sudan in the work of the Council.

We would like as well to express our appreciation
to Ambassador Joanna Wronecka. We thank her for her
briefing as Chair ofthe Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and for
the report that she presented today. I would also express
my appreciation to the members of the Council for their
statements earlier in the meeting.
With regard to the peace process in Darfur, I
would like to underline the following points. First, the
Government of the Sudan is fully committed to the
peace process and to creating the appropriate conditions
for it. My Government expresses its readiness to resume
negotiations with the Justice and Equality Movement
and the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi faction
in accordance with the pre-negotiation agreement
signed in Germany on 6 December 2018. We would
like to reiterate our appreciation and gratitude to our
partners in Germany, and we look forward to further
cooperation with the Security Council and to increased
pressure being put on the rebel movements in order to
encourage them to join the peace process, in line with
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

Secondly, with regard to the situation in Jebel
Marra, I would like to affirm that what took place in
that area was the direct result of the refusal of the so-
called Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction
to accept all invitations to hold negotiations in order
to normalize the situation that has existed since 2006
and to achieve a peaceful solution. Moreover, certain
members of the Council also refused to adopt any
measures against the obstinacy of that movement and
its leadership, its disregard for the lives of our people
in Darfur and the obstacles that it has placed in the
way of all national, regional and international efforts to
establish peace in Darfur.

Thirdly, I would like to note the close link between
peace and development in Darfur and that the conflict
in Darfur is essentially over scarce resources for
development. Resolving the root causes of the situation
therefore depends on the level of commitment shown
by our partners and by the international community to
support development in Darfur and to respond to the
call issued by the High-Level Event on the Transition
from Peacekeeping to Peacebuilding and Development
in Darfur, held on the margins ofthe high-level segment
of the General Assembly in September 2018.

Concerning the issue of sanctions, I would like
to note the following. We affirm that the Government
of the Sudan is committed to cooperating with other
United Nations entities and agencies working in the
Sudan on the condition that they comply with their
mandate and that they respect the sovereignty of the
Sudan. Moreover, we strongly reject the unverified false
information mentioned in the final report of the Panel of
Experts on the Sudan established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) (see S/2019/34). Such information was
gathered from sources that are not credible or impartial,
such as Radio Dabanga.

I would like to note that since the sanctions regime
was imposed on Darfur under resolution 1591 (2005),
there have been many developments and that the current
situation in Darfur, as testified to by the Security
Council and the reports of the Secretary General, has
changed. The circumstances now are very different
to those that existed when the sanctions regime was
imposed 13 years ago. All United Nations reports that
have been submitted for the period under review by the
Secretary-General and the Panel of Experts confirm
the continued improvement in the security situation
in Darfur. That improvement was the main factor that
prompted the Council to adopt resolutions 2363 (2017)
and 2429 (2018), which stipulated a reduction in the
troop strength of the African Union-United Nations
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in preparation for a
final drawdown and full exit by June 2020.

The Government of the Sudan has continued to
make efforts to normalize the situation in Darfur in its
various aspects so that the states of Darfur can return
to normalcy. The Government has exerted efforts
in the area of security that have led to great strides
in achieving both security and stability throughout
Darfur. The campaign to disarm citizens and collect
their weapons has bolstered stability and security and
ended outbreaks of violence, which took place in the
past, while combating criminal acts and banditry. The
Government has succeeded in exercising its authority
and enforcing the rule of law, and is continuing its
efforts on a daily basis, which has strengthened security
and stability and prompted large numbers of internally
displaced persons to return to their homes.

Last February, the Council adopted resolution
2400 (2018), which renewed the mandate of the Panel
of Experts until February of this year. I should like to
point out that, in paragraph 3 of that resolution, the
Council expressed its intention to review the sanctions
regime in Darfur in the light of the evolving situation on
the ground. Given the fact that all the reports submitted
by the Secretary-General and the Panel of Experts

during the period under review confirm the continued
improvement of the situation in Darfur, we hope that,
in considering the adoption of a subsequent draft
resolution in February to renew the Panel's mandate,
the Council will review the sanctions regime imposed
on Darfur pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005). That
would enable the Sudanese armed forces to perform
their duties as guaranteed by the Charter of the United
Nations and the State's Constitution, especially in
the light of the planned reduction in UNAMID troop
strength in preparation for its exit next year. Moreover,
our armed forces and other security entities would be
able to fight transnational crime, human trafficking
and illegal migration as well as fighting terrorism and
carrying out other tasks, thereby making it incumbent
upon the international community to support our
military institutions. The Security Council must take
into consideration that Darfur neighbours three States
that are undergoing conflict - a situation that requires
the armed forces and other relevant institutions to be
able to control the situation on the borders shared with
those States.

In response to Council members' remarks
concerning the demonstrations, violence and
sabotage seen in certain parts of the Sudan since
19 December 2018, I would like to state the following.
The Government of the Sudan is fully committed to
providing its citizens with opportunity to peacefully
express their views concerning the political and
economic situation in the country. At the same time,
the Government of the Sudan is committed to carrying
out its constitutional obligations and international law
in accordance with its right to protect lives and public
property against sabotage, arson and all other forms of
violence, which some demonstrators have carried out. I
would also like to confirm that those demonstrations are
not related even remotely to the topic of this meeting,
which is dedicated to a specific agenda item, namely,
a discussion on the Panel of Experts final report (see S/2019/34) of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005), concerning sanctions imposed
on the Sudan. I would ask that Council members remain
focused on the topic at hand.

The meeting rose at 11.25 am.
