Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Mr. President, we are
honoured by your presence today in the Security
Council. I thank Lebanon for holding this very
important debate today. I also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his participation.

This is a timely moment to hold a debate on
intercultural dialogue for peace and security, coming as
it does on the eve of the Third Global Forum of the
Alliance of Civilizations, which is going to begin
tomorrow in Rio de Janeiro, as has already been
mentioned. The Forum will seek to rethink the way
tensions among different cultures are dealt with and to
launch projects for the promotion of trust and
understanding among nations. It will address questions
that include the challenges of stimulating integration in
multicultural societies and of strengthening the role of
women and of religious leaders in the advancement of
peace.

It is very fitting that today's debate is promoted
by a country such as Lebanon, which knows and
appreciates the benefits of the peaceful coexistence of
cultures, faiths and traditions and recognizes the value
of dialogue and understanding.

The theme of our debate is also very close to the
heart of Brazilians. We are a country born of a mix of
cultures and ethnicities. We were enriched by the
significant contribution that many immigrant groups
have made to our country and culture, among which is
an important Lebanese community. For us, therefore,
intercultural dialogue is not a political preference; it is
part of our own identity. We are determined, in the
Council and elsewhere, to do our part in promoting and
facilitating such dialogue.

As noted in the background note that your
delegation, Mr. President, has prepared for this debate
(S/2010/248, annex), intercultural dialogue is in no
way alien to the concerns of the Security Council.
International peace and security cannot be sustained in
the absence of adequate communication, mutual
understanding and a minimum of trust.

As a universal organization, the United Nations is
uniquely placed to facilitate dialogue among nations
and cultures. Such dialogue is important to diffuse
tensions and to avoid a conflict. It should take place
during a conflict, in the form of peacemaking. It must
happen afterwards, though peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and mechanisms of reconciliation and
transitional justice.

Discussions on preventive diplomacy in the
United Nations tend to consider issues such as early
warning systems, mediation and good offices. They are
all necessary and potentially effective. However, in
cases where conflict arises or may arise due to

profound differences - actual or perceived - in
values, traditions and faiths, there is a deeper
perspective of preventive diplomacy that can be
explored, one that, instead of managing conflict, seeks
to eliminate or mitigate the possibility of conflict by
changing the way people and groups see and react to
differences.

Such a deeper approach seeks to promote a
structured exchange at several levels among persons,
groups, governments and cultural and religious
organizations. The goal is to correct misconceptions,
prove prejudices wrong and mitigate stereotyping and
simplistic generalizations.

One element of such an approach must be what
some have called education for tolerance - a
conscious and sustained effort to form the minds of
individuals and to influence the ethos of groups and
institutions so that they accept and even welcome the
difference. If we succeed in building institutions and
educating people in that manner, some of the intangible
but very powerful root causes of conflict in many parts
of the world will have been eliminated or abated.

The United Nations itself can also contribute to
the intercultural dialogue through peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The work with local communities,
capacity-building, support to local media, especially
radio, and projects that promote dialogue and
understanding are all means that can be used to that
purpose. They contribute to a culture of peace. They
help cement and exemplify the notion that a strong
society requires not only the absence of violence, but a
foundation of mutual trust and cooperation among
diverse traditions and beliefs.

My delegation remains ready to support all
efforts at the United Nations aimed at dispelling
cultural misconceptions that nurture resentment and
contribute to conflict. This Organization, built on the
notion of collaboration for the benefit of all, including
with regard to peace and security, has an indispensable
role to play.

