Uruguay thanks France for convening this open debate and aligns itself with the statement submitted by Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends on Children in Armed Conflict. Uruguay expresses its deep concern about the increase in serious violations that continue being perpetrated against children. In 2019, more than 25,000 grave violations were verified by the United Nations, as compared to over 24,000 violations in 2018. The high occurrence of sexual violence and of indiscriminate attacks on hospitals and schools, as well as the exponential increase of cases of denial of humanitarian assistance to children, is particularly alarming during the coronavirus disease pandemic, when children desperately need to be protected and to have access to basic life-saving medical and humanitarian assistance. Implementing the children and armed conflict agenda is becoming more pressing than ever. Uruguay would like to emphasize the following points we view as relevant towards that end. First, strict compliance with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law is a necessity. Uruguay encourages all Member States to ratify and implement the Optional Protocol to the Convention of the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. The twentieth anniversary of the conclusion of this international instrument is an appropriate moment to advance towards its universal ratification and full implementation. Uruguay endorsed the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Paris Commitments and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, and calls on other States to do the same. The alarming number and increasing cruelty of intentional attacks targeting hospitals and schools and their personnel, as well as against children seeking medical care or education, make the full implementation of resolution 2286 (2016) indispensable. Those countries not yet having done so should endorse the Safe Schools Declaration. Secondly, the effective reintegration of children, in particular those associated with armed forces or armed groups, should be prioritized. Such children should always be treated primarily as victims within the framework of legislation and a juvenile legal system oriented towards their rehabilitation. Long-term, sustainable programmes and services for children victims of conflict are required. They should include psychosocial support, education and vocational training, and take into consideration the specific needs of girls. Thirdly, this delegation wants to stress the transforming and fundamental role of education. Education is also key to preventing conflicts and achieving reintegration. Sustainable Development Goal 4 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development underscores that every child has the right to quality education, which has an important role in reducing poverty and inequality. Education provides children professional opportunities and economic security and prevents them from resorting to crime or from being re-recruited. Fourthly, it is essential to take advantage of all instruments and mechanisms that the United Nations has at its disposal to fulfil the children and armed conflict mandate. My delegation wishes to highlight the role of the Special Representative and her team, as well as that of UNICEF. They can count on Uruguay's full support in their efforts to protect children from conflict. Likewise, the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the list annexed to the report of the Secretary-General are effective tools that have a tangible impact on the protection of children. When there is documented evidence that parties to conflict committed grave violations against children, they must be included in the list. When it comes to attacks against children, there is no place on that list for waivers or exemptions of any kind. For the list to be effective, it must be complete, exhaustive, independent and impartial. Otherwise, its credibility will be undermined, and its role in condemning and its ability to respond to and prevent such violations will be weakened. Peacekeeping operations are also relevant instruments. It must be ensured that child advisers participate in these missions and that adequate instruction is provided to peacekeepers. In that regard, Uruguay provides predeployment training to its troops on child protection issues, among other matters. Violators must be held accountable for their crimes and face justice. This will end impunity and ensure that violations are not repeated. States should cooperate with the International Criminal Court, and the Security Council should refer cases to the Court when appropriate. In conclusion, the coronavirus disease means that millions of boys and girls living in fragile settings face additional vulnerabilities. Children trapped between the horror of war and the impact of the pandemic need stronger political will and multilateral action from Member States. This is imperative to counter the current global health crisis, which is already transforming into a protection crisis, from having catastrophic consequences for the new generations. The unprecedented crisis caused by the pandemic also represents an unprecedented opportunity for cooperation and solidarity. We need to take advantage of this opportunity to protect our children and safeguard our societies' most valuable treasures.
