Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Algeria
reaffirms its firm condemnation of the grave violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
committed in Darfur. It also expresses its sympathy for
and solidarity with the victims of that tragedy. From
the outbreak of the crisis, Algeria has been involved in
the international community's efforts to end the
suffering of the civilian population and to find a
political solution. In that regard, Algeria has spared no
effort to support the effective measures taken by the
African Union and its Chairman, President Obasanjo,
to stabilize the situation and help the parties to find a
peaceful solution to that fratricidal conflict.

Algeria firmly believes that fighting impunity is a
crucial element for the entrenchment of peace and
stability. That need is all the more essential in the case
of Darfur because the conflict, which has raged for
several years, has damaged relations between the
communities. The process of fighting impunity must
therefore also aim at restoring harmonious relations
between the populations of Darfur and serve the cause
of peace.

From our point of view, all steps taken by the
international community must seek four equally
important objectives. First, they must bring to justice
those guilty of crimes through credible, fair and
transparent trials. Secondly, they must render justice to
the victims by restoring their rights and by
compensating them for the moral and material damages
they have suffered. Thirdly, the steps taken must
promote national reconciliation, a political settlement
of the crisis and the strengthening of peace and
stability throughout the Sudan. Finally, they must gain
the Sudanese people's support for a process in which
they are the most important concern and that ensures,
in particular, the Government's cooperation, which is
essential for bringing that process to completion.

Taking those considerations into account, Algeria
believes that the African Union is best placed to take
charge of that sensitive and delicate undertaking. We
are convinced that the African Union can satisfy the
requirements for peace without sacrificing the
requirement of justice that we all owe the victims. For,
while it is true that there can be no peace without
justice, it is equally true that without peace, there will
be no justice.

On behalf of the African Union, President
Obasanjo made a proposal founded precisely on the
desire to reconcile those two fundamental
requirements, mindful that utmost prudence must be
exercised when taking action. We regret that the
members of the Council have declined to study that
proposal in depth or to assess it in the light of the
possibilities it offers for attaining our common
objective of placing the fight against impunity in the
service of the strengthening of peace and national
reconciliation.

We also underline that one cannot claim to
support the African Union and leave to it the task of
proposing African solutions suited to the various types
of crises the continent has experienced, only to brush
aside its proposals to the Council without even
deigning to consider them.

In that context, I wish to recall that when the
situation in Darfur erupted, only the African Union
dared to send soldiers to monitor the ceasefire and
protect the civilian population, and that, in the face of a
complex crisis, only the African Union was able to
persuade the parties to engage in negotiations for a
peaceful solution to the conflict.

What is true of the situation in the Sudan is true
of all conflicts in Africa, where African heads of State,
through often intense mediation, have been able to put
an end to conflicts. And it is the African approach,
based on justice and reconciliation, that has enabled
communities that have ripped one another apart to
make the effort, once justice has been served, to learn
how to live together once again.

The resolution that has just been adopted took a
different approach. My delegation had no choice but to
abstain.

I wish to conclude my statement by expressing a
regret. I regret that, out of a concern for compromise at
all costs and at whatever price, those defending the
principle of universal justice have in fact ensured that,
in this domain, the use of double standards - of which
some have accused the Council - and a two-track
justice were most unexpectedly demonstrated.

