Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank the
ambassadors of the United States and of the United
Kingdom for their briefings. We have taken note of the
efforts of the Coalition Provisional Authority with
regard to the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1483 (2003). Since the Security Council
adopted resolution 1511 (2003), there have been
several new developments in the Iraqi situation. I
would like to make several comments in this
connection.

First, we have taken note of the announcement of
15 November regarding the agreement reached
between the Governing Council and the Coalition
Provisional Authority. We welcome that agreement,
according to which a transitional administration will be
established by next June and - before the end of 2004
- the constitutional process and the election of a new
Government will be completed. We hope that that will
truly contribute to the restoration of full sovereignty to
Iraq. We expect the Governing Council, in compliance
with the provisions of resolution 1511 (2003), to
submit to the Security Council by 15 December, a
timetable for the constitutional process and general
elections.

Secondly, we have always advocated that a
leading role be played by the United Nations in the
reconstruction of Iraq. We have also taken note of the
aspirations of the Governing Council in that regard. We
hope that, when circumstances permit, the United
Nations will be able to play, at an early date, a
substantive role in the political process in Iraq and in
the economic reconstruction of the country. That will
be of great significance for the prompt restoration of
stability in Iraq.

Thirdly, we are deeply concerned about the
failure to improve the security situation in Iraq. We
hope that the Coalition Provisional Authority will take
further effective measures promptly to improve the
security situation there so that an environment
conducive to the reconstruction of the country can be
created.

SANA-869

 

