Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for their briefings.

We strongly condemn the serious drone and missile
attacks on civilian targets in Saudi Arabia, including
this weekend's attacks on oil installations, which were
claimed by the Houthis. Such attacks are unacceptable
and jeopardize the efforts to reach a lasting political
solution to the conflict. We also join the Secretary-
General in both condemning and calling on all the
parties to exercise maximum restraint in the current
climate of tension.

With respect to Al-Hudaydah, we welcome the
outcome of the last meeting of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee on 8 and 9 September, in
particular regarding the de-escalation mechanism and
the activation of the joint operations centre. We reiterate
our call on all parties to fully implement the withdrawal
agreement, respect the ceasefire in its entirety and
resolve outstanding points of disagreement. I take this
opportunity to congratulate Lieutenant General Guha
on his appointment to head the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement. We continue to call
on all parties to implement the Stockholm Agreement in
its entirety, including the prisoner exchange agreement
and the Taiz agreement.

Additional efforts are needed to improve the
humanitarian situation, which remains catastrophic, as
we have heard. We commend the humanitarian agencies
for their outstanding work despite the difficulties
encountered. It is critical that all parties facilitate access
for humanitarian assistance and respect international
humanitarian law.

We draw the Council's attention to the excellent
and recently published report of the Group of Eminent
International and Regional Experts on Yemen
(A/HRC/42/17). Belgium is part of the core group of
supporters of the Human Rights Council resolution
36/31, which established the Group of Experts. We will
support the extension of the mandate at the next session.
We call on the parties to honour their obligations and
commitments under international humanitarian law and
human rights law. In that context, Belgium stresses the
importance of taking measures to protect against sexual
and gender-based violence, such as the establishment of
structures and services to respond to sexual violence.

Belgium encourages the Special Envoy to continue
to prepare the next steps in the political process, which
must be inclusive, with the meaningful participation of
women and young people, so as to adequately reflect
the ethnic, geographical and political diversity of
the population of Yemen. As stressed in presidential
statement S/PRST/2019/9, of 29 August, a political
agreement negotiated following an inclusive dialogue
is the way to resolve disputes and address the legitimate
concerns of all Yemenis, including those in the south.
In that context, we welcome the talks organized by
Saudi Arabia in Jeddah so as to identify a solution to
the situation in the south, and we call on all parties to
participate constructively.

Violence in the rest of the country continues and
exacerbates the lack of trust between the parties. In
addition, such violence hampers access to humanitarian
assistance. We call on all parties to cease hostilities
throughout the country. Belgium remains very
concerned about the high number of child victims of
air strikes and ground fighting and demands that all
parties take immediate measures to protect children.

