Mr. Inzko: It is my honour to address this body
today. In an ever-changing and frequently turbulent
global environment and with so many important
agenda items facing the Security Council, it is of
utmost importance that Bosnia and Herzegovina not
be forgotten. I sincerely thank the Council for its
continued attention and interest.

In May, I reported to the Council on the many
months of efforts to build a political coalition and
form the Government at the State and Federation
levels following the October 2018 general elections
(see S/PV.8522). At that time, despite clear differences
between the majority political parties, I would not have
believed that I would be standing before the Council
again today, six months later, to report that the process
had failed. While the parties in the Republika Srpska
formed their authorities soon after the elections and
the Government of Republika Srpska is functioning
properly, the State remains without a newly appointed
Council of Ministers, and the Federation remains
without a newly appointed Government.

Furthermore, the Council of Ministers from
the previous mandate continues to function, but it
remains hamstrung by the politically calculated and
unnecessary blockage of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly, which means that no new
legislation can be adopted, including the State budget.
The State is therefore forced to operate on quarterly
temporary financing, which severely limits the scope
of its activities and its ability to effectively deal with
such emerging issues as the migrant crisis. In this
regard, I would also recall Republika Srpska's long-
standing policy - since 2012 - of starving out
State-level institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina by
putting an unreasonable cap on the State-level budget,
while at the same time increasing its own budget.
I would also like to draw the Council's attention to
the clear lack of substantive fiscal coordination in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the related blockade of
the fiscal-coordination body known as the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Fiscal Council.

In May, the European Commission delivered its
opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina's application to
become a State member of the European Union (EU).
The Commission set out 14 key areas in which Bosnia
and Herzegovina must improve as part of the process
that will open talks on accession. As the goal of EU
membership is one of the very few areas where there
seems to be consensus across the political spectrum,
this should have been a milestone on Bosnia and
Herzegovina's European path, with political leaders
rallying to meet the challenge. However, the failure
to establish authorities and the continued blockage of
the State parliament hinder any possibility for Bosnia
and Herzegovina to enact the reforms needed to make
improvements in the key areas set out in the opinion.

Also in the EU-related context, I would like to
warmly welcome the newly appointed European Union
Special Representative, Johann Sattler, and wish him
the best of luck.

As Council members will also recall following my
previous briefing to the Security Council, numerous
members rightfully called on the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement the 5+2 agenda
consisting of the five objectives and two conditions to
be fulfilled prior to the closure ofthe Office of the High
Representative and the end of my mandate. However,
the lack of authorities and a functional State parliament
means that not only has there been no progress towards
implementation of the 5+2 agenda, but the same forces
working to block the parliament have also actively
engaged in holding back previous progress and key
reforms in this regard. We are moving away from the
implementation of the 5+2 agenda, not towards it.

Moreover, the Republika Srpska authorities have
announced a session of the National Assembly later
this month, in which they will discuss the decisions
of the High Representative. Senior Republika Srpska
officials have previously questioned the authority of
the High Representative and the validity of decisions
that established or helped to establish State-level
institutions and have suggested that Republika Srpska
might withdraw from those institutions regardless
of their ratification by State and entity parliaments.
Trouble even from a single institution would have grave
effects on the State's sovereignty. I will monitor these
developments and report to the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board and, if necessary, to the
Security Council.

Also worrying is the fact that these destructive
tactics occur against a backdrop of continuing
divisive and destabilizing rhetoric from many of the
same political leaders who claim to be committed
to Bosnia and Herzegovina's European path. Some
political leaders from Republika Srpska continue to
make statements expressing separatist tendencies or
predicting the dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
while some Croat representatives seek a territorial
rearrangement of the country. At the same time, the
biggest Bosniak party adopted, as it had in 2015, a
party platform advocating a Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina if agreed in Parliament, which was also
not helpful under the circumstances.

In this political environment, we must also be
concerned about the potential militarization of police
forces in Republika Srpska. It sends an alarming signal
to the public. The international community needs to
closely monitor this issue of separatist rhetoric and
actions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We do not need a
police arms race; rather, we need fewer police, not more.
But what is most reprehensible is revisionism or outright
denial when it comes to the issue of genocide, which, in
the case of Srebrenica, is a legal fact, as confirmed in
judgments of both international and domestic judicial
bodies, including the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), which was established by
this very body in 1993 (resolution 827 (1993)).

I want to take this opportunity to say once again
that, as the ICTY concluded, genocide was perpetrated
in Srebrenica in 1995, and nothing and no one can
change this fact. I would also like to thank all those
individuals and organizations that keep the truth about
Srebrenica alive and continue to search for justice,
particularly the Mothers of Srebrenica. The mothers
deserve our deep appreciation and respect.

To honour the victims of genocide, the Parliamentary
Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina must introduce
legislation that addresses genocide denial and the
glorification and commemoration of war criminals.
That will be a focus of mine in the coming period as we
approach 2020, which will mark the passing of 25 years
since the July 1995 Srebrenica genocide.
December 22 will mark the tenth anniversary of the
judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in the
Sejdic' and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina case. Dervo
Sejdie, a Roma, and Jakob Finci, a Jew, both citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, contested the provisions of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution that reserved
posts in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency and the
Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples exclusively
for Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats, claiming that these
provisions discriminated against them because it made
them ineligible to stand for election for either body.
The contested provisions meant that if a potential
candidate belonged to any of the 16 minorities ~ there
are 16 minorities in the country - or was the product
of a mixed marriage, or was born in the wrong entity,
that person could not stand for election for the State
Presidency or the House of Peoples, just like the Serbs
in Sarajevo, who cannot run for the State Presidency
there. In the same vein, Bosniaks from Srebrenica
cannot run for the State Presidency because they were
born on the wrong side of the Inter-Entity Boundary
Line. And it is not just a question of 16 minorities, for
it is approximately 10 per cent of the population that is
affected. Regretfully, nothing is being done to alleviate
the situation.

Moreover, recent proposals for electoral reforms,
particularly on the part of Croat political parties,
seek to attain so-called legitimate representation,
through which ethnic representatives in the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Presidency and the State and
Federation Houses of Peoples could be elected only
through constituencies of the same ethnicity. These
proposals move even further away from implementing
the judgment in the Sejdie and Finci case, which
basically holds that every citizen - everybody who
has a Bosnia and Herzegovina passport - can run for
the State Presidency, which is, of course, logical, is
it not? But that is not the case in Bosnia: candidates
have to be Bosniak, Serb or Croat. Ifa candidate is not
Bosniak, Serb or Croat, he or she cannot run for the
State Presidency. As a result, people filed a complaint
at the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg
nearly 10 years ago, and they obtained a judgment in
their favour, but nothing has changed.

By way of illustration, the Ambassador of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, my respected friend and colleague,
Mr. Sven Alkalaj, who belongs to a minority group,
cannot run either for the State Presidency or for the
House of Peoples. That is a real scandal. There is no
equality for him, or for others. But the other scandal is
that we have a 10-year-old judgment from the European
Court of Human Rights that remains unimplemented.
Parties need to do something to celebrate this
anniversary, as it were.

Similarly, 26 November will mark the ninth
anniversary of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court's 2010 ruling that certain
provisions in the Bosnia and Herzegovina election law
pertaining to the city of Mostar were not in harmony
with the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution.
Unfortunately, as a result of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliament's failure to adopt necessary changes to the
law, the ruling also remains unimplemented - and has
been for nine years now e and Mostar has not held
local elections since 2008. Can any of us imagine a
city in our own countries not holding an election since
2008? That of course remains a black eye on Bosnia
and Herzegovina's democratic record: yet another
unimplemented Constitutional Court decision.

Most recently, in another case the European Court
of Human Rights ruled that the failure of the authorities
to act prevented a citizen from voting in or standing
for local elections, which amounts to discrimination
on the basis of her place of residence. Moreover, the
Court found that the authorities' failure has created
a legal void that has, since 2012, led to Mostar being
governed by a mayor who does not have the requisite
democratic legitimacy, obviously because there have
been no elections there since 2008.

I call on the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary
Assembly and political leaders to implement that
judgment and all other judgments as a matter of
priority, and to do so independently of other issues,
by finding a political agreement to amend the Bosnia
and Herzegovina election law. Bosnia and Herzegovina
must be a State that is based on the rule oflaw, as stated
and prioritized in the Dayton Peace Agreement.

The rule of law and the fight against corruption
should be priorities for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Public
opinion polls show that three quarters of citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina are extremely or mostly
dissatisfied with the rule-of-law situation and the work
of judicial institutions. Accordingly, I will make the
rule of law and the functionality of judicial institutions
my priority in the coming period, working together, of
course, with the international community.

Unbridled disrespect for the rule of law does not
occur in a vacuum. A case in point is the tragic and
still unsolved murder of the young David Dragicevie in
Banja Luka almost two years ago. But dissatisfaction
with the legal system remains one of the leading
reasons for the brain drain that Bosnia and Herzegovina
is experiencing. The brain drain is not unique to the
country, but the phenomenon is particularly tragic in
Bosnia, which has a small population. Data from the
World Bank Group's Fall 2019 Europe and Central
Asia Economic Update, Migration and Brain Drain,
suggests that almost half of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
population has permanently emigrated from the country.
According to the World Bank, the main domestic risk
is the challenging political environment, which makes
structural reforms more difficult. In simple terms,
people do not just want jobs: they also want political
stability and justice.

Next year, we will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Dayton Peace Agreement. Unfortunately, over
these 25 years, the expectations of many citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, or of the international
community, have not been met. Bosnia and Herzegovina
has proven serious problems related to the functionality
of its institutions, the rule of law and the fight against
corruption, the freedom of media and in many other
areas, which are reflected by the pervasive separatism
and divisive policies in the country and the general
lack of focus of the country's political elite on issues
of real importance to the citizens. Among these issues
are gender equality, bearing in mind that on average
women's salaries amount to only 50 per cent of men's
salaries. Women are also severely underrepresented
in the political sphere, despite there being a legal
obligation for them to occupy 40 per cent of positions
in the political institutions, which was mandated by a
law that was passed without incident and with near-
universal approval, but, of course, it remains to be
implemented. We should remember that women in
conflict situations across the world are experiencing
great suffering, and that it is high time the international
community and, above all, the politicians of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, prioritize gender issues. I will look into
this matter and encourage a more thorough discussion.

The fundamental issue that we must all consider is
not only how to help Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to
face its challenges going forward but, more importantly,
how to prevent Bosnia and Herzegovina from going
backwards. The current trends and various public

pronouncements clearly indicate an ongoing effort to
roll back the reforms that have carried the country thus
far. In this regard, it is now more important than ever
to preserve the Dayton structure and the tools at the
disposal of the international community, including the
authority granted to the High Representative under
the General Framework Agreement for Peace and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including, of
course, the European Union-led Operation Althea. It is
of utmost importance that the international community
work together to preserve the investments it has made
over the past two decades and, above all, deliver on the
promise of a better future for the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

As I have previously suggested, we must recognize
backsliding when it occurs, and in such instances,
acknowledge that our mission is not yet complete.

