Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation has just voted against the
draft resolution before us. This is not a situation we would
have liked to see. It was caused entirely by the erroneous
acts of the Government of Guatemala.

China has all along supported the peace process in
Guatemala and the relevant resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly. We welcome and are gratified by the
peace Agreement reached by the two parties in Guatemala,
and sincerely hope that peace and stability will prevail in
the country.

Regrettably, however, the Government of Guatemala
has, for four consecutive years, unscrupulously supported
activities aimed at splitting China at the United Nations, in
flagrant violation of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and in disregard of repeated
demarches of the Chinese Government. It was furthermore
bent on inviting, in disregard of the solemn warnings of the
Chinese Government, the authorities of Taiwan to the
signing ceremony of the peace Agreement in Guatemala,
thereby providing them with a venue for secessionist
activities against China.

It is the unshirkable responsibility of all Member
States to safeguard the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. The Government of
Guatemala, by its own doing, has trampled upon the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the Charter of
the United Nations, contravened General Assembly
resolution 2758 (XXVI), infringed upon China's
sovereignty and territorial integrity, interfered in its
internal affairs and hurt the feelings of the Chinese
people.

The Guatemalan authorities cannot expect to have
the cooperation of China in the Security Council while
taking actions to infringe upon China's sovereignty and
territorial integrity. No country's peace process should be
at the expense of another country's sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

Despite the actions taken by the Government of
Guatemala that harmed China's interests, we still made
reasonable suggestions in a constructive and forward-
looking approach in order to find a proper solution to the
issue at hand. We hoped that the Government of
Guatemala could take concrete actions to correct its
mistakes. This fully shows China's sincerity. However,
the Government of Guatemala turned a deaf ear to all this
and clung to its erroneous position, thereby setting serious
obstacles in the way of our support for the draft
resolution. Undoubtedly, the Government of Guatemala
should be held responsible for all the consequences
arising therefrom.

I wish to reaffirm the principled position of China
on the question of Taiwan. There is but one China in the
world and the Government of the People's Republic of
China is the sole legal Government representing the entire
Chinese people. The question of Taiwan is a major
question of principle that bears upon China's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the cause of national reunification.
It falls entirely within China's internal affairs and brooks
no outside interference whatsoever. The Chinese
Government has no room for compromise on this
question. It is the unswerving determination of the
Chinese Government to safeguard its State sovereignty
and territorial integrity.

Finally, I wish to point out that if the Government
of Guatemala is indeed sincere, values its peace process
and moves to remove the obstacles, the Chinese
delegation may reconsider the authorization of the
deployment of military observers in Guatemala by the
Security Council.
 

