Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro; and the European Free Trade Association
countries members of the European Economic Area,
Iceland and Liechtenstein, align themselves with this
statement.

I appreciate that you, Sir, have asked that
delegations speak for no more than five minutes.
However, as I am speaking on behalf of 35 countries, I
hope for your indulgence if I exceed ever so slightly
your time limit.

The European Union welcomes today's debate
and the opportunity to address the subject of small
arms two and-a-half years since the 2001 United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and a year since
the Council's last debate on this issue.

The European Union worked very actively to
achieve a successful outcome from the 2001
Conference and remains consistent, through the
political and practical actions of the Union and its
member States, in its commitment to the full
implementation of the Programme of Action.

The problem of small arms and light weapons
worldwide has, unfortunately, not diminished in any
significant way over the past two years. Estimates for
stockpiles worldwide of small arms vary considerably,
but recent figures suggest as many as 600 million of
these weapons are in circulation. Such statistics
demonstrate the scale of the problem.

The death toll from misuse of small arms and
light weapons remains dramatic by any standard -
perhaps as many as 500,000 people each year. The
nature of modern conflicts is such that it is most often
civilians who suffer most, with the overwhelming
majority of victims being women and children. But the
impact on societies of the destruction caused by the
misuse of small arms and light weapons is much wider:
on victims' immediate families, on livelihoods and,
more generally, on the very fabric of societies.

The problem of the excessive and destabilizing
accumulations of small arms is a global one, requiring
a coordinated response at national, subregional,
regional and international levels. The response also
needs to be comprehensive if we are to address
effectively this complex and multifaceted issue
involving, inter alia, factors such as international and
internal security, trade, civil-military relations, the role
of weapons in societies, human rights and humanitarian
concerns and the impact on development.

The Small Arms Survey 2003 puts it succinctly
when it says that "the challenge is and will be to
develop an adequate conceptual, political and practical
framework within which all relevant dimensions of the
problem can be tackled".

Many of the world's conflicts are fuelled by the
easy supply and availability of small arms. The ease
with which they can be concealed and moved, their
relatively low cost and violations of Council arms
embargoes make it extremely difficult to retrieve and
remove these weapons from the equation. It makes
sense, therefore, to do everything possible to stop their
supply at source or to prevent their diversion from
legitimate purposes.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
is recognized as a primary factor in sustaining
conflicts, exacerbating violence, contributing to
displacement and fuelling crime and terrorism. Arms
control activities, including, in particular, measures to
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, remain an essential dimension, therefore, for
conflict prevention and resolution, as well as for the
success of peace-building efforts.

Therefore, the European Union welcomes the
Secretary-General's report (S/2003/1217), in response
to the statement of the President of the Security
Council of 31 October 2002 (S/PRST/2002/30) on the
state of implementation, one year on, of the
recommendations originally proposed to the Council by
the Secretary-General.

Overall, the assessment of the report is positive.
It notes where advances have been made, without, on
the other hand, shying away from pointing to areas
where progress has been less marked or where a more
proactive approach is needed.

In 2002, the Secretary-General had recommended
that the Council might wish to call upon Member
States to support the development of an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace, in a
timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms and light
weapons. The European Union (EU) warmly welcomes
the concrete progress that has been made on this
particular point with the agreement by the General
Assembly at this session to establish an open-ended
working group to negotiate an international instrument
on marking and tracing. The working group will hold
its organizational session in early February, and we
hope that it can hold its first substantive session before
the summer. The European Union strongly believes that
a multilateral and legally binding instrument on
marking and tracing would greatly strengthen abilities
to tackle issues of illicit weapons flows and illegal
traders and to curtail the acquisition of such weapons
by those engaged in terrorist activities.

The European Union regards the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms as a global
transparency and confidence-building measure and
welcomes the recent decision taken on expanding its
scope. The widest participation by Member States in
the Register would greatly enhance its value, and the
EU therefore reiterates its call on all States to submit
timely returns of their imports and exports to the
Register, including information on military holdings
and procurement through national production.

The European Union supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the Council pursue
more vigorously and expeditiously the use of arms
embargoes to countries or regions threatened by,
engaged in or emerging from armed conflict and to
seek additional ways to promote their effective
implementation through enhanced monitoring
mechanisms.

Stopping the flow of small arms at source through
efforts aimed at preventing their diversion from
legitimate purposes implies the implementation and
enforcement of national laws and regulations
controlling the manufacture, production, import,
export, possession and trade in small arms and through
cooperative efforts at subregional, regional and global
levels. In this regard, the EU sponsored in the First
Committee the draft resolution entitled "Promotion at
the regional level in the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe of the United Nations
programme of action on the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all its aspects", adopted as
resolution 58/55, which reaffirms the importance of
ongoing efforts at the regional and subregional levels.

The European Union Code of Conduct on Arms
Exports has been in operation since 1998, and we
believe that it is a model that can be drawn on in
implementing legislation in other jurisdictions. The
European Union is currently looking at the elaboration
of common national and international standards that
would aim to ensure that legal trade is not diverted into
illegal channels and to limit the excessive
accumulation of small arms in areas of existing tension
or armed conflict.

Export controls are an essential tool in helping to
curtail illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. One measure to improve control over the
export and transit of small arms and light weapons
would be to enhance the effectiveness of end-user
certificates. The European Union continues to advocate
enhanced international action in this area.

Controls on brokers and on brokering is an area
of particular concern and one to which the EU is
paying priority attention. Illicit brokering and
trafficking are recognized as being among the main
factors fuelling the illegal trade in small arms and light
weapons around the world. I wish, therefore, to draw
the attention of the Council to the European Union's
adoption, in June 2003, of a common position on arms
brokering, requiring member States to introduce
legislation in order effectively to control the activities
of brokers.

Also in this regard, the EU welcomes the General
Assembly's decision, in its resolution 58/241, to
request the Secretary-General to hold broad-based
consultations with all Member States, interested
regional and subregional organizations, international
agencies and relevant experts on further steps to
enhance international cooperation on illicit brokering
in small arms and light weapons. We look forward to
the Secretary-General's future report on his
consultations.

The European Union, as a demonstration of its
seriousness in implementing its commitments under the
2001 Programme of Action, has allocated assistance
totalling approximately €7.7 million in the period 2001
to 2003 to affected countries, to help them deal with
the excessive and destabilizing accumulation of small
arms and light weapons. Examples include projects in
Cambodia of approximately €4.8 million, in Latin
America and the Caribbean of €1.045 million and in
Albania of €1.37 million. Additionally, a contribution
of €500,000 was granted to the running costs of the
joint Stability Pact and United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) regional clearinghouse in
Belgrade on the control of small arms and light
weapons. In May 2003, a financial agreement totalling
€2 million over a three-year period, for a large-scale
project implemented by SaferAfrica, was concluded
between the United Republic of Tanzania and the
European Commission. In addition, States members of
the European Union contribute individually to
numerous projects and assistance programmes with the
aim of controlling the illicit trade in, and combating the
use of, small arms and light weapons, particularly in
African countries.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's emphasis,
in his report (S/2003/1217) on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in post-
conflict situations, and we welcome the Council's
increased focus on this issue. Given porous borders in
many regions of tension around the world and the easy
portability of small arms, effective disarmament
programmes, including weapons collection and
disposal, will often require a subregional or wider
regional approach. We encourage the Council to
continue to explore how best to address this regional
dimension of the issue.

