Mr. Davutoglu (Turkey): I appear before the
Council today as a result of a very sad and tragic
occasion on which one State Member of this house has
committed a serious crime in total disregard of all the
values we have vowed to uphold since the
establishment of the United Nations system.

I am distraught by the fact that the Israeli
Defense Forces stormed a multinational civilian
endeavour carrying humanitarian aid to Gaza in
international waters - 72 nautical miles off the coast,
to be exact - killing and wounding many civilians.
This action was uncalled for. The Israeli actions
constitute a grave breach of international law. In the
simplest terms, it is tantamount to banditry and piracy.
It is murder conducted by a State. It has no excuses or
justification whatsoever. A nation-State that follows
this path has lost its legitimacy as a respectful member
of the international community.

The multinational civilian flotilla, composed of a
few ships and a total of around 600 people from
32 countries carrying humanitarian aid to impoverished
Gaza, was unlawfully ambushed early today. The sole
aim of this civilian mission was to provide much-
needed relief to the children of occupied Gaza, who
have been under illegal and inhumane Israeli blockade
for years. The ships were hardly a threat to the State of
Israel or any other State, for that matter.
Humanitarian aid was on its way to children who
have been stripped of their opportunities to live as
children and enjoy all the basic amenities that all of
our children take for granted. These children do not
know where their next meal is coming from. They
either have no shelter or live in extremely deprived
conditions. They receive no education. They have no
future in which they can contribute to a peaceful and
stable Palestine and the wider region. The ships carried
amenities and facilities - such as playgrounds - that
would remind the children of their childhoods. They
carried very basic goods, such as cancer medication
and milk powder to enhance child growth and health in
the absence of milk proper.

The international community has been witness to
this humanitarian tragedy for years and failed to act.
Today, this is where we are. Today, we have observed
through live coverage an act of barbarism whereby the
provision of humanitarian aid has been punished
through aggression on the high seas, 72 miles off the
coast. Today, many humanitarian aid workers are
returning in body bags and Israel has blood on its
hands.

This is not off the coast of Somalia or in the
archipelagos of the Far East, where piracy is still a
phenomenon. This is the Mediterranean, where such
acts are not the norm. This is where we need common
sense. This is where civilization emerged and
flourished, and where the Abrahamic religions took
root. Those are religions that preach peace and teach us
to extend our hand when others are in need.

The use of force was not only inappropriate, but
also disproportionate. International law dictates that,
even in wartime, civilians are not to be attacked or
harmed. The doctrine of self-defence does not in any
way justify the actions taken by the Israeli forces.
High-seas freedoms constitute one of the most basic
rights under the international law of the sea, including
customary international law. The freedom of navigation
is one of the oldest international norms, dating back
centuries. No vessel can be stopped or boarded without
the consent of the captain or the flag State. The law
permitting such action in exceptional cases is clearly
stated. Furthermore, any suspected Violation of law on
the part of a vessel and its crew on the high seas does
not absolve the intervening State of its duties and
responsibilities under applicable international law. To
take humanitarian aid delivery as a hostile act and to
treat aid workers as combatants is a reflection of a
dangerous state of mind, with detrimental effects on
regional and global peace. Therefore, the Israeli actions
cannot be deemed legal or legitimate. Any attempt to
legitimize the attack is futile.

This unacceptable action was perpetrated by
those who in the past made use of ships carrying
refugees and those escaping one of the worst tragedies
of the past century. They should be more aware than
most of the importance of humanitarian assistance and
of the dangers and inhumanity of ghettos, such as that
we currently see in occupied Gaza. I am proud to
represent a nation that has in the past helped those in
need and escaping extermination.

Following this act of aggression, I have heard
official statements claiming that civilians on the ship
were members of a radical Islamist group. It saddens
me to see officials of a State stoop so low as to lie and
struggle to create pretexts that would legitimize their
illegal actions. However, the flotilla consists of citizens
from 32 countries, all of them civilians representing
many faiths - Christianity, Islam and Judaism - and
people of all creeds and backgrounds. It represents the
conscience of the international community. It is a
model of the United Nations.

Therefore, this was an attack on the United
Nations and its values. The international system has
suffered a sharp blow. It is now our responsibility to
rectify this and prove that common sense and respect
for international law can prevail. We must be able to
show that the use of force is not an option unless
clearly stated in law. We must uphold our commitments
and punish those who are in contradiction. The system
must be set right. Otherwise, the trust of the people in
the system, in their leaders and in us will be
demolished.

No State is above the law. Israel must be prepared
to face the consequences and be held accountable for
its crimes. In these conditions, any slim chance that
existed with regard to peace and stability in the region
has suffered a serious setback. The processes in place
have been suffocated by this one single act. It seems as
if Israel has gone the extra mile to negate any positive
developments and hopes for the future. It has become
an advocate of aggression and the use of force.

In View of all those considerations today, I call on
the people of Israel to express their dismay with regard
to this wrongdoing. They must not allow another
blatant action to once again present Israel as an
aggressor. They must take steps to reinstate their status
as a credible partner and responsible member of the
international community.

Turkey would like to see the Security Council
react strongly today and adopt a presidential statement
strongly condemning this Israeli act of aggression,
demanding an urgent inquiry into the incident, and
calling for the punishment of all responsible authorities
and persons. I call on the Council to step up and do
what is expected of it. We hereby expect the following
to be included in the decision.

Israel must apologize to the international
community and to the families of those who were
killed and wounded in the attack. An urgent inquiry
must be undertaken. Appropriate international legal
action must immediately be taken against the
authorities responsible for and the perpetrators of this
aggression. A severe expression of disappointment and
warning must be issued by the United Nations. Israel
must be urged to abide by international law and basic
human rights. The countries concerned must be
allowed to retrieve their deceased and wounded
immediately. The ships must be expressly released and
allowed to deliver the humanitarian assistance to its
destination. The families of the deceased and wounded
and the non-governmental organizations and shipping
companies concerned must be compensated to the full
extent. The blockade of Gaza must be ended
immediately and all humanitarian assistance allowed
in. Gaza must be made an example through its swift
development as a region of peace. The international
community must be invited to contribute.

This is a black day in the history of humankind,
on which the distinction between terrorists and States
has been blurred. Anyone who stands in the way of
re-establishing dignity and respect for the international
world order will have to answer to world public
opinion. It is incumbent upon us to show that all States
are bound by international law and humane values.
Turkey is prepared to shoulder its responsibility in that
regard. I am sure that this is our common goal.

In conclusion, I salute all humanitarian workers
who endeavour to provide relief. They are the people
on the front lines. I convey my condolences to the
families of those who gave their lives in this pursuit,
whatever their background, religion or ethnicity. I
share their grief.
According to Abrahamic tradition and my belief,
killing one human being is killing humankind as a
whole. Yesterday, humankind drowned in the
international waters of the Mediterranean.

