Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I should like to thank the High Representative
for the statement he has just made and to state that we
fully agree with his analysis of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I also welcome the presence of
Mr. Spirie, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Sweden will speak later on behalf of the
European Union, and France naturally aligns itself with
that statement. More than a year ago now, Bosnia and
Herzegovina took an important step in signing a
stabilization and association agreement, which
confirmed its wish to join the European Union (EU).
We had hoped then that positive momentum would
result from that act to confirm a European perspective,
but we see today with regret that political divisions still
exist.

France remains optimistic. Last year's Prud
process opened the way to solutions. For now, the
Butmir process initiated by the European Union and
the United States is opening up some genuine
prospects. The international community cannot take the
place of Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders and people
in dealing with the country's problems. It is up to them
to demonstrate the political resolve necessary to arrive
at compromises and to head towards the future. The
international community, particularly the EU, is
mobilized and continues to follow developments
attentively. In this regard, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 1895 (2009), which extends the mandate of
the European Union military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (EUFOR) for another year. This is an
essential contribution from the EU to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's cause.

Today's meeting could have been the opportunity
to note some progress by announcing the closing of the
Office of the High Representative and the arrival of a
new phase, since the EU is ready to take on even more
responsibility. But the five conditions and two
objectives have still not been fulfilled, and I must thus
reiterate the necessity for Bosnia and Herzegovina's
leaders to come an agreement on a compromise. This is
within their grasp; it is up to them to assume their
responsibilities, and the international community calls
upon them to do so.

