Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on children and armed conflict. Your presence
here manifests the commitment of the Government of
Benin to this very important and sensitive issue.

Greece fully associates herself with the statement
to be delivered later by the Ambassador of
Luxembourg to the United Nations on behalf of the
European Union. Nevertheless, I wish to make the
following remarks.

The Secretary-General has presented a
substantive report. In our View, the fifth report on
children and armed conflict has fully addressed the
recommendations of Security Council resolution 1539
(2004), and specific proposals have been submitted.

We would also like to commend the remarkable
work done in the last seven years by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu.

The report of the Secretary-General provides us
with evidence and data on progress made towards
reducing the number of child soldiers and redressing
the horrendous acts of abuse inflicted upon children
who are caught in armed conflict situations.

However, children continue to be recruited,
killed, maimed, abducted, sexually abused and
exploited in armed conflicts. The report specifies 42
armed groups in 11 countries that are recruiting and
abusing children in war zones. We witness progress in
one war situation and at the same time there is a
drawback in another armed conflict, even in the same
country. The current situation in the Sudan is just an
example of the complexities of the issue.

The information concerning sexual exploitation
and abuse in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
committed by United Nations peacekeeping personnel
demonstrates how widespread and serious the situation
is. The response of the United Nations must be
unequivocally a zero-tolerance policy. All of us agree
that we have to act and act soon. But how can we do
that in order to get the long-awaited results?

As the report points out, in recent years we have
succeeded in establishing a comprehensive international
legal framework for the protection of war-affected
children. I have two comments on that issue.

First, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child provides that no one under the
age of 18 should be recruited by any army. All States
must become parties to this Protocol and must
implement its provisions. Greece has ratified it and as a
European Union member State is also committed to the
implementation of the European Union Guidelines on
Children and Armed Conflict adopted in 2003.

Secondly, the international community must not
allow impunity to prevail as regards serious crimes
against children in armed conflict. The perpetrators of
such crimes must be brought to justice. In that respect,
we would like to underline the importance of the
International Criminal Court in pursuing
accountability. The Rome Statute provides a clear legal
basis, as it stipulates that the use of children under the
age of fifteen as soldiers in armed conflict is a war
crime.

Therefore, having a complete set of the necessary
legal and judicial tools at our disposal, what remains to
be done is to take action.

We welcome the strong focus on compliance in
the Secretary-General's report, in particular the
recommendation that the Security Council impose
targeted measures against those parties named in the
two annexes who do not meet their obligations for
compliance. In that context the fifth report indeed
paves the way, in the words of the Secretary-General,
to an era of application.

The Secretary-General's action plan to establish a
systematic and comprehensive monitoring and
reporting mechanism contains important elements that
would enhance the protection of children in situations
of armed conflict. It has the full support of Greece. We
hope that the Security Council will soon be able to
agree on the relevant resolution, currently under
discussion.

With regard to post-conflict situations, special
attention should be given to ensuring that all children
are included in all disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) processes and that their specific
needs, such as medical support, education and
reunification with their families, are being addressed.
The vulnerable situation of girls also deserves special
care. Greece is committed to contributing funds to the
DDR programmes for children through the European
Union's Plan of Action on Children and Armed
Conflicts.

In concluding my remarks, I would like to
congratulate Benin for keeping the issue of children
and armed conflict high on the agenda of the Security
Council by presenting a draft resolution destined to be
our trigger for action that we hope to be able to agree
upon at a later stage.

We all share responsibility in taking action to
stop the recruitment and all acts of abuse that children
suffer in armed conflicts throughout the world. The
perpetrators have to be made accountable for their
crimes. There is no other way to protect the lives of our
innocent children, our hope and our future.

