Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation is deeply disturbed and
concerned at the present development in Iraq. We have
always believed that Iraq should implement in full
Security Council resolutions and resume, as soon as
possible, its cooperation with the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). At the same time the Security
Council, in accordance with the provisions of its relevant
resolutions, should also make a timely and objective
assessment of Iraq's compliance. Only then can Council
resolutions be fully and effectively implemented. It is our
hope that questions left over from the Gulf war can be
properly resolved as soon as possible.

As the Chinese saying goes, "three feet of ice is
hardly the result of one day's cold". We should seriously
reflect on the root causes of the present situation. There
is no doubt that Iraq has to fulfil in a comprehensive
manner its obligations under relevant Security Council
resolutions. But the Council also has the responsibility to
make a fair and objective assessment in light of Iraq's
compliance.

We are of the View that regarding some weapon
files, conditions are ripe to move to the next ongoing
monitoring and verification stage. The fact that the
Security Council has been unable to make such a political
decision is regrettable.

The Secretary-General has proposed that the Council
conduct a comprehensive review of the Iraqi question and
put forward some concrete ideas in this regard. The
Secretary-General's proposals and ideas have been
warmly received and supported by an overwhelming
majority of the Council members. We appreciate and
support the Secretary-General's ideas and positive efforts.
We believe that, under the present circumstances,
conducting a comprehensive review is still a way out of
the present impasse. We support the Secretary-General in
his ongoing active role in this regard.

Only through dialogue and consultations and
confidence-building can we resolve the present problem.
There is no other way out. In this context, I should like
to appeal to all sides to exercise restraint and to try to
resolve their differences through dialogue and cooperation

 

and to refrain from any actions that might sharpen the
conflict and exacerbate tension.

Although there are still elements in the draft resolution
that are not totally to our liking, it is also true that the draft
has incorporated amendments put forward by China and
other interested countries by taking out the part which
determines that the situation in Iraq poses a threat to
international peace and security, and by adding that it is the
primary responsibility of the Security Council to maintain
international peace and security, reiterating its support for
the Secretary-General in his efforts to ensure the
implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding and
reaffirming the Council's intention to act in accordance
with the relevant provisions of resolution 687 (1991) on the
duration of the prohibitions.

We therefore believe that, in general, the text is a
balanced one. In order to ensure the full implementation of
Security Council resolutions and to seek an appropriate
solution to the present problem, we will vote in favour of
the draft resolution. We hope that this resolution will
facilitate the resumption of cooperation between Iraq, on
the one hand, and UNSCOM. and IAEA, on the other, so as
to allow an early comprehensive review which will in turn
free the Iraqi people from sanctions.

