Mr. Tanin: Before I begin my remarks on the
situation in Kosovo, I would like to convey my profound
sadness over the passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin
of the Russian Federation, and to express my sincere
condolences to his wife, his family and the Government
of the Russian Federation on having lost one of his
country's greatest diplomats. We will miss him in
the Council.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/95/Rev.l), the past few months in Kosovo have
been characterized by inconsistent progress as well
as heightened tension between Belgrade and Pristina,
including a reciprocal series of reactions and counter-
reactions, accompanied at times by threatening and
bellicose rhetoric. These events and political posturing
reduce space for progress within the top-level political
dialogue - a process that remains as fragile as it is
essential and irreplaceable.

During my recent discussions in Pristina and
Belgrade, each side naturally expressed differing
perceptions of the reasons behind the reduced quality
of communications and relations, and in general
accused one another of having engaged in intentional
provocations. Pristina leaders perceive various actions
and words from Belgrade as being calculated to
undermine the objectives of the Pristina Government,
particularly as regards its outreach efforts towards
the northern Serb-majority municipalities. Belgrade
leaders perceive the actions and words of Pristina as
attempts to sidestep processes based in the dialogue
facilitated by the European Union (EU) and create new
realities on the ground.

Irrespective of the divergent perceptions and
interpretations, the facts were that a succession of events,
detailed in the Secretary-General's report, combined
to undermine trust, to inhibit the space for productive
dialogue, and to push the situation uncomfortably close
to renewed instability and confrontation. I should note
that, since the issuance of the report, several other
significant developments have taken place, including
some more constructive ones.

At the beginning of this month, partially as a
response to an escalating situation, Belgrade and
Pristina leaders finally met at the highest political level
in Brussels, under the auspices of the European Union
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy. This meeting was an essential step to chart a
path out of a deteriorating situation and to publicly
reconfirm their commitment to working together. A
few days later, after close consultations led by the EU
Special Representative and involving various other
diplomatic partners, the Mayor of North Mitrovica and
the Minister of the Environment and Spatial Planning
of Kosovo signed an agreement to remove the wall
that had previously been constructed as part of the
bridge redevelopment plan near the northern end of
the Mitrovica bridge. It was removed without incident
on 5 February, and construction subsequently began
on a newly agreed park space plan that addresses the
concerns of all stakeholders.
Most recently, Pristina has renewed calls for the
transformation of the Kosovo Security Force into the
Kosovo armed forces, including through the adoption of
a resolution in the Assembly of Kosovo. This initiative
remains opposed by the Kosovo Serbs and Belgrade,
with reference to resolution 1244 (1999), emphasizing
the exclusive role and authorities of the international
security presence, the Kosovo Force (KFOR).

In the short term, the effects of the recent stresses
in Kosovo still reverberate. Trust and confidence
among Kosovo Serbs and Albanians have been affected;
they will take time to rebuild. Nonetheless, with the
restarting of the top-level dialogue, there are signs that
work is again happening towards this goal. Discussing
the details involved in implementing the future
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
will certainly help the Kosovo Serbs to re-engage with
the range of Government activities from which they
have unfortunately removed themselves over the past
three months. As seen in the past, one-sided approaches
or steps aimed at resolving issues that affect both
sides, and indeed overall progress in the normalization
process, are more likely to lead to confrontation than
to positive results in the direction desired by those who
contemplate such steps.

There is no alternative to dialogue. The international
prescriptions set forth to Pristina and Belgrade are
categorical imperatives: non-confrontation, resolving
issues through dialogue, and placing the objective
improvement ofthe lives ofpeople ahead ofmore limited
and parochial calculations. I hope that the Council will
help to hold leaders to their words that they will maintain
a sincere and consistent commitment to dialogue and
the full implementation of all the agreements already
reached, and avoid making statements or undertaking
activities that undermine its potential and put at risk
all the benefits it is designed to bring to the population:
security, prosperity and peace.

Kosovo's institutions continue to face daunting
challenges to delivering as their leaders might wish.
Political infighting persists. Disputes between the
Government and opposition remain acrimonious.
Disputes between the governing parties are also
visible, as is dissent within governing parties. Major
stakeholders feel pressure to position themselves for the
electoral cycles, too often at the expense of time and
energy that can be devoted to governance. Belgrade is
also engaged in a political campaign surrounding the
presidential elections in April. It is paramount to ensure
that electoral politics do not disrupt vital processes and
the kind of progress that is built up only with sustained
time and effort, beyond the fluctuations of political
seasons. The normalization of relations, reconciliation
and justice all belong to that broader horizon.

Success in the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina is interlinked with long-
term and sustainable societal reconciliation among
Kosovo's communities. Courageous leadership and
positive actions are important to promoting changes
in attitudes. We recognize and appreciate a number of
significant steps taken by some leaders, and encourage
more sustained efforts to move beyond the past and to
focus on the future.

Along with all my international colleagues in
Kosovo, I took careful note of the recently announced
initiative to explore the establishment of a truth and
reconciliation commission as one additional mechanism
to open internal dialogue between the communities in
Kosovo. Any such initiative should be lauded and given
as much support as needed to encourage success. It is
also important to recall that such initiatives are parts
of a greater whole; the EU-facilitated dialogue itself
is also one part, as is the serious work under way to
provide for the many victims of the conflict in Kosovo
who still await justice. Among the most essential
international principles and practices for conducting
truth and reconciliation processes in the post-conflict
setting are impartiality, independence, transparency,
complementarity with other efforts, full consultation
with and the participation of all stakeholders involved,
and, ultimately, commitment to the due diligence and
care required for such a sensitive process.

Concentrated work needs to continue in order to
improve the social and economic situation in Kosovo.
Addressing unemployment, making progress in the
rule of law and fighting corruption remain central for
all people in Kosovo. People who find little hope or
prospects within society experience frustration and
isolation. Many will gravitate to alternative paths,
including those leading to religious radicalization and
violent extremism. As noted in the Secretary-General's
report, the threat of violent extremism and terrorism
remains real in Kosovo and throughout the region.

The professional work of Kosovo's security bodies
continues, while better integration into regional and
international approaches can greatly leverage these
efforts. Through the current five-year plan coordinated
by the Office of the Prime Minister, the authorities of
Kosovo are also focusing on a holistic approach to the
issue, including in the educational anddevelopmental
spheres. That important work can also benefit from
strong support and coordination with global efforts.

Coordinated responses and engagement during the
recent period of increased tensions, notably involving
the European Union, the Kosovo Force, UNMIK
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, among others, once again confirmed the
importance of the ongoing international engagement in
the maintenance of peace and stability in Kosovo and
the region. Stability in Kosovo and the normalization
of relations between Pristina and Belgrade are part of
the broader effort to improve stability in the Western
Balkans. Last week in the Security Council (see S/PV.7886), the Secretary-General highlighted the
danger of instability in the Western Balkans region.
Any tension or potential crisis between Belgrade and
Pristina cannot be seen in isolation from the challenges
that the region already faces. Good-neighbourly
relations, dedication to a common future within a united
European space and a commitment to human rights and
the rule of law and resolving disputes only through
the peaceful means of dialogue and compromise are
essential for Kosovo, as they are for the entire region.

As I have reported to the Council over the past
months, UNMIK has brought a newly calibrated focus
to its work, providing applicable support where it is
most suited and working to ensure that the parties, the
EU-centred political process and all our international
organizational partners benefit from well-coordinated
and constant partnership on the ground. In doing so,
we are grateful for the close support we receive from
all members of the Council. I thank the Council most
sincerely for the ongoing support.

