Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): 1 thank the delegation of Belgium for having
chosen the subject the maintenance of international
peace and security for today's open debate of the
Security Council. I would also like to thank
Mr. Pascoe, the President of the General Assembly and
the President of the Economic and Social Council for
their statements.
There is an undeniable link between development
and international stability, or, to put it another way,
between poverty, instability and conflict in the context
of domestic and international relations. It is noteworthy
that many of the countries that have experienced
conflict in recent years are rich in such natural
resources as diamonds, gold, timber, oil and copper, to
name but a few. Paradoxically, the exploitation of those
sources of wealth has contributed to fuelling or
prolonging conflicts. Especially in some regions of
Africa, armed groups often use those resources to
finance their activities and defend the territories where
those resources are located from State control.
Likewise, a country's entire dependence on its natural
resources generally results in great vulnerability, given
that an economy centred on a single element has a
higher risk of experiencing ongoing economic crises
once international conditions for that commodity
worsen. The result of that is an increased chance that
conflict will break out.

During its membership of the Security Council,
Argentina therefore supported the imposition or
continuation of embargoes on diamonds and timber
from certain countries on the agenda of the Council in
which resources were being used by armed groups to
finance their activities. Argentina has also supported
the Kimberley Process to establish an international
system of certification of the origin of raw diamonds
that would make it possible to lift embargoes from
States once they could guarantee the source of
diamonds, so that the income generated from that
resource could help those countries attain sustainable
development, which would help them to avert a relapse
into conflict during the peacebuilding phase.

An objective mechanism is in place for diamonds,
namely, the Kimberley Process. However, with regard
to other natural resources, in order to make the
transition from sanctions imposed on a country to the
lifting of sanctions during the peacebuilding stage,
there is a need for greater cooperation and coordination
among the Security Council, regional organizations and
the Peacebuilding Commission so that the
Commission's assistance to countries in conflict can
make it possible not only for the Council to lift
sanctions in connection with the exploitation of natural
resources but also for natural resources to become a
source of sustainable development for the
Governments in question.
With regard to the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, the Secretary-General's recent
comprehensive report on strengthening the capacity of
the Organization to administer and support
peacekeeping operations underscores the fact that the
complexity of mandates has resulted in an increase in
the number of integrated missions. The report proposes
the establishment of integrated operational groups
comprising officers from various United Nations
departments. The groups would be responsible for day-
to-day support for all aspects of peacekeeping
operations, including the coordination and preparation
of recommendations for the planning and
implementation of policy strategies and the
achievement of integrated operational objectives. With
regard to peacekeeping operations in countries where
illegal exploitation of natural resources is taking place,
we believe that these integrated operational groups
could also include experts in the area of natural
resources, so that the Secretariat's recommendations
could also serve to adjust the mandates of
peacekeeping operations in that regard.

We would also like to emphasize that the Security
Council's authority to impose sanctions on the illegal
exploitation of natural resources in countries that are
on the Council's agenda due to a specific conflict that
threatens international peace and security is clearly
among the powers conferred upon the Security Council
by the Charter of the United Nations. Nevertheless, the
situation would be different if the Council were to
determine that preventive intervention were necessary
due to a potential risk that exploitation of a given
country's natural resources could in the future lead to a
conflict that could pose a threat to international peace
and security. That would violate the principle of non-
intervention in the internal affairs of States that is set
out in the Charter of the United Nations, because the
basis for intervention would then be the remote
consequences that the sovereign actions of a country
could possibly have for international peace and
security.

