Mrs. Ogata (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees): Thank you for inviting me to address the
Security Council. Since I last briefed the Council, in April,
it has frequently dealt with crises causing humanitarian
and refugee problems. While the intensification of such
crises is worrying, I welcome the Council's attention and
interest. In our work on behalf of refugees and other
victims of forced displacement, we are increasingly
involved in conflict situations or in situations immediately
following the end of conflicts. We are also exposed to a
great variety of security threats - Vincent Cochetel, the
head of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) sub-office in
Vladikavkaz, in the Russian Federation, was kidnapped in
January and has now spent more than nine months as a
hostage. I therefore welcome the Council's recent
discussions on the need to better ensure the protection of
humanitarian operations. As I have said very often, the
safety and security of humanitarian workers and of the
people whom they protect and assist can be guaranteed
only by broader political efforts. To have it recognized
and discussed by the Security Council is therefore an
important step in the right direction.

Unfortunately, conflicts forcing civilians to flee are
increasing, both in number and in intensity. This slows
down and sometimes completely blocks solutions to
refugee problems. Even when political settlements are
reached and problems of displacement are resolved
through voluntary return, the peace thus established can
at best be described as fragile. From our perspective, the
increasingly blurred lines between war and peace and the
necessity to reach out to Victims of forced displacement
across those lines make the protection of refugees and
returnees a more complex exercise than ever before.

Nowhere in the last few months has my Office dealt
with the direct relationship between conflict and
displacement more than in Kosovo. When I briefed the
Council in April, I expressed my concern about the risk
of large-scale displacement of civilians within the
province and across its borders. While international
efforts could not prevent a major refugee crisis, which
observers had predicted for years, in the last few weeks
they have at least been able to contain the conflict, define
minimum conditions to restore the security of civilians
and establish a framework aimed at verifying compliance
with such conditions.

This has indeed encouraged almost all people
displaced within Kosovo to return, often to find their
homes destroyed and their property looted. Few people
remain in the open. It is not likely, however, that any
significant return will occur before spring 1999 from
other countries, including Montenegro, Albania and the

 

former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, which together
host approximately 65,000 refugees from Kosovo. Of
course, further returns are also based on the assumption that
the ceasefire will hold. Given the fragility of the situation,
we are not promoting repatriation for the time being, but
will of course provide support, if necessary, to those
voluntarily choosing repatriation.

Security considerations remain overriding in the minds
of all those affected by the conflict. There has been
considerable withdrawal of police and military forces, but
it is essential that further progress be made and that any
presence of forces that can be an obstacle to return, or a
potential threat thereafter, be withdrawn as a matter of
priority. Because the situation is likely to remain fragile in
the next few, crucial weeks, it is literally vital - I repeat,
vital - that staff of the Kosovo Diplomatic Observer
Mission and then of the Kosovo Verification Mission be
deployed to the most critical locations as soon as possible.
It is very important that monitoring the security and
treatment of civilians not be limited to returnees, but apply
to all those affected by the conflict. In addition to physical
protection, there is also a need for legal guarantees; we are
promoting the adoption of an amnesty to provide a critical
further element of confidence.

UNHCR has considerably strengthened its presence in
Pristina and in three satellite offices. We have been able to
deploy about 70 staff in Kosovo alone. Time is of the
essence, considering that winter will make logistics very
difficult in some areas. We are therefore concentrating on
the main humanitarian priority, which is to help those
without winter-proof shelter find it as soon as possible,
preferably in their own homes. We estimate at 20,000 the
number of houses to be rebuilt or repaired.

UNHCR's role as lead humanitarian agency must
remain clearly distinct from that of the verifiers. Theirs is
a political mission. Our tasks, however, are closely related,
and we are fully committed to ensuring our cooperation
with the verifiers. We have established a close liaison with
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and its verifiers as well as with the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) Air Verification Mission. We are
also taking part in the training of the verifiers.

If fully implemented, the mechanism of the
international involvement in Kosovo will facilitate the
return of refugees and displaced people and may help create
favourable conditions for a lasting political settlement and
the establishment of a durable peace. From a humanitarian
perspective, such a mechanism may also constitute a model
framework within which to address problems of human
displacement.

In the past, I briefed the Security Council on the
excruciating dilemmas we had to confront in Bosnia and
the former eastern Zaire. The situation in Kosovo could
have presented us with similar dilemmas. Working within
the framework of a larger international involvement -
with political support, in simple words - may avert this
risk. In Kosovo, there is now an opportunity for
humanitarian action not to unwittingly contribute to
prolonging a conflict, but, as a component of a larger
peace-building effort, to achieve its primary objective of
protecting and assisting civilian Victims. If it is successful,
I hope that the international involvement in Kosovo can
become a useful precedent to be replicated in other
situations.

But let me be realistic. Decisive international
involvement is not the norm today. Indeed, in most other
situations where we have to deal with the humanitarian
consequences of conflicts, we cannot count on the same
level of organized political support as in Kosovo. Where
peace efforts are insufficient or ineffective, the ability of
humanitarian agencies to help refugees, returnees and
other Victims of conflict is greatly diminished. I am
thinking of Afghanistan, for example, or of southern
Sudan. In these situations, it is very difficult to address
the immediate humanitarian problems caused by actual
population displacement, let alone contribute to the
prevention of fresh population movements.

Let me turn to Africa, which offers the most
dramatic examples of this difficulty. Some factors have
directly contributed to the blocking of solutions to refugee
problems in the continent: first, a trend towards increased
violence against civilians, of which mutilations and
killings by rebel forces in Sierra Leone have been the
most horrifying example; secondly, a strong ethnic
component in some conflicts, particularly in the Great
Lakes region; and thirdly, the regionalization of military
action. Because these trends are very evident, in different
ways, in Central and West Africa, I will focus my
presentation on those two regions.

In Central Africa, war and human displacement have
become so complex, and their ramifications and
interrelations so wide, that I hesitate to refer simply to a
"Great Lakes" crisis. Between 1993 and 1996,
displacement problems were essentially refugee situations.
In 1996 and 1997, the focus was on repatriation,
particularly of Rwandan refugees. Today, refugee

 

situations persist - the largest group being the 260,000
Burundi refugees still in Tanzania - but there is a growing
mixture of refugee flows, internal displacement and
repatriation movements.

The lack of an immediate solution to the unresolved
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is the
most worrying element in the Central African context.
Although this war has produced relatively limited refugee
outflows so far - a new group of about 20,000 Congolese
has fled to Rwanda and Tanzania - further displacement
on a large scale, and notably internal displacement, is a
very real risk, already affecting North and South Kivu.

Because of the traditional link between war and
displacement in this area, I am extremely worried by the
regionalization of the war in Congo and by its proximity to
other conflicts - Angola, for example, where another
peace process is collapsing, and where hundreds of
thousands of people have been recently displaced. Peace
processes Within Burundi and Rwanda, themselves very
difficult and painful exercises, are undoubtedly made more
fragile by the Congolese conflict. In Rwanda, the
Government has recently appealed for assistance to meet
the needs of hundreds of thousands of internally displaced
people - many of whom are recent returnees - in the
northwest, an area where insecurity is closely linked to
events across the border with Congo.

In the Central African Republic last week, after some
Rwandans hosted in a refugee camp threatened to use
Violence against the local police, the Government ordered
the deportation of all Rwandans to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We are discussing with the authorities how
to deal with this complex issue in a manner that is
respectful of humanitarian principles but which takes into
account the Government's security concerns. UNHCR,
however, cannot assist in transporting people, and
particularly those among them who are refugees, to a
situation of conflict, where some of them may be recruited
to fight.

On the other hand, in a simultaneous but separate
development, a camp hosting Sudanese refugees, also in the
Central African Republic, has come under attack by armed
groups from southern Sudan. Two refugees were killed, and
humanitarian workers were threatened. With the support of
the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic,
30 Government troops were flown to the site yesterday.
This episode follows similar attacks on Sudanese refugee
Villages in the north-east of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Sixty thousand refugees fled from this area. I am
extremely concerned that we have no information about
the majority of those who have disappeared.

Given the complex, interrelated nature of these
problems, the search for solutions must have a strong
regional approach and address the issue of forced
population movements. The efforts of the Southern
African Development Community to stop the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo must be given
stronger support and encouragement, with the aim of
setting up a comprehensive and effective framework for
peace in Central Africa.

Forced population movements have plagued this
region for decades and have been one of the main causes
of insecurity in the last few years. From my perspective,
therefore, a peace framework for Central Africa should
ensure that ethnic and nationality problems are addressed
as a matter of priority; otherwise, if ethnic tensions are
allowed or even encouraged to simmer, people may flee
again in massive numbers.

In a region affected by several conflicts in the last
few years, another issue that needs to be urgently
addressed is the disarmament and demobilization of ex-
combatants. We should not forget that the conflict in the
Congo has among its causes the catastrophic effects of the
Rwandan refugee crisis. At the regional ministerial
meeting on refugees that the Organization of African
Unity and UNHCR jointly convened in Kampala in May,
Central African States agreed to respect refugee protection
and humanitarian principles, but insisted on the need to
address the impact of large-scale population movements
on the economy and the environment, but especially on
national security. We must act before we reach a situation
in which not only humanitarian principles, but also peace
and security, are threatened again by population
movements of a mixed nature.

In West Africa this year the crises in Sierra Leone
and Guinea-Bissau forced hundreds of thousands of
people to flee their homes. Half a million Sierra Leonean
refugees have put an enormous additional burden on
countries that have generously given asylum to refugees
for years, in spite of their limited resources. There are
350,000 refugees in Guinea alone. Liberia, a country
emerging from years of war, hosts almost 90,000 Sierra
Leonean refugees.

Both in Sierra Leone and in Guinea-Bissau conflicts
have ended thanks mostly to regional efforts. Peace must
now be consolidated in both countries. This will be a

 

particularly difficult exercise in Sierra Leone, where
unprecedented levels of violence were reached during the
conflict and where fighting continues in some border areas
not yet under the full control of the Government and the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG).

The return of refugees and internally displaced people
must be an essential component of peace-building in all
these countries; it must be well-planned and well-supported,
and must include a reintegration component. The Sierra
Leonean Government, in particular, must be encouraged to
establish a dialogue between the affected communities.
Without reconciliation, peace efforts will be fruitless.
UNHCR stands ready to play its role in the repatriation of
Sierra Leoneans and to complete the repatriation of
Liberians. In order to promote return and repatriation, and
indeed a durable peace in West Africa, countries in the
region must also begin to closely consult among
themselves.

West African countries, through the harsh experiences
of many conflicts, have been striving to build a regional
capacity for conflict resolution. These efforts require more
international support. On our side, we have established
closer ties with ECOWAS. On the broader level, more
substantive logistical and other material support must be
provided to ECOMOG, whose presence continues to be
necessary in Liberia and Sierra Leone. A well supported
and truly multinational ECOMOG is indispensable to the
peace and security of a region that has already had its share
of Violence and refugees, and may provide a useful model
for similar arrangements in other regions of Africa.

I could speak of several other situations in which the
absence or collapse of a stable peace makes it very difficult
for UNHCR to seek solutions to refugee problems -
which, I wish to remind the Council, is a fundamental
component of my mandate. But I do not wish to limit this
presentation to a list of problems. I prefer to look ahead,
and suggest a few issues on which we can move forward.
I stress "we" because, although resolving conflicts is an
eminently political task, and although my responsibilities
are clearly limited to the humanitarian sphere, they can be
carried out only with political support. Let me add that
conflict-resolution efforts can in turn benefit from well-
planned, timely and effective humanitarian action.

I would like to indicate three areas on which we can
focus together. First, the complexity of war and the fragility
of peace in many parts of the world mean that new
outflows of refugees, or movements of internally displaced
people, can happen at any time. I am extremely
concerned, for example, by the possibility of renewed
conflict in the Horn of Africa, a region traditionally prone
to large-scale population displacement, or in Central Asia,
where efforts to build the local capacity to deal with
refugee and migrant movements have not eliminated the
risk of forced displacement. My request to the Council is
that when it discusses ongoing or potential conflicts it not
overlook the human displacement factor, which - as
events have abundantly proved - is often an effect, but
can also be a cause, of conflict.

On our part, we shall continue to address refugee
and returnee emergencies as promptly and effectively as
possible, not only by deploying human and material
resources to respond to actual crises, but also by
improving preparedness measures and adapting them to
new situations. Earlier this year, for example, we were
asked to make contingency plans for a possible outflow
from Iraq. In May, unrest in Indonesia prompted us to
dispatch emergency-preparedness teams to neighbouring
countries. Although in these cases a crisis was,
fortunately, averted, we remain prepared in both regions.
We also stand ready to provide training and advice to
Governments and non-governmental agencies in countries
prone to refugee influxes, as we did in South-East Asia.
Building our emergency capacity has been one of my
foremost priorities. I continue to attach the greatest
importance to this aspect of our work, and, with the
Council's help, I intend to maintain and improve our
ability to prepare and respond to refugee emergencies.

Secondly, we must focus more concretely on the
relationship between security problems and humanitarian
situations. I am talking of insecurity affecting
humanitarian operations as a whole - of refugees or
returnees, of communities hosting or receiving them, as
well as of international and national staff working with
them.

The Secretary-General's report to the Security
Council on Africa clearly identified this problem as a real
threat to peace and security. It recommended that my
Office cooperate with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in drawing up proposals for the establishment
of international mechanisms to assist Governments in
maintaining the security and humanitarian nature of
refugee camps and settlements. In commenting on the
report before the Council then, I said in July that our
preferred approach was to develop a "ladder" of options:
from the "soft" option of providing training and support
for the building of national law enforcement capacity, to

 

"medium" alternatives of deploying international civilian or
police monitors, to the "hard" international peacekeeping
solution - with a preference, however, for subregional
arrangements. Together with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, we have developed a set of
proposals.

Let me express my strong hope that the continued
interest of the Security Council in this issue will help turn
proposals into concrete mechanisms. While we can continue
to work on the "soft" options - and we are indeed already
applying them in certain refugee situations, for example, in
Kenya or Tanzania - and while multinational
peacekeeping solutions require Security Council approval,
I would like to focus the Council's attention on the
"medium" options involving, for example, deployment of
police or other supervisory forces in support of local law
enforcement mechanisms. "Medium" options and
subregional peacekeeping may be the most viable solutions
in many situations, but they require the support and active
involvement of Governments, so that standby arrangements
can be put in place.

In the past, UNHCR and its partners often faced
intractable situations alone. I do not want this to happen
again - hence the importance of establishing concrete
mechanisms soon, with well-defined procedures to activate
them. As a user of such mechanisms - on behalf of
refugees - I would like to be aware of which type of
security support I can count upon in case of need.
Predictability is crucial to the effectiveness of any security
mechanism.

Thirdly, I believe we must pay much more attention
to post-conflict situations. If war has changed, so has peace.
In our work in support of refugee repatriation, we often
deal with people who have fled a conflict and have now
returned to live with others who may have been on the
opposite side of the same conflict. In current post-conflict
situations, the return of refugees, necessary as it may be to
the peace-building process, often complicates it. We see
this in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, where 1.8 million people remain
uprooted and where minority returns continue to face
serious political, administrative and security obstacles. We
see it in Rwanda, where 25 per cent of the population are
recent returnees and where - while humanitarian
assistance dries up for lack of funds - development
activities do not start, given the precarious political and
security situation and the limited capacity of the
Government. This may further weaken a very fragile peace.

I am, of course, aware that the transition from war
to peace is a very complex problem, much broader than
issues of human displacement. The large-scale return of
refugees and displaced people, however, is very often a
key element of post-conflict situations. When peace is
negotiated, more attention must therefore be paid to
creating conditions for the peaceful coexistence of divided
communities. Rehabilitation and reconciliation activities
are fundamental elements of peace-building and must be
planned and implemented much sooner, while
humanitarian agencies, such as my Office, concentrate on
their areas of expertise - helping people return and be
reintegrated in their communities.

The example of Bosnia and Herzegovina, however,
clearly shows that reconciliation is also a political
process. The resolve of the international community to
promote minority returns as an essential component of the
Dayton Peace Accords should not be weakened by its
parallel efforts in Kosovo. I had declared 1998 the year
of minority returns, but this has been less successful than
we hoped. A significant number of minority returns must
therefore occur in 1999, and I welcome the commitment
of the international community, expressed by the High
Representative, to achieve a substantial breakthrough in
this respect. The willingness of national and local
authorities to restore intercommunal dialogue is
indispensable, but so is a positive attitude by the people
concerned. This is perhaps the greatest challenge of the
return of refugees to situations of fragile peace, in Bosnia
and elsewhere - and, I would add, of post-conflict
situations in general: that peaceful coexistence be
accepted by divided communities living together again,
rather than simply be enforced upon them.

Humanitarian challenges, more than ever, are closely
linked to the Council's efforts in bringing unresolved
conflicts to an end and in maintaining peace in countries
and regions emerging from war. My Office is ready to
play its role in dealing with the humanitarian aspects of
these situations: helping refugees and other people
displaced by war and assisting those who are no longer
displaced, but who must rebuild their lives. In doing so,
we can be successful only if Governments understand our
problems and cooperate with us. I count on the Security
Council to promote their vital support.

