Mr. Manz (Austria): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European
Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia - and the associated country Cyprus, as well as
the European Free Trade Association countries members
of the European Economic Area, Iceland, Liechtenstein
and Norway, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union is gravely concerned at the
latest fighting and at the escalation of the conflict in
Afghanistan. We have always held the view that there is
no military solution to this conflict, and that only a
political settlement aimed at the establishment of a fully
representative, broad-based transitional government, can
lead to peace and reconciliation. We therefore call on all
factions to agree an immediate ceasefire and enter
negotiations under United Nations auspices.

The fighting is again causing enormous suffering for
the Afghan people and adds to their misery, while human
rights, fundamental freedoms and international
humanitarian law continue to be violated with impunity.
We are deeply concerned at new reports of the killing,
harassment and displacement of innocent civilians. The
European Union is particularly concerned about the
situation of the civilian population of the Hazarajat
region, where tens of thousands have already been at risk
as a result of severe food shortages in the last few
months. We are very anxious about the consequences of
the latest fighting for the Hazara and strongly urge the
Taliban to refrain from all acts of indiscriminate violence,
especially against civilians, and from using humanitarian
aid as a weapon against the civilian population.

The European Union strongly condemns the armed
attack against two staff members of the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan on 21 August 1998 in
Kabul, which caused the death of an Italian national and
left a French national injured. The European Union urges
the Taliban in Kabul to take immediate steps to
investigate this heinous crime and to keep the United
Nations informed of the results of the investigation, as
requested by the Secretary-General in his statement of 24
August [press release SG/SM/6681]. The European Union
reiterates its strong concern for the security of United
Nations personnel, other related personnel, and personnel
of non-governmental organizations in Afghanistan, and
recalls the responsibility of all factions to ensure their
safety, security and freedom of movement.

 

The European Union expresses its deep concern at
reports of the capture by Taliban militia of the Consulate-
General of the Islamic Republic of Iran in Mazar-e-Sharif
and at the fate of its personnel and other Iranian nationals,
who have been missing since then. The European Union
wishes to underline that the obligations ensuing from the
Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic Relations and on
Consular Relations have universal effect and are to be
observed under all circumstances. The European Union
urges all parties concerned, in particular the Taliban, to
help in finding these missing people and in securing their
safe passage out of Afghanistan.

The European Union strongly deplores the fact that
third parties, instead of using their influence on the warring
factions to support the efforts of the United Nations to
restore peace, continue to interfere in Afghanistan's internal
affairs in a destructive manner by supplying the factions
with weapons, fuel, arms, ammunition and other materials
for military use. We are also concerned by reports of
involvement of military personnel from outside the country.

In this connection, the European Union wishes to
reaffirm its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan. It strongly urges that all kinds of strategic and
military support to Afghan factions, including involvement
of foreign military personnel, must cease. Furthermore, the
European Union considers it imperative that all countries
with an influence on the parties should exercise this
influence in a positive and constructive manner, in support
of the United Nations peace efforts. We also continue to
enforce the embargo on the export of arms, munitions and
military equipment provided for in the European Union's
Common Position of 17 December 1996 on Afghanistan
and urge other countries to adopt a similar policy of
restraint.

The European Union is deeply concerned at the
various restrictions of access imposed on United Nations
humanitarian agencies and international humanitarian
organizations which have been operating in Afghanistan,
and in particular by the measures which the Taliban have
taken in this regard. We deplore the decision by the Taliban
in Kabul to forcefully close the offices of international non-
governmental organizations, expel foreign workers and
imprison non-governmental organizations' local personnel.
These decisions have forced the non-governmental
organizations to abandon their much-needed help for the
innocent civilian population of Kabul, which now has to
suffer the consequences.

The European Union is the major donor of
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan. But for the
reasons I have mentioned, the European Commission had
to suspend common funding by the Community for
projects in Kabul. We have helped the Afghan people
through years of suffering and conflict, and we earnestly
desire to continue helping them. However, aid can
continue only where it can be delivered in an effective
and principled manner, without discrimination, and where
humanitarian organizations are able to carry out their
work freely and safely. In this regard, the European
Union fully supports United Nations efforts to resolve the
crisis in Kabul and to ensure adequate conditions for the
delivery of aid, in cooperation with other international
humanitarian organizations.

With regard to mine-clearance programmes in
Afghanistan, the European Union urges all Afghan parties
to support and participate in these programmes.
Furthermore, the European Union reiterates its appeal to
the Afghan factions to put a complete halt to the use of
landmines, which continue to take a very heavy toll on
innocent civilians.

The European Union remains gravelly concerned at
persistent human rights violations and breaches of
humanitarian law in Afghanistan. We are also deeply
concerned about the situation of displaced persons in the
country, whose number is growing.

The European Union calls on all Afghan factions, in
particular the Taliban, to recognize, protect and promote
all human rights and fundamental freedoms - including
the right to life, liberty and security of persons - and to
respect fully the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
which has been repeatedly endorsed by the international
community, including Afghanistan.

The European Union denounces the continuing
discrimination against girls and women in Afghanistan.
We urge Afghan factions, in particular the Taliban, to end
discriminatory policies and to recognize, protect and
promote the equal rights and dignity of men and women,
including access to education and health facilities,
employment outside the home, personal security and
freedom from intimidation and harassment. The European
Union will continue to point out the implications of
discriminatory policies on the distribution of aid.

The conflict in Afghanistan continues to threaten
peace, security and stability in the whole region. By
creating favourable conditions for the illicit production

 

and trafficking of drugs, as well as for terrorist bases and
training camps, the conflict's repercussions reach far beyond
Afghanistan and its neighbours. They cause serious damage
to member States of the European Union and many
countries elsewhere.

The European Union is therefore committed to
reinforce the fight against illegal drugs and terrorism in
Afghanistan. Furthermore, the European Union will take
account of drug control objectives when considering
contributions to development aid. The European Union
reiterates its call upon all factions, in particular the Taliban,
to close down training camps for foreign terrorists inside
Afghanistan and to participate in and support international
efforts to combat terrorism.

As expressed in our Common Position of 26 January
1998, the European Union is determined to play an
effective role in efforts to stop the fighting and to restore
peace, stability and respect for human rights and
international principles in Afghanistan.

Let me also, in conclusion, reiterate the European
Union's continuing commitment to use all its influence to
bring about a sustainable peace in Afghanistan, put an end
to foreign intervention and encourage inter-Afghan
dialogue, in particular through support for the central role
of the United Nations.

