Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), under the chairmanship of Ambassador Gary
Quinlan, and the Panel of Experts for their continued
to work in supporting implementation of the Security
Council's resolutions on Iran. The report may be dry,
but the work that the Committee does is very important.

On 24 November 2013, the E3+3 and Iran reached
an important and encouraging milestone, when a first
stage agreement was reached on the nuclear issue.
Since then, a first round of talks on a comprehensive
agreement was held in Vienna in February, where there
was a willingness and a commitment from all sides
to negotiate in good faith. Those talks continued in a
positive atmosphere earlier this week.

The interim agreement was a significant step
forward and allows for time to negotiate a comprehensive
solution. In January, the United States and the
European Union delivered the sanctions relief, and
we welcome the latest report by the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, dated
20 February, which confirms that Iran has continued to
implement the nuclear measures agreed under the joint
plan of action.

Meanwhile and importantly, the bulk of sanctions
remain in place, including all United Nations sanctions.
We should continue to robustly enforce those sanctions
to ensure that economic pressure continues to act as a
peaceful incentive for Iran to negotiate a comprehensive
solution.

Turning to the work of the Committee, we are
concerned by breaches and possible breaches by Iran
of its international obligations. Reports that a cargo
ship, the Klos C, was found to have dozens of Iranian-
supplied rockets on board in hidden containers, are
deeply worrying, including the fact that the final
destination appears to have been the Gaza Strip. That
not the first time that we have seen reports of potential
arms transfers to Gaza involving Iran. We would like
to the Panel of Experts investigate the circumstances of
the case, identify individuals and entities responsible,
and make recommendations to the Committee, as
appropriate.

In January 2013, the report of the Panel of Experts
clearly and unanimously concluded that Iran's ballistic
missile launched last year constituted a violation of
resolution 1929 (2010). The Committee contacted
Iran twice on the issue, but Iran has yet to respond.
As that report recalls, Iran has also not replied to the
Committee regarding a request for information on an
intercepted arms shipment to Yemen. We call on Iran to
engage with the Committee on such incidents.

We are concerned that Iran continues to provide
substantial military and financial support to Hizbollah
and the Syrian regime, in contravention of the United
Nations embargo on the export of weapons by Iran. We
urge Member States to continue to enforce the sanctions
regime and encourage Member States to act on and
report all suspected violations of those sanctions.

We look forward to the Panel of Experts' final
report in May.

The United Kingdom is committed to finding a
peaceful, negotiated solution with Iran on the nuclear
issue. That will be a long-term process. We do not
expect instant results, but we remain fully committed
to finding a diplomatic solution. The Geneva agreement
and ongoing negotiations are the best opportunity we
have for real and sustainable progress. All sides must
continue to make every effort to succeed.

