Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like first of all to thank Judge Meron, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and Judge Mase, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
for their briefings on the annual reports and the
activities of the Tribunals.

I am also gratefial to Ms. Del Ponte and Mr. Jallow,
the Prosecutors, respectively, of the ICTY and the ICTR,
for the briefings that they provided on their work.

The Chinese Government attaches importance to
the work of the two Tribunals in the establishment of
judicial bodies in their respective areas. We would like
to see the work of the two Tribunals prove positive for
the development of international law in that area. We
have every confidence in the capacity and ability of the
Judges and Prosecutors of the two Tribunals, and we
express appreciation to them.

In August, the Council adopted a resolution
requesting the two Tribunals to increase their
efficiency and implement the completion strategies,
and appointing separate Prosecutors for the two
Tribunals. The resolution also requested the Tribunal to
focus on those indictees with the greatest level of
responsibility and to consider referring those cases
involving mostly mid- and lower-level accused to
domestic jurisdiction. We believe that those measures will
help the two Tribunals to successfully accomplish their
mandate. We have taken note of the fact that, in their
briefings, the Judges and Prosecutors specifically
referred to measures to be taken for implementing the
completion strategies. We will give serious consideration
to those recommendations and proposals. We hope that
the completion strategies will be fully implemented.

We also believe that the success of the two
Tribunals in implementing the completion strategies
will depend upon the cooperation of the countries
concerned. We hope that the two Tribunals will
demonstrate wisdom and that the countries concerned
will fully cooperate with them.

I would like to ask two questions. First, with
regard to the ICTR, if the number of ad litem judges is
increased from four to nine, and if the Tribunal
transfers lower-level cases to domestic jurisdiction, can
it ensure that all the trials will be completed within the
time frame set out for the completion strategy?

Secondly, does the ICTR have other options if
difficulties are encountered in transferring cases or if
the pace of transfer is not what is expected? I would
like a response on that.

