Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
you, Sir, and your delegation for organizing today's
briefing and for giving us the opportunity to discuss
the situation in the Lake Chad basin one year after we
in the Council visited the region and adopted resolution
2349 (2017), which was unique in its comprehensive
approach, integrating development, human rights
and security.

I would also like to thank our briefers today for their
reflections on the humanitarian and security situations
and for their suggestions on the next steps to address
the root causes of the conflict. They have already made
a number of concrete proposals and I hope that careful
note of them has been taken by the Secretariat. We look
forward to discussing some of those ideas later with
other Member States.

The security situation in the Lake Chad basin
continues to be of great concern. On 2 March, the
Council condemned the attack on humanitarian workers
in Rann and another in Dapchi, in which a large number
of schoolgirls were abducted.

The humanitarian crisis remains as dire as when we
visited the region a year ago. The number of people in
need ofhumanitarian assistance remains at 10.7 million,
and 5.8 million people are now experiencing severe
food insecurity. We call upon donors to maintain the
momentum of the response, including by fulfilling the
financial requirement of $1.6 billion for 2018. We call
on all parties to the conflict to grant safe, timely and
unimpeded access to humanitarian organizations, in
line with international humanitarian law.

Based on the humanitarian and security situations,
it is clear that the international community and the
Security Council must remain fully engaged in the
crisis. On 21 March, the United Kingdom opened a
diplomatic office in Chad to facilitate efforts to stabilize
the region and address the root causes of insecurity.

We welcome the steps taken by the Governments
of the region through the Multinational Joint Task
Force to address the terrorist threat. I welcome the
presence of the representative of Nigeria at the table.
I take this opportunity to acknowledge his country's
determination and leadership in fighting terrorism and
to salute the partnership that the United Kingdom and
Nigeria have formed on this and other vital issues.

Although the military approach has an important
role to play in stabilizing the region, the solution to
the crisis cannot be solely military. As recognized in
resolution 2349 (2017), to achieve sustainable peace
it is vital that the root causes of regional instability,
including poverty, climate change, inequality and
violent extremism, be understood and addressed.
We recognize the ongoing efforts of the countries
of the region, both individually and jointly, through
the Lake Chad Basin Commission to achieve that
aim. We must ensure that Governments of the region
demonstrate strong leadership, in particular on the
demobilization, deradicalization and reintegration of
former combatants. The international community and
we in the United Nations must support those efforts
with robust strategies on prevention and a sustaining
peace approach.

The Deputy Secretary-General has shown great
leadership in bringing together the diffuse activities
of many United Nations development agencies in the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, linked
to wider security efforts. We must apply those lessons
and that approach to the Lake Chad basin region.
Special, political missions, in particular the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS) must work to ensure that their efforts
are coherent and that regional strategies are mutually
supported. I fully agree with the representative of
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, who stated that a
comprehensive analysis should be included in the future
briefings of UNOCA and UNOWAS to the Council.
The United Nations strategy must be based on accurate
information so that future crises can be predicted
and the Council, the wider United Nations family
and Governments of the region can take preventive
action in line with the Secretary-General's own focus
on prevention.

On this World Water Day, let us remember that
climate and ecological changes are a major root cause
of the conflict. If we want to build sustainable peace
and promote sustainable development, we must support
efforts to build livelihoods that are resistant to climate
change, including through adequate risk assessments
and risk-management strategies. It is also vital that the
United Nations and Governments of the region take the
particular concerns of women and children into account
in stabilization, conflict-resolution and peacebuilding
efforts, in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000). The
United Nations could support it through a stronger,
more consistent in-country presence.

As the representative of the United Kingdom stated
when we adopted resolution 2349 (2017), "[w]e will fail
the people ofthe region ifwe do not respond to what we
saw" (S/PV. 7911, p.5). When we travelled to the region,
we saw the root causes and the serious consequences of
the conflict and we must respond. The Lake Chad basin
is a region that requires a sustaining peace approach
and we would hope that the Secretary-General will be
able to demonstrate the support of the United Nations
by visiting the region, as set out in resolution 2349
(2017).

