Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you for holding this important meeting, in the form of
an open debate, to consider the first annual report of
the Peacebuilding Commission. This constitutes an
important opportunity to review the activities of the
Commission and to discuss the best ways to support it.
I would also like to welcome Ambassador Takasu, the
Permanent Representative of Japan and Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and to thank him for his
statement. I wish to thank the previous Chair of the
Commission, Ambassador Gaspar Martins of Angola,
for the effort he put forward during his chairmanship.

During its first year of operation, the
Peacebuilding Commission made commendable
progress, in terms not only of procedural and
organizational matters, such as the adoption of the
provisional rules of procedure, but also of systemic
issues, such as reaching agreement on the concept
paper that provides the appropriate framework for
developing an integrated peacebuilding strategy. Of no
less importance are the tangible results achieved by the
Commission in the context of peacebuilding in each of
the two countries under its consideration, Burundi and
Sierra Leone, where the Commission covered new
ground in its attempt to bring more coherence and
impact to the international community's approach to
peacebuilding.

The Peacebuilding Commission has proved that
its effectiveness in peacebuilding transcends the
provision of financial support to post-conflict countries
and that it extends to numerous other areas, thereby
achieving the Vision of an integrated approach to

peacebuilding, on the basis of which the Commission
was established. While everyone is aware that the
Peacebuilding Commission is not a donor agency, it
has proved from the outset that it can be an effective
factor in mobilizing financial support from donors.

In addition, the first year since the inception of
the peacebuilding mechanism, which emerged from the
2005 World Summit, saw the operationalization of the
Peacebuilding Support Office within the Secretariat
and the Peacebuilding Fund, which started to receive
donations and to provide funding for a number of
projects.

There is no doubt that this progress is
encouraging; yet, according to the Peacebuilding
Commission's report, a number of challenges still face
the Commission. In its new session, the Peacebuilding
Commission must continue to develop its working
methods, strengthen the importance of the integrated
peacebuilding strategy, and establish tracking and
monitoring mechanisms to measure the success of that
strategy. It would be useful to continue the balance
between the work of the Organizational Committee and
the country-specific configurations, given their
complementary nature. On the other hand, the
coordination between the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office must continue to be improved.

In order for the Peacebuilding Commission to
succeed in achieving its goals, post-conflict countries
which are under consideration at regional meetings
must have full ownership of the peacebuilding process
for the benefit of their peoples. It is essential that the
Commission and the Governments of those countries
agree on how to move forward on peacebuilding
activities.

Under General Assembly resolution 60/180 and
Security Council resolution 1645 (2005), the mandate
of the Commission provides for consultation with civil
society, non-governmental organizations and the
private sector, since those actors play important roles
in post-conflict peacebuilding. Consequently, we
welcome the adoption by the Organizational
Committee of provisional guidelines that ensure active
and productive participation by those players in the
process, and we hope that those guidelines continue to
be reviewed and improved.

The mandate of the Commission provides for the
participation of the stakeholders in the Commission's
work, and in this context we commend the
Organizational Committee's decision to extend
permanent invitations to institutional donors to
participate in all Peacebuilding Commission meetings.

The 2005 World Summit decided to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission as a joint advisory body
reporting to both the General Assembly and the
Security Council. Accordingly, the Commission must
operate within the mandate given by those two bodies.
The recent meeting of the General Assembly that
considered the Peacebuilding Commission's annual
report demonstrated clearly the close attention given by
the Assembly to the work of the Commission. In
general, close coordination must exist between the
Commission and the main bodies and organs of the
United Nations, including the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council.

The Peacebuilding Commission, having scored a
preliminary success with the first two countries under
its consideration, it is only natural that we should
ensure that more countries benefit from its services in
the course of the coming stages of its work. In
considering candidate countries, due consideration
must be given to their varied conditions and, therefore,
to the most appropriate manner of administering the
peacebuilding process. Consideration must also be
given to how much the candidate country can benefit
from being included in the Commission's agenda.

Finally, we commend the effective efforts of
Ambassador Gaspar Martins, the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission during its first session, and
the two Vice-Chairs and the Chairs of the two country-
specific configurations. We wish also to commend the
Peacebuilding Support Office, headed by Assistant
Secretary-General McAskie, and the great work that
the office has undertaken in implementing its
responsibilities.

