Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom voted in favour of draft resolution S/2017/ 1060
today because it is in line with previous Security
Council resolutions, including 242 (1967), 476 (1980),
478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), and with our established
position on the status of Jerusalem. That position is
clear and long-standing. The status of Jerusalem should
be determined through a negotiated settlement between
Israelis and the Palestinians and should ultimately be
the shared capital of the Israeli and Palestinian States.
In line with those same resolutions, we regard East
Jerusalem as part ofthe occupied Palestinian territories.

As we have previously said, we disagree with
the United States decision to unilaterally recognize
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel before a final status
agreement and to move the United States Embassy to
Jerusalem. As recent events in the region have shown,
these decisions are unhelpful to the prospects for peace
in the region, an aim that all ofus in the Council remain
committed to. The British Embassy to Israel is based in
Tel Aviv and we have no plans to move it.

Importantly, the draft resolution that has just been
voted on stressew that Jerusalem is a final-status issue
to be resolved through negotiations; affirmed that
decisions and actions that purport to have altered the
character, status or demographic composition of the
Holy City of Jerusalem have no legal effect; demanded
that all States comply with Security Council resolutions
regarding Jerusalem; and called for the intensification
and acceleration of international and regional efforts
to achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle East
without delay.

Our position since the Security Council met on
8 December (see S/PV.8128) has not changed. We
recognize that Jerusalem holds huge significance and
holiness for Jews, Muslims and Christians. We reiterate
the fundamental necessity of maintaining the status quo
at the holy sites, in particular the Temple Mount/Haram
al-Sharif. We continue to value Jordan's important
role as custodian of the holy sites, and remain fully
supportive of its efforts to maintain calm.

We must now all look forward. We share President
Trump's desire to bring an end to this conflict and
welcome his commitment to a two-State solution
negotiated between the parties. This includes his clear
acknowledgement that the final status of Jerusalem,
including the sovereign boundaries within the city,
must be subject to negotiations between the parties.

Our commitment to and position on an Israeli-
Palestinian peace agreement has also not changed. It
should be based on the lines as they stood on 4 June 1967
with equal land swaps to reflect the national, security
and religious interests of the Jewish and Palestinian
peoples. Jerusalem should be the shared capital of the
Israeli and Palestinian States, and its status must be
determined through a final status agreement. A just,
fair, agreed and realistic settlement for refugees is
needed that is demographically compatible with the
principle of two States for two peoples. This position is
consistent with the draft resolution before us. We now
strongly encourage the United States Administration
to bring forward detailed proposals for an Israeli-
Palestinian settlement.

We call on all parties to act with restraint, reject
violence and work together to ensure calm and stability.
This will give the peace process the best chance of
success. We remain fully supportive of progress
towards a lasting peace and will do everything we can
to achieve it.

Any peace effort needs to take account of the
people, not just the land and the holy sites. For too
long Israelis have lived in fear of rockets and terror;
this wreaks havoc in people's daily lives and renders
peace hard to achieve, as do attempts by some to
deny the ancient and legitimate connection of the
Jewish and Palestinian peoples to Jerusalem. Many
Palestinians living outside East Jerusalem, including
the Old City, are effectively cut off from it. Those that
can enter have to wait in long lines to pass through
checkpoints. Within East Jerusalem live more than
320,000 Palestinians. The vast majority are permanent
residents, but their permits can be revoked at any point.
If they apply for Israeli citizenship, and most do not,
a high proportion of applications are rejected. The
lives of Jews and Palestinians - and for both groups
Jerusalem is uniquely holy - must not be forgotten in
any peace effort.

I once again reaffirm our strong support for renewed
peace negotiations between the Israelis and Palestinians
as soon as possible - these should be supported by
the international community - and for realizing the
vision of General Assembly resolution 181 (II), whose
seventieth anniversary we marked last month: a safe
and secure Israel, the homeland for the Jewish people,
living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian
state, the homeland for the Palestinian people.

