Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my sincere
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I am certain that your experience and
diplomatic skills will help us to deal with the sensitive,
important and serious subject before us. Undoubtedly,
your decision to convene this meeting stemmed from
your deep understanding of the problem we currently
face on the Palestinian front and its potential effects on
the Middle East as a whole. We would also like to
extend our sincere appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Mali, Ambassador
Ouane, for his wisdom and excellent conduct of the
work of the Council during his presidency in
September.

The popular uprising currently raging in the
occupied Palestinian territories is but an expression of
the frustration and oppression suffered by the
Palestinian people at the hands of Israel's tyranny,
which has surpassed all limits. The most recent
example of that tyranny was the provocative visit by
Ariel Sharon, the leader of the Israeli opposition, to Al-
Haram Al-Sharif. That visit was another attempt by
Israel to assert its baseless claims over Al-Quds Al-
Sharif, in complete disregard of all international
resolutions and covenants, and in particular of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). It was not only a
provocation to the sentiments of the Palestinian people,
but also a provocation to the feelings of millions of
Muslims around the world, and has aroused
unprecedented risks. As we know, there are limits to
people's patience. We believe that for the Palestinian
people the situation has now surpassed the limits of
patience.

We, together with the entire world, have followed
the horrible images in the world press and television
networks of the actions against unarmed civilians
perpetrated by Israel's occupation forces, who are
armed with all sorts of light and heavy weapons,
including tanks and helicopters. One of the most
atrocious crimes committed by those forces was the
heart-wrenching and painful scene of 12-year-old
Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra being killed in the arms of
his father. In addition to being one of the most
outrageous scenes we have seen, it was also a flagrant
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.

I would like, on behalf of the Government, the
people and the Permanent Mission of Qatar, to extend
our deepest sympathy and condolences to the families
of all the victims. We pray to Almighty God to grant
the victims a place among the martyrs at his side.

The aggressive actions against an unarmed people
by the Israeli army, which was backed by groups of
Jewish settlers and has violated all international
customs and norms, represents a shameful stigma upon
anyone who defends the Israeli position today. Those
actions are further proof that Israel's Government
continues to be held hostage to extremist factions
within the Israeli population that completely disregard
internationally binding resolutions. The international
community is urged to act and to assume its
responsibility towards the Palestinian people, whose
land has been occupied and whose members have been
expelled to every part of the world to suffer the fate of
a permanent Diaspora as a direct result of Israel's
ongoing rejection of their right to return to their
homeland.

Together with the entire world, we await the
outcome of the Paris talks that have brought together
Palestinian President Yasser Arafat, Israeli Prime
Minister Ehud Barak and United States Secretary of
State Madeleine Albright. However, Qatar's View of
the peace process in the Middle East is founded on
realistic foundations and principles, regardless of the
differing views about that situation. Achieving a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace requires putting an
end to Israel's occupation of all occupied Palestinian
territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, and enabling
the Palestinian people to secure their legitimate
national and political rights. Those rights include their
right to return to their land, to enjoy self-determination
and to have an independent State with Al-Quds Al-
Sharif as its capital.

The tragic events that are taking place in the
occupied Palestinian territories should not be condoned
or forgotten. People never forgive or forget. In this
regard, we call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities under the Charter and take the
following actions.

First, it should intervene rapidly and call upon
Israel to halt its excessive and aggressive hostilities
and to withdraw its forces, which continue to kill
innocent, unarmed Palestinian civilians, including
children. Secondly, it should guarantee Palestinians
total freedom to carry out their religious practices in
Al-Quds Al-Sharif, free from harassment by Israeli
forces. Thirdly, it should launch an international
investigation of these tragic and outrageous events and
call for the prosecution of those Israelis responsible for
firing on Palestinian citizens, killing scores and
wounding hundreds more. Fourthly, it should condemn
the provocation caused by Ariel Sharon's visit to
Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Fifthly, it should condemn the
actions of the occupying Israeli forces and call on them
to comply with the norms and instruments of
international law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention. And sixthly, it should call for
compensation to Palestinian civilians for the loss of life
and material damage that they incurred as a result of
those events. This is the least it can do to appease the
outrage of the Arab peoples and to maintain the
credibility of the Security Council in the eyes of the
international community.

