Baroness Warsi (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin, Madam President, by congratulating you and the
Government of Pakistan on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of January. I am
grateful to you for convening this important debate
on taking a comprehensive approach to countering
terrorism. Allow me also to thank the Secretary-
General for his introductory remarks and briefing this
morning.

Pakistan is on the front line of terrorism and is
making enormous sacrifices. Thirty thousand Pakistani
civilians have died in terrorist attacks since 9/11. In
Britain, we understand the terrible losses terrorism has
inflicted on the Pakistani people. We feel them deeply,
too. The people of Pakistan will always have our
sympathy, our understanding and our steadfast support
in addressing those problems and in confronting
terrorism. As Prime Minister David Cameron has said,
Pakistan's enemy is our enemy.

Terrorism remains one of the most pressing
and most challenging of the threats facing our
world today. A united international response is the
only way by which the scourge of terrorism can be
defeated - a comprehensive approach to terrorism.
The world has changed since the 9/11 attacks and other
terrorist atrocities such as the Bali bombing and the 7/7
attacks in London. Globalization has made the world
increasingly interconnected, its boundaries less clearly
defined.

Those changes have brought many benefits,
but they have also brought significant challenges
that require a collective global response if we are to
overcome them. The same applies without doubt to the
terrorist threat we face today. It is more diverse and
more fragmented but also more determined than ever
to challenge the shared values on which the United
Nations was founded. The United Kingdom therefore
welcomes the call for a more comprehensive approach
to countering terrorism - comprehensive in terms of
the number of countries working together to ensure its
defeat and comprehensive in terms of the range of tools
we deploy in our struggle against it.

When a terrorist threat is faced, a military response
is sometimes unavoidable. But we must also recognize
the link between instability and terrorism and the need
to address the grievances and poverty that terrorists seek
to exploit, to radicalize and to recruit from. In Yemen,
for example, we need to expand access to justice, jobs
and basic services in order to address those grievances.
And in Somalia the work of our Department for
International Development to support police training,
to pilot community safety committees and to secure
access to health care and humanitarian assistance is
playing a crucial role in countering terrorist threats.
The United Kingdom is keen to continue its support for
the new Government of Somalia in its efforts to secure
lasting peace and security in East Africa, building on
the success of the London Somalia Conference last year.

Therefore, our broader counter-terrorism effort
must continue to include work to bring countries out of
poverty and to build stability. That requires us to take
a truly holistic and comprehensive approach, bringing
together diplomatic, development and defence work in
countering terrorism.

We must not forget that financing is the lifeblood
of terrorist networks. Cutting off that financing is
core to countering terrorism. We therefore welcome
the work of the United Nations and other international
bodies, including the Financial Action Task Force, in
setting international standards for combating terrorist
financing and promoting their effective implementation.
Terrorists are also quick to exploit the opportunities
presented by technology. In the field of cybersecurity
the United Kingdom is playing a key role in shaping
an international cyberstrategy, including hosting the
2011 London Conference on Cyberspace. We welcome
international initiatives, particularly in the United
Nations, aimed at reducing the threat we face from
cybercrime.

The United Kingdom is also working closely with
our international partners to tackle other transnational
threats such as drug and human trafficking. In
particular, the United Kingdom welcomes and has
adopted the United Nations Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, which
supplements the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy emphasizes the importance of conducting
counter-terrorism activity in conformity with
international law. The United Kingdom strongly
endorses that position. Compliance with international
human rights obligations is vital to the sustainability
of all our counter-terrorism work. We need to ensure
that our collective capacity to arrest, prosecute and
detain terrorists is in accordance with the human
rights standards that United Nations Members have
signed up to.

The United Kingdom is active also across the
globe in providing security and justice assistance to
international partners. In doing so, we consider it to
be of critical importance that this work be consistent
with our values. The United Kingdom has therefore
developed specific guidance, the overseas security and
justice assistance guidance, to ensure that all of our
overseas counter-terrorism activity is in line with our
fundamental human rights standards. All proposals for
security and justice assistance overseas are now subject
to that guidance.

The United Nations is uniquely placed to lead and
coordinate the universal struggle against terrorism.
United Nations resolutions provide the framework for
international activity to counter terrorism, and United
Nations bodies here in New York and around the world
are working hard in different ways to help mitigate the
terrorist threat that we all face. The United Kingdom
welcomes the efforts of all these entities in helping to
create the legal framework for countering terrorism by
addressing the conditions that can give rise to violent
extremism and through practical measures to help
prevent terrorist attacks.

But with so many international bodies involved
in that effort, 31 separate entities in all, there is a risk
that activity is not as coordinated as it could be. We
therefore continue to support the Secretary-General's
call for the appointment of a United Nations counter-
terrorism coordinator, which we believe could increase
the impact of the United Nations counter-terrorism
effort and help to promote a truly comprehensive
approach. We would need the right mandate, and we
would need to think carefully about how best to use the
available resources, but we remain convinced that more
effective coordination within and between international
organizations is crucial to our success in tackling the
global terrorist threat.

It is also important that the United Nations continue
to strive to work as effectively and in as coordinated
a manner as possible with other multinational
organizations working on counter-terrorism. We
welcome the regular European Union-United Nations
counter-terrorism dialogue and look forward to
increased operational cooperation as a result. Similarly,
we welcome the important contribution that the United
Nations makes to the work of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Forum.

Madam President, I should like to thank you once
again for using the occasion of your presidency of the
Security Council to shine the spotlight on this important
issue. The United Kingdom remains determined to
work with Security Council colleagues, the wider
United Nations membership and the key United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies to advance our collective
comprehensive counter-terrorism efforts.

