Mr. Ele Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me at the outset to thank you and your
delegation, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
We welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Tiebile Drame, to
whom we wish every success in the new role entrusted
to him by His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita.

We would also like to express our thanks to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for his very detailed
and useful briefing. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea highly values his leadership and praises his
hard work and that of his entire team in constantly
challenging conditions.

The security situation in Mali and the Sahel region
is nothing short of a tragedy. Abductions, attacks
on barracks and camps, improvised - yet skilfully
programmed - explosive devices, ambushes and
murders form the basis of a constant, heightened danger
that puts all actors, whether national and international,
on the defensive. Many of them are confined to their
quarters with little else to do but fight to stay alive, in
the best-case scenario. It may be politically incorrect
to be so explicit, but we are facing a paradoxical
situation. The state of affairs in Mali is deteriorating
at the same pace the international community's interest
is increasing, as is its involvement in the restoration
of the stability and authority of the State throughout
the country.

Indeed, despite the military and financial resources
deployed, as well as the ongoing international
mobilization and support for the full implementation
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
the current strategy is demonstrating its weaknesses
in its ability to curb the jihadist threat. Worse still,
these past few weeks have witnessed an outbreak in
intercommunity conflicts - between Dogons, Fulanis,
Mossis, Arabs, Baoules and Malinkes - which have
been skilfully exploited by Islamist strategists, masters
in the art of inciting, exacerbating and executing attacks
in a plethora of ways.

Equatorial Guinea strongly condemns such
violence, including the most recent incident just a few
days ago in the centre of the country, which left almost
100 civilians dead. The severity of this inter-ethnic
conflagration suggests that the situation is getting out
of hand. It is therefore essential, against this backdrop,
that a national awakening lead the Malians to take
ownership of the situation, to echo the point made
earlier by Mr. Annadif.

Faced with such an explosive situation, which
threatens Mali's very existence, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea urges national and international
actors and partners to continue fostering broad
consultations and exchanges in order to provide the
tools required to prevent and combat violence in all its
forms and manifestations, both at the national level and
in the Sahelo-Saharan region.

My country welcomes the establishment of a
new inclusive Government in Mali on 5 May and we
note the commitment of the new Prime Minister to
providing MINUSMA, within the next three months,
with a road map to accelerate the implementation of
the agreement. We underscore the need for this road
map to establish a timeline for the organization and
holding of a constitutional referendum and security and
defence sector reform, as well as to create the northern
development zone.

Moreover, we reiterate our categorical condemnation
of the ongoing attacks perpetrated against the civilian
population, Blue Helmets, United Nations personnel
and the Malian armed forces. The Government of
Equatorial Guinea expresses its gratitude and pays a
heartfelt tribute to all the national and international
defence forces participating in these courageous efforts
to combat cross-border violence and organized crime
in Mali and across the Sahel region. We also urge the
Malian authorities to investigate all these barbaric acts
and bring those responsible to justice. They cannot
go unpunished.

Faced with the cycle of deadly violence in the
centre of Mali and given the infeasibility of any
military solution, it might be advisable for the Malian
Government and all political and civil stakeholders to
establish a dialogue with all opponents in the country.
This new strategy would represent a notable change
of course, combining military pressure, dialogue and
disarmament to prompt local leaders to approach the
negotiating table.

Aware of the continuing deterioration of the
security situation in Mali, and in view of the upcoming
renewal of the mandate of MINUSMA, Equatorial
Guinea will support any proposal or initiative aimed at
further strengthening the Mission's mandate so that it
is capable not only of defending itself properly, but also
of maintaining the pressure on terrorists and jihadists
until their final withdrawal from the country.

Equatorial Guinea recalls that all stakeholders - the
national Governments of the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), the Economic Community
of West African States and neighbouring States, the
African Union and the United Nations - have the
responsibility to mobilize their resources as part of a
coherent and comprehensive stabilization approach that
enables the restoration of security and development.
We welcome the work of the Governments of the
Sahel countries and of national and international
stakeholders and the coordinating role of the United
Nations. We underline the essential role of MINUSMA
in bringing about stability, peace and reconciliation in
Mali, including its role in the north and centre of the
country. We particularly highlight its efforts to assist
the extension of State authority, the protection of all
civilians, without discrimination, the restoration of
basic services and the use of good offices in support of
the political process, which must be completed, as well
as its capacity to interact with other security forces,
including the essential support that it provides to the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

I conclude my statement by recalling that the
situation in Mali is a clear threat to international peace
and security. The Security Council must therefore
remain united on this matter and consider it a core issue
on its agenda, providing and encouraging the greatest
possible support to the Government of Mali.

