Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me also thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix and Assistant Secretary-
General Gilmour for their briefings.

We continue to follow the situation in Khartoum
very closely and support the mediation efforts of the
African Union and Ethiopia, which should pave the
way to a civilian-led transition. Negotiations should be
resumed as soon as possible. We echo the clear statement
issued by the Council earlier this week (see S/PV.8543).
We strongly condemn the violence against civilians and
call for respect for human rights and for accountability
for the violence committed by security forces. We are
also concerned about the reports alleging that serious
human rights violations have been committed by
elements of the Rapid Support Forces and militias since
3 June and in the aftermath of the attacks on the protest
area. We join Special Representative Patten in urging
for an investigation of all credible allegations of sexual
violence and for accountability for those responsible.

Let me also say that we very much agree with Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix and thank him for his view
that the team sites of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) cannot and
will not be handed over to the Rapid Support Forces,
but rather only to civilian institutions, as agreed.
The mission needs a willing and civilian partner for
peacebuilding in Darfur, and we do not see that that is
the case at the moment.

With regard to the future of UNAMID, as we have
heard from Assistant Secretary-General Gilmour, the
protection needs in Darfur are unfortunately growing,
not declining. We hear reports about increasing
intercommunal violence in central Darfur and we have
had to witness the looting of UNAMID team sites. We
strongly condemn any violence or threats of violence
against UNAMID by anyone. The mission has a Chapter
VII mandate that provides for robust self-protection
and protection of its mandate, and despite its limited
capacities, UNAMID continues to play an important
role in protecting civilians, fostering the rule of law
and tackling the root causes of the conflict. Germany
continues to believe that we should transition from
peacemaking to peacebuilding in Darfur, in accordance
with the benchmarks and indicators, as agreed by the
Council, and that the transition should be done in an
orderly, dignified and sustainable manner. We do not
see that the circumstances right now can allow such an
approach to be rapidly implemented.

I would like to say a few words with regard to
suggestions on the way ahead. We, the United Kingdom
and Germany, will suggest a way forward for the
upcoming mandate renewal that reflects the current
fluid situation. We believe that as the Council we
cannot follow a trajectory on autopilot, disregarding
the real situation on the ground. How would we explain
that to the people in Darfur? We have the responsibility
to adapt our approach in the light of the major shifts we
have seen in the Sudan, which are already having clear
repercussions in Darfur.

We also took note of the discussion in the African
Union Peace and Security Council yesterday, which
expresses similar concerns and calls for a suspension of
UNAMID's drawdown. That is why we believe that the
best way forward at this moment, as my British colleague
said, is with a technical rollover for UNAMID. A
technical rollover would enable UNAMID to continue
its important work at the intersection of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding for the time being. It would give the
United Nations and the African Union time to come
up with a political strategy for Darfur, as suggested in
the special report of both organizations (S/2019/445).
It would also allow all the relevant stakeholders to
agree on a political way forward, including on the
peace process in Darfur, which is currently stalled.
The United Kingdom and Germany will engage with
all Council members in the coming week to discuss
our suggestions in detail, and we look forward to
constructive engagement and discussions.

