Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): At the outset, I
would like to express my appreciation to Portugal and
the other members of the Security Council for this
opportunity to address this high-level meeting on
Timor-Leste. Indeed, Mr. President, the fact that your
Minister for Foreign Affairs is attending today's
meeting attests to the importance of this issue.

Before I continue, allow me to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/641). I also
wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Timor-Leste, Zacarias Albano da Costa,
for sharing with us the latest developments in his
country. Lastly, I would also like to express our
delegation's appreciation to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT), Ameerah Haq, for her exhaustive briefing.

Since our last debate on UNMIT, in February (see S/PV.6485), we have seen improvements in the
political and security situation in Timor-Leste. Since
the Timor-Leste national police took control of
policing responsibilities in March this year, the
security environment has remained calm and stable. As
a consequence, the vastly improved peace and order
situation has allowed UNMIT to downsize the number
of its police officers. The country, however, is still
vulnerable to politically motivated violence as the 2012
presidential and parliamentary elections draw near.

The Philippines commends the great strides made
by Timor-Leste in preparing itself for a post-UNMIT
scenario. The joint transition plan drawn up by the
Timorese Government and UNMIT is one of the most
detailed and comprehensive plans ever produced for
the smooth withdrawal of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission, although the outcome of next
year's elections will be crucial in determining whether
or not that road map will be followed. But the fact that
the seven focus areas have already been identified and
analysed will greatly facilitate the work of UNMIT in
the coming months.

The Philippine contingent to the United Nations
police within UNMIT now stands, from a high of 139,
at 86 police officers, 21 of whom are women, and three
military advisers. The three military personnel are
assisting mainly in humanitarian activities and in the
investigation of incidents and violations. Five of the
police officers hold key positions, while 29 serve as
advisers. They have been doing an outstanding job in
carrying out the mandate of the United Nations police
force within UNMIT, and we are proud of their
accomplishments in the security sector, particularly in
the areas of community policing, training and capacity-
building. In fact, although they are expected to return
home in April next year, UNMIT has requested the
Philippine Government to extend the tour of duty of
those 34 Filipino police officers until the end of
December 2012, so as to ensure the fulfilment of
UNMIT's mandate.

The report of the Secretary-General underscores
the recent economic growth achieved by Timor-Leste,
which is largely due to the Timorese Government's
excellent management of the oil industry and
investment in public infrastructure. The long-term
challenge is, of course, how to convert the country's oil
wealth into human and physical capital in order to
build a strong economy and improve the quality of life
of the Timorese people. Indeed, socio-economic
development will remain a priority for a young nation
such as Timor-Leste even as the country consolidates
the gains made in the area of political stability with a
view to further deepening democracy and the rule of
law.
The presidential and parliamentary elections next
year will be a crucial test for the people of Timor-
Leste. They will also take place after the expiration of
UNMIT's present mandate. The Philippines believes
that the UNMIT drawdown must be gradual and based
on an objective assessment of current and anticipated
requirements, especially in the light of the forthcoming
presidential and parliamentary elections. We do not
want, of course, a repetition of what happened in 2007,
when a premature United Nations disengagement
triggered chaos and violence.

In view of the inevitable withdrawal of UNMIT,
however, all stakeholders and partners concerned must
work closely together to make the transition to a
post-UNMIT Timor-Leste as seamless and smooth as
possible. At the same time, it provides a window of
opportunity to the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste to show their readiness and capacity to
assume responsibility for their own peace and security.

As an active member of the Core Group for
Timor-Leste and a close bilateral partner, the
Philippines fully supports Timor-Leste at this crucial
moment in its young history as an independent nation.
As Timor-Leste marks its tenth anniversary, it is still
experiencing hardship and difficulties, like many States
emerging from conflict. But the Philippines is
confident that Timor-Leste is in a good position to face
the many challenges ahead.

At this point, Mr. President, let me once again
assure you and all of our partners in the United
Nations, especially the Core Group for Timor-Leste,
that the Philippines will do its part to contribute to the
success of UNMIT and to continue assisting the people
and the Government of Timor-Leste.

