Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing. I would also like to thank you, Madam
President, for your efforts in convening this meeting.
Continuing to promote international nuclear
non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament and nuclear
security is of great significance to the maintenance of
international peace and security. China supports the
Security Council in playing its role in that regard. With
regard to the common efforts of the international
community, the areas of arms control and
non-proliferation have seen some positive
developments. At the same time, the nuclear
proliferation issue remains acute. We have a long way
to go to achieve nuclear disarmament. The nuclear
security situation remains grave. The international
community needs to enhance its coordination and
cooperation in that regard and join hands to face the
challenge.

China believes that to maintain international
peace and stability and to achieve general security in
the world, we must uphold a new security concept
based on mutual trust, benefit, equality and
coordination, with a focus on building a peaceful and
stable international environment, building inter-State
relations based on mutual trust and understanding,
adhering to multilateralism, consolidating collective
security with the United Nations at its core, adhering to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and resolving hotspot problems and
international disputes through dialogue and
negotiations so as to eliminate the root cause of nuclear
proliferation and nuclear terrorism.

We must honestly address nuclear disarmament,
nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful use of
nuclear energy in a balanced manner. We must
vigorously promote the nuclear disarmament process,
maintain global strategic balance and stability, and
abandon nuclear deterrence policies based on the
concept of first use of nuclear weapons to effectively
reduce the threat of nuclear weapons. We must
consolidate international nuclear non-proliferation
mechanisms, fully respect the rights of countries to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy and avoid double
standards. At the same time, we must adhere to
scientific and rational concepts of nuclear security,

strengthen capacity-building in that regard, deepen
international communication and cooperation, raise the
global level of nuclear security and achieve the
common goal of general nuclear security.

Safeguarding peace and stability on the Korean
peninsula and in the Northeast Asian region and
promoting denuclearization on the peninsula are the
common interest and responsibility of all. Dialogue
and consultation is the only correct way to address the
peninsula issue. We hope that all sides will make
efforts to maintain and implement the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea-United States 29 February
common understanding. We also hope that all sides
will maintain calm and show restraint, remain engaged
in dialogue, commit to the Six-Party Talks, promote the
denuclearization process in the shared interest of
maintaining peace and stability on the peninsula and in
Northeast Asia.

Committing to dialogue and negotiation in
addressing the Iran nuclear issue is of great
significance for maintaining stability and peace and
avoiding greater upheaval in the Middle East region.
All sides must maintain the existing common
understanding, engage in constructive dialogue,
cooperate in good faith, gradually build mutual trust
and eventually address the Iran nuclear issue in a
comprehensive, just and appropriate manner.

Nuclear non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament
and nuclear security are long-term tasks before us.
China is prepared to work with the international
community in strengthening communication and
cooperation and make our contribution to promoting
the relevant processes and building lasting peace and
shared prosperity for all.

