Ms. Leskovar (Slovenia): At the outset, I would
like to join others and express my Government's strong
condemnation of today's heinous attacks on United
Nations House in Abuja. We would like to convey our
deepest sympathies and sincere condolences to the
people and Government of Nigeria, the whole United
Nations family and, in particular, the families and
friends of the victims.

Slovenia would like to express its appreciation to
the Indian presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today's open debate on the issue of
peacekeeping and to commend it for the invaluable role
that India plays as one of the leading troop contributors
in this respect. We would like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-Moon for his remarks. At the same
time, we also wish to take this opportunity to thank
former Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for his
vision, courage and determination during a period of
extraordinary challenges for the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), which he has led so
skilfully over the past three years.

Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Peacekeeping, which was not foreseen in the
Charter of the United Nations - as the useful concept
note (S/2011/496, annex) that India drafted for this

meeting reminds us - has developed into a flagship
activity of the United Nations. Over the past decades,
we have witnessed the changing character of
peacekeeping.

Today, peacekeepers work in extremely difficult
conditions, often risking their lives. At times they have
a nearly impossible mission, trying to maintain peace
between warring factions with no peace agreement in
place, without adequate numbers, with insufficient
training and inadequate equipment, and lacking the
quality of leadership and civilian expertise that they
require.

Yet we should give United Nations forces great
credit for providing security to war-torn countries and
for assisting people whose livelihoods have been
washed away by floods or ruined by deadly
earthquakes. The presence of the United Nations on the
ground helps to prevent the escalation of
confrontations and paves the way for the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Peacekeepers save and protect
the lives of millions of civilians and provide much-
needed order, stability and hope.

Peacekeeping operations are the expression of a
global partnership and the international community's
commitment. We strongly commend the dedication of
the United Nations soldiers, police officers and civilian
and aid workers who do the hard work, facing danger
around the world. As we mark the eighth anniversary
of the Canal Hotel bombing, we should pay tribute and
never forget the sacrifice of those who gave their lives
to help save others.

As the complexity of peacekeeping operations
has increased over the years, we must all join forces to
ensure that United Nations peacekeeping adapts and
adjusts to meet new and emerging challenges. At the
same time, it is expected that the demands of
individual United Nations peacekeeping missions will
further grow. Building on the progress achieved by the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809), launched 11 years ago,
and the recent New Horizon Initiative, we need to
pursue reforms that will make current and future
operations more effective.

Peacekeeping missions require clear mandates.
Peacekeepers deserve practical and updated guidance
based on lessons learned. Such guidance would enable
them to implement their mandates to protect civilians
effectively and would provide better support to host
Governments, which bear the primary responsibility
for protecting their citizens. Such clear guidance will
also help them to use appropriate tactics when facing
various threats and challenges on the ground.

However, that is the task of all mission
components, not uniformed personnel alone. Therefore,
closer interaction among the military, police and
civilian dimensions of missions is essential, as it could
facilitate efficient strategies for the essential
peacebuilding role that peacekeepers play in
contemporary operations. Peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding are tools that should be deployed in
an integrated fashion. We must continue to evolve
towards a more flexible architecture of response that
allows us to customize our assistance to the immediate
and real needs on the ground.

Slovenia would like to emphasize the significance
of the civilian capacity review and its wide-ranging
recommendations aimed at strengthening international
civilian support for post-conflict countries. We have to
make better use of the capacity of regional and
subregional organizations and further strengthen the
United Nations partnership with them. We must seize
the political momentum generated by the 2010
Peacebuilding Commission review (S/2010/393, annex), empower the Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund, and promote greater coherence
among the many components of the United Nations
system that make up the peacebuilding mosaic.

The challenging mandates assigned to
peacekeeping missions require appropriate resources
and adequate equipment to be implemented effectively.
As regards the planning and monitoring of
peacekeeping missions, we believe there is still room
for the further strengthening of the planning and
assessment process, particularly by increasing the
involvement of those countries contributing their
forces.

Slovenia welcomes regular communication
among the Security Council, the troop- and police-
contributing countries, the Secretariat and other
stakeholders and encourages even more cooperation.
Likewise, we support the proposal of even more
frequent briefings by Force Commanders.

In implementing the global field support strategy,
which was designed to provide more predictable,
secure and flexible logistic support to contingents on
the ground, we must take into account the advice of our
women and men serving in the missions. That becomes
increasingly important in the wake of the global
financial and economic crisis, which constraints all
national budgets.

The Blue Helmets have recorded many
achievements in the past and recently, and United
Nations peacekeepers deserve greater recognition for
their service in Liberia, East Timor, Haiti, Lebanon, the
Sudan and Cote d'Ivoire, to mention just a few
examples. In Cote d'Ivoire, without the presence of the
United Nations operation, the post-election violence
earlier this year would have been much worse. In the
Sudan, the United Nations mission played a crucial
role in making the peaceful referendum on the self-
determination of South Sudan possible. However,
disturbing reports from Southern Kordofan, especially
regarding the deliberate attacks and other gross
violations against the innocent Nuba people, should be
of strong concern to the international community.

Slovenia celebrated the twentieth anniversary of
its independence two months ago. Next May, two
decades will have passed since our country of 2 million
people became a United Nations Member. Recognizing
the importance of peacekeeping, Slovenia began
contributing servicemen to United Nations operations
immediately after joining the Organization. Since then,
more than 5,000 Slovenian peacekeepers have been
deployed to United Nations peacekeeping operations
around the world as a demonstration of our unwavering
commitment to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

My delegation would also like to highlight the
important role of women in peace and security. The
integration of the gender perspective in all stages and
sectors of peacekeeping and peace-related activities is
of vital importance to the successful outcome of
peacekeeping efforts. We commend the DPKO and
contributing Member States for their dedication to
gender mainstreaming and we encourage them to
continue to promote the cause of women. Those efforts
must be accompanied by increased protection of the
most vulnerable - girls and women - especially from
sexual violence. Slovenia strongly supports the
measures taken to establish and implement a zero-
tolerance policy for sexual exploitation and abuse. We
call on all peacekeeping personnel to act in full
compliance with that policy.

Let me close by saying that we must also expand
our work on conflict prevention, in particular to
improve our ability to read the warning signs and
trigger early action. We believe that, in an increasingly
interdependent and complex world, every country has
to bear its share of global responsibility. Slovenia
stands ready to assume its share and to engage even
more in the maintenance of international peace and
security, fully, fairly and without delay.

