Mr. De Medicis: Mr. President, in response to
your request and following the good example of
Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta, I shall present a very
short version of my statement. I understand that the full
text will be distributed.

Let me thank you, Mr. President, and the other
Security Council members for inviting the Community
of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP) to take part
in this meeting. Such an opportunity is a milestone in
the history of our organization and constitutes an
important acknowledgement of our work.

Our Community was created in 1996 by the
Governments of Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-
Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal and Sao Tome and
Principe. From day one, we took to heart Timor-Leste's
quest for sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. More than just our first, this was our
founding initiative. Indeed, our maturity as a group of
fellow nations was marked on 20 May 2002, when we
proudly accepted Timor-Leste as our eighth member
State. That day, the eight Portuguese-speaking
countries internationally asserted their peaceful and
democratic agenda. That was also the day when we
reclaimed a cultural heritage rooted in five centuries of
history and exchange among Asia, Africa, Europe and
South America.

Our Community brings together countries of
different sizes, resources and degrees of development.
Some of our member States rank among the world's
poorest nations. Timor-Leste's struggle to overcome its
misfortunes and the efforts of its society over the past
four years to reaffirm the country's potential have
constituted quite a success story. But an attentive
observer will understand that this recent achievement is
still far from being safely established.

With dedication and professionalism, the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), under the outstanding leadership of Sergio
Vieira de Mello, helped create a new nation, with high
standards for its public life and a strategic vision for its
future. That challenging task is currently being
complemented by UNTAET's successor, the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). Although much has been accomplished,
the CPLP understands that Timor-Leste still needs the
support of the United Nations in order to become a
stable and self-sustaining nation.

The special report of the Secretary-General on
UNMISET (S/2004/117), presented last week, points
correctly to the necessity of applying the concept of
downsizing in a balanced and careful way. The CPLP
welcomes the report and endorses the observations and
recommendations set out in paragraphs 62 to 68.

In the area of human rights, as the report made
clear, further efforts will be necessary in order to bring
open issues to closure and allow for solid advances in
national reconciliation. In the area of public
administration, international assistance will also
continue to be required for some time to assure that
crucial tasks are discharged.

Concerning UNMISET's police and military
components, the CPLP agrees with those who believe
that it is too early for a handover of full defence
responsibilities to the Government of Timor-Leste.
Although the situation in the country is peaceful, one
could argue that this very situation relies on the
stabilizing role played by the United Nations
peacekeeping force. Potential threats are dormant to a
great extent because a sound element of deterrence is
in place.

As the memory and the physical evidence of the
events of 1999 still linger over Timor-Leste, some
important issues, such as serious crimes and former
refugees, remain unresolved. Consequently, the CPLP
believes that the hard-won achievements of nation-
building in Timor-Leste must not be jeopardized by an
untimely withdrawal of the UNMISET military
component.

Internal security and law enforcement are issues
that also need to be addressed. The UNMISET police
forces, in which personnel from CPLP countries take
part, are an element of stability that should be
preserved. Moreover, the National Police of Timor-
Leste could only benefit from the extension of the
mentoring and monitoring provided by the UNMISET
police component.

That is the message the CPLP would like to
convey to the Security Council. The United Nations
has been doing a superb job in Timor-Leste. We share
the common hope that the Security Council will
continue to help that new nation overcome the
problems of its past, providing it with the necessary
means to advance towards a stable, peaceful and
prosperous future.

