Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
welcoming Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov
to his post as head of the newly created United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Office. I would also like
to thank him, Ambassador Aboulatta, Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, and Mr. Scharia of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), for their briefings on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001).

It has been 16 years since the terrorist attacks
of 11 September 2001 and the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001). Despite the international community's
numerous counter-terrorism efforts since then, we
continue to witness terrorist attacks all over the world
with alarming frequency. In Europe this year alone, we
saw serious terrorist attacks in London, Manchester
and Barcelona. In Asia, a group claiming to be the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-East Asia has been
fighting with the Government over the city of Marawi
in the Philippines since May. The threat posed by
terrorists is evolving globally, particularly with foreign
terrorist fighters returning to their countries of origin
or relocating to other regions.

In addition, we are alarmed by terrorists' evolving
tactics, which include diversifying financial sources,
disseminating propaganda through social media,
exploiting encrypted applications and using broken
travel. We have heard reports of the use of bitcoin and
drones. In response to terrorists' evolving tactics, we
must enhance our capacities and vigorously implement
counter-terrorism resolutions.

In addition to resolution 1373 (2001), the Council
has recently adopted resolutions 2309 (2016), on
aviation security; 2322 (2016), on international judicial
cooperation; 2341 (2017), on protection of critical
infrastructure; 2354 (2017) on counter-narratives; and
2370 (2017), on preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons. The adoption ofthese resolutions is important,
but their full implementation is Vital.

Japan has implemented these resolutions and
developed new measures in response to terrorists'
evolving tactics. For example, we recently enacted
laws to prevent terrorists from using bitcoin and
virtual currencies and to prohibit drones from flying
over critical facilities, embassies, and nuclear plants.
To strengthen international judicial cooperation
against transnational organized crimes, including
terrorism, Japan, as a State party to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and two of its supplementing protocols, will cooperate
more effectively with each State party in investigation
assistance and extradition.

The terrorist threat is global and we must extend
assistance to those in need as part of our collective
response. Japan, for example, provided $35 million in
March, mainly in South-East Asia, in the light of the
increasing threat in that region. That will be used to
facilitate the implementation of relevant resolutions
through concrete projects, including the Advance
Passenger Information system, international judicial
cooperation, INTERPOL databases and counter-
propaganda. Japan will continue to work closely with
CTC and CTED towards the full implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions.

The new Office of Counter-Terrorism is expected
to greatly enhance coordination of counter-terrorism
measures in all Member States. We should build
on that momentum. Japan looks forward to close
collaboration with the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and Under-Secretary-General Voronkov. The Council
must be united in fighting terrorism by implementing
our resolutions, including resolution 1373 (2001), and
further developing our counter-terrorism measures.

