Mr. Kamau (Kenya): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. I commend you, Sir, for the manner in which
you have conducted the affairs of the Council so far. I
thank you for organizing this timely debate on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace and for providing us
with a concept note (S/2017/6/annex) to frame it.

I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing on how we can prevent conflicts so as to
achieve sustainable peace, as guided by the Charter
of the United Nations. We believe that the priorities
that he set out in his briefing, particularly on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace, will re-energize and
refocus our collective commitment towards achieving
the objectives of the Charter. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the world urgently needs a
"surge in diplomacy for peace". Kenya stands ready to
play its role in that surge.
I also thank the previous speakers for their
insightful statements.

We believe that, in order to succeed in our goal of
sustaining peace, we need to reframe and reprioritize
our responses. Sustaining peace must run through all
our collective efforts, ranging from conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, peacemaking, reconstruction to
development. And we agree with the Secretary-General
that the primary responsibility for conflict prevention
lies with Member States.

The renewed approach to sustaining peace that
the Secretary-General laid out today presents a solid
opportunity for the United Nations to adapt better to
today's global realities. We need to reintegrate peace
in our security, development and human rights agenda.
We must place emphasis on conflict prevention and on
addressing the root causes of conflict.

We know that the United Nations peace and
security architecture has benefited from three reviews
in 2015 on peace operations. Similarly, the 2030
Agenda on Sustainable Development provides us
with a solid foundation for achieving and sustaining
peace and prosperity without leaving anyone behind.
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) provide
the basis for addressing the root causes of conflict,
including poverty.

Our strong, collective political will can help us in
achieving lasting peace only when we invest financial
and other resources in prevention. That will ensure that
we are able to build a greater common understanding of
conflicts, share early-warning information and develop
the proper analysis ofpotential hotspots to guide timely
early interventions.

The United Nations has an important and unique
character that reinforces its role in conflict prevention.
It is the only truly universal entity that can guide and
develop norms for guiding Member States as they
seek to react to conflicts and prevent them. But for the
United Nations to play its leadership role in conflict
prevention effectively it needs to break down the silo
mentality within its system, which undermines its
ability to prevent conflicts. We therefore agree with
the Secretary-General that United Nations responses
remain overly fragmented.

Allow me to highlight a few areas and steps that we
believe the Council can take to ensure more effective
conflict prevention among Member States and across
the United Nations system.
First, sustainable peace requires the development
of national institutions with the capacity to address
the root causes of conflict. National ownership and
inclusive leadership of such institutions are key to
achieving success in efforts to prevent conflicts and
sustain peace. In designing special political missions,
including mediation, peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding programmes and other preventative
actions, strong coordination and cooperation between
the United Nations and national authorities, based on
mutual complementarity, are vital for success. The
inclusive participation of youth and women in national
institutions is also vital to sustaining peace.

Secondly, the United Nations, including the
Council, should continue encouraging and reinforcing
mutually supportive partnerships on conflict prevention
with regional and subregional entities. Modern conflict
is increasingly intra-State in nature, with cross-
border tendencies in particular regions, occasioned
by unique political and socioeconomic grievances.
Regional entities have better knowledge of their areas
of operation, including the minute details on conflict
dynamics, whereas the United Nations has unique
expertise and tools sourced at the global level to resolve
the problems we face.

Thirdly, the Security Council, as the custodian of
international peace and security, needs to prioritize the
financing of conflict prevention, including through the
Peacebuilding Fund, so as to ensure that sustainable and
predictable funding is available. Flexibility in resource
mobilization and partnerships with international
financial institutions and regional development banks
are key.

Fourthly, conflict prevention is impossible without
effective early-warning mechanisms. It is essential for
the United Nations, including the Council, to assist
Member States and regional and subregional entities
to develop capacities for early-warning analysis,
information-sharing and the development of common
approaches to prevent the eruption of violent conflict.
That is normally far cheaper and more efficient in
addressing conflicts than the usual reactive tools
employed once violence has erupted.

Fifthly, it is essential to strengthen the
interlinkages relating to sustaining peace and conflict
prevention among the various United Nations entities,
including the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. Unique
intergovernmental bodies, such as the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission, should be strengthened
so that they can play their role in conflict prevention
and sustaining peace more effectively, while enhancing
coherence in United Nations efforts.

In conclusion, I want to state that progress in
prioritizing conflict prevention and sustaining peace
will depend upon sustaining people's trust in political
institutions, enhancing inclusivity, justice and the
rule of law within credible national institutions and
diversifying economies through the implementation of
the SDGs in order to address the root causes of conflict.
The primacy of politics in preventing and resolving
conflicts is key to sustaining peace. The Council must
therefore continue to strive to keep all solutions to
conflict political.

