Mr. Koenders (Netherlands): I appreciate the
opportunity to speak here today on behalf of the
Netherlands and the Dutch people. Today we recall
the tragedy of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7, which
occurred a little over a year ago. We mourn all 298
men, women and children on board on that flight from
Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur. Today is also the day that
the pursuit ofjustice is called for.

On the 17 July, at the memorial service organized
by the families of the victims, I saw once again how
deeply this tragedy has wounded so many people in the
Netherlands and in many other grieving nations. One
hundred and ninety-six Dutch citizens were killed.
Innocent men, women and many children. Many more
families and friends were left behind in despair and are
wondering why. Why them? Their wish, their desire, is
forjustice to be done: a cry for accountability, a cry for
this important organ to act.

In response to the incident, the Security Council
adopted the crucial resolution 2166 (2014), which
condemns the downing of Flight MH-17 - which
resulted in the terrible loss of so many lives - calls
upon all the parties involved to facilitate recovery and
repatriation and demands that those responsible be held
to account. The resolution created hope for those who
lost loved ones.

My country has abided by the resolution. We set
out a three-step approach in close cooperation with
other affected countries. That approach includes, first,
repatriation and identification of the victims; secondly,
a thorough and independent investigation into the cause
of the crash; and, thirdly, justice for the victims and for
those responsible.

The Netherlands has regularly and thoroughly
informed the Security Council of the progress made
on those three steps. First, all but two victims - both
Dutch citizens - have been identified and repatriated.
Secondly, the technical investigations into the cause
of the crash are nearly complete, and the completely
independent Dutch Safety Board is expected to release
its final report in October. And, thirdly, the criminal
investigation being carried out by thejoint investigation
team set up by Australia, Belgium, Malaysia, the
Netherlands and Ukraine is at a very advanced stage.

That brings us to our ultimate task, namely, holding
to account those directly or indirectly responsible for
the downing of Flight MH-l7. Bringing them to justice
is not only our duty to the victims of this tragedy; the
Council's important resolution 2166 (2014) demands
it. In that resolution, the Council acknowledged its
authority and responsibility to see this matter through
to its logical conclusion in the following ways: by
reaffirming the international legal prohibition of acts
of violence that pose a threat to international civil
aviation; by calling on all States to cooperate fully
with the international investigation of the incident; by
demanding that, as called for in the resolution 2166
(2014), those responsible for this incident be held to
account and that all States cooperate fully with efforts to
establish accountability. That imposes an international
obligation to prosecute the perpetrators.

Let me ask the following question. When the Council
called upon all States to act in that way, did the Council
not assume that it too had a responsibility? After all,
this is the highest political institution representing the
international community. When the Council decided to
remain actively seized of the matter, did it not foresee
a role for itself in guaranteeing compliance with the
resolution by all States Members of the United Nations
in the interests of all those who lost their lives that
afternoon above the skies of the Ukraine?

On behalf of the Netherlands, Australia, Belgium
and Ukraine, Malaysia presented to the Council
a thorough and carefully drafted proposal for an
international criminal tribunal, to be established under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Our
purpose is to create a timely, depoliticized and credible
mechanism to ensure that the perpetrators face justice
and are held to account.

We came to the Council with a desire to see justice
done in the most effective, impartial and legitimate
way, with the greatest possible chance of success. I
would like to thank those Council members who have
supported the Malaysian draft resolution and believe
that this terrible crime deserves the attention of the
Security Council and the best possible prosecution
mechanism at our disposal. I express my deep
disappointment that Russia has used its veto to stop the
Council from actively ensuring that justice is served.
My thoughts go out to the families of the victims who
had placed their hope on the resolve of the Council to
set up this tribunal.

We listened carefully to the arguments and concerns
Russia voiced. We engaged and answered all - and
I underline - all its questions. We made very clear
that this is the best way forward, giving the demand
for accountability by the Security Council itself. The
accountability process is duly under way and in line
with international standards. It makes no sense at all
for the Council to stop it here. As said, the Dutch Safety
Board has finished the investigation into the cause,
and will publish its report in October. The criminal
investigation is well under way, now we should have
acted in order to be ready for the follow-up.

We have made the case for a prosecution mechanism
that transcends politics. The idea to establish a tribunal
now was born to ensure an independent and depoliticized
procedure, before the results of the investigations
would point at certain possible perpetrators. I find it
incomprehensible that a member of the Security Council
obstructs justice in a tragedy that has affected so many.
Impunity will send a very dangerous signal and will
threaten the safety of civil aviation - the safety of all
of us, the safety of Council members.

We, the countries working together on the criminal
investigation, will not stop in our endeavour to ensure
that those responsible for this violent act are held
accountable. We have the support of many in this
Chamber and many more outside. My country will
not rest until all the facts are known and justice has
been been served. We expect the world community to
continue to cooperate with us in our efforts to bring the
perpetrators to justice, in accordance with resolution
2166 (2014). The Netherlands, Malaysia, Australia,
Belgium and Ukraine will continue to work together
to find the best way of prosecuting those responsible.
We will continue working together to ensure justice is
served, and we will lose no time in pursuing this.

