Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing
today and Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi both for the
briefing and the leadership that he and his team have
demonstrated in supporting the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).

It has been one year since the United States,
France, the United Kingdom, Germany, China, Russia
and the European Union (EU) concluded a deal with
Iran to ensure that Iran's nuclear programme is and will
remain a peaceful one. Despite a long history of deep
mistrust on both sides, commitments have been kept.
Despite dire predictions to the contrary, the deal has
held. That is a truly significant achievement.

In the time since, Iran has dismantled two-thirds
of its centrifuges and filled the core of its plutonium
reactor at Arak with concrete. More than 98 per cent
of Iran's stockpile of enriched uranium has been
moved out of the country. The remainder is under
continuous monitoring to make sure that Iran stays
withing the stockpile limit. As result, Iran's pathways
to a nuclear weapon remain closed, and Iran's break-
out time has been extended from two to three months
before the deal to at least a year today. We know all this
and more because the deal granted the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) unprecedented access
to Iran's nuclear facility and supply chains, allowing
for effective monitoring and evaluation. If and when
questions or concerns arise in this monitoring, we have
a process to address them.

The United States acknowledges and welcomes
Iran's swift implementation of this historic deal, which
has produced real, tangible change - change that,
without question, has improved international peace and
security, which is the primary purpose of the Security
Council. We also recognize that negotiating this deal
and implementing it has required overcoming great
scepticism in some Iranian quarters. The world is safer
because of this deal.

It has been six months since the IAEA's
verification that Iran completed its key nuclear-related
commitments under the deal and the simultaneous
lifting of United Nations, EU and United States nuclear-
related sanctions. While Member State implementation
of the commitments of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) is a subject for the Joint Commission
rather than the Council, let me be clear that the United
States, our P5+l partners and the EU have thus far fully
and unequivocally implemented all our commitments
under this deal by lifting nuclear-related sanctions
specified in the deal and by providing clear and timely
guidance to Government and private-sector partners
about engagement with Iran that is now permitted.

Consistent with the terms of the deal and directly
resulting from the choices that its leaders have made,
the economic burden on the Iranian people has been
eased, and the United States will continue to implement
its commitments in good faith and without exception
under the JCPOA. Yet while it is undeniable that the
deal has led to significant verifiable progress in rolling
back Iran's nuclear programme, it is also true that Iran
and other Member States have at times taken actions
that, while not always violations of the JCPOA, are
inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015).

The report released today by the Secretary-General
(S/2016/589) documents a number of such actions.
These include Iran's repeated ballistic missile launches,
which the Council called upon Iran not to undertake.
The report states that these launches have the potential
to increase tensions within the region. Iran does not
hide these launches. The report also notes violations
by Iran of resolution 2231 (2015), such as armed
transfers to other parts of the region, some of which
have been interdicted. The Secretary-General's report
also documents violations of asset freezes and travel
restrictions applicable to Iranian entities designated by
the Council, such as the participation of Iran's Defence
Industries Organisation in an arms exhibition in Iraq.

No one - including United Nations Member States,
the Security Council and the Secretariat - should turn a
blind eye to such actions. As we have said all along with
regard to this resolution, implementation is everything.
That means that when the resolution is violated or
actions are taken that are inconsistent with it, those
actions must be documented and condemned. And it
means that all Member States, especially the members
of the Council, the P5+1 countries and Iran, which
negotiated the deal, must do their part in implementing
the resolution. That is why the United States commends
the actions of the Royal Australian Navy and the French
Navy, which intercepted and confiscated Iranian arms
shipments on 27 February and 20 March, respectively,
as the United States Navy did on 28 March. It also means
that the Council and the international community must
call out Member States when they do not fulfil their
responsibilities under the resolution.

The United States disagrees strongly with elements
of the report, including the fact that its content goes
beyond the appropriate scope. We understand that Iran
also disagrees strongly with parts of the report. For
our part, while some have argued that to be balanced,
the report should give Iran a chance to express
complaints about sanctions relief under the deal, the
Security Council did not mandate the Secretariat to
report on issues unrelated to implementation of annex
B of resolution 2231 (2015). It was instead the Joint
Commission that was carefully designed by the JCPOA
participants to discuss and resolve such implementation
issues, and that is the appropriate channel through
which to raise such concerns.

The United States has fully implemented all of its
sanctions-related commitments under the deal, and we
have responded to questions about them both through
the Joint Commission and through extensive bilateral
engagement with Iran. Even beyond fulfilling its
JCPOA commitments, the United States has engaged
with Governments, businesses and banks throughout
the world that have questions about our changed
sanctions environment.

To be clear, the deal has not resolved all of our
differences with Iran. We continue to be profoundly
concerned about human rights abuses that Iran commits
against its own people and the instability that Iran
continues to fuel through its destabilizing activities in
the region, including repeated threats against Israel.
But we are undoubtedly in a better place to address
these and other challenges without the threat of a
nuclear-armed Iran. The lines of communication that
we have developed with Iran over the course of our
negotiations have already proven useful to engaging
in other areas of vital interest, as occurred in January
when Iran detained ten United States sailors and two
United States naval vessels in the Persian Gulf. The
sailors were released in less than a day in no small
part because Secretary Kerry and Foreign Minister
Zarif are able to work constructively. Iran has joined
the International Syria Support Group, which is trying
to resolve the horrific conflict in Syria - a goal that
would be impossible without all the countries that are
involved in the conflict in Syria at the table.

In conclusion, as we all know, it took the P5+1,
the EU and Iran two years of gruelling negotiations
to reach a deal designed to address the international
community's concerns about Iran's nuclear programme.
At several points, negotiations nearly collapsed, owing
to distrust and the inability of participants to find
a compromise. But we persisted, knowing that the
instability that would come from a potential conflict
demanded that we exhaust all options in seeking an
effective diplomatic solution. The deal is a reminder
of what we can achieve when we come together to
confront shared threats and engage our adversaries
through robust, principled diplomacy.
Yet building on the progress made - progress that
critics of the deal said the world would never see - is not
guaranteed, and it is not irreversible. Rather, it continues
to depend on the willingness of the Security Council,
the Secretariat and each of our individual countries
to do their part in implementing the resolution. Our
collective security demands nothing less.

