Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank Nigeria for having taken the
initiative to convene this meeting on piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Toure and Mrs. Ukonga for their
briefings.

I would like to emphasize the following points.
First, the United Nations should pay particular
attention to piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. In recent
years, acts of piracy there have increased; there have
been more attacks, and the scope of those attacks has
worsened, as has the violence involved. This is a
serious threat to economic activity in the Gulf of
Guinea and to shipping security. It is therefore also a
threat to peace and security in the region. The coastal
States, regional organizations and the international
community must become fully aware of the seriousness
of the problem of piracy and take timely measures to
combat it and prevent a worsening of the situation.

Secondly, to deal with piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea, both underlying and ongoing causes must be
addressed. The international community and the
countries of the region must focus on the causes of
piracy and adopt an integrated strategy to effectively
maintain peace and stability in the countries of the
region, based upon capacity-building aimed at ensuring
peace and dealing with the economic situation of the
countries in the region. The international community
must play an active and constructive role in that
context.

Thirdly, the coastal States and international and
regional organizations must scale up coordination.
Given the many countries along the Gulf of Guinea
coast, combating piracy will require the efforts of all
States. China pays tribute to the joint patrols launched
by Nigeria and Benin and welcomes the efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States, the Gulf
of Guinea Commission and other regional
organizations to formulate a regional strategy to
combat piracy.

It is our hope that the countries concerned and
international organizations will enhance efforts to
coordinate their work. Assistance must also be
provided to combat piracy. China calls upon the
international community to provide the necessary
support to coastal States and regional organizations by
sharing information and experience and providing
technical assistance and capacity-building.

China welcomes the decision of the Secretary-
General to send a fact-finding mission to the Gulf of
Guinea and hopes that the he will be able to brief the
Security Council in a timely manner.

