At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this month and to wish you and your team every success. I would also like to thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing and her report, which she presented to the Council today. Today the Council has listened to Ms. Bensouda's briefing, which contained irrefutable and conclusive evidence of what we have discussed on several occasions - horrific violations, war crimes and crimes against humanity committed against innocent civilians, especially during the attack on Tripoli and its suburbs in April last year. It should once again be clear to everyone who was involved - who should, without a doubt, be held accountable. In discussing the investigation of the crimes and violations committed in Libya, we must reaffirm the principle of judicial complementarity between the Libyan judiciary and the International Criminal Court (ICC). We are committed to continuing to cooperate in accordance with resolution 1970 (2011) in order to hold accountable those outside the Government's control. In that regard, we would like to express our satisfaction with the progress on joint cooperation and the Council's response to our request for assistance in the investigation of all violations committed against civilians over the past years. In order to ensure the transparency of those investigations and the advanced technical capabilities they require, we have requested that the ICC and the Human Rights Council send fact-finding missions to investigate war crimes and violations against civilians resulting from the attack on Tripoli by Haftar's militias and mercenaries and the countries supporting him. According to the evidence-based reports of Ms. Bensouda, those crimes and violations include the shelling of residential neighbourhoods; the destruction of some 125,000 houses; the displacement of around 342,000 citizens; the deliberate targeting of hospitals and medical staff, educational institutions, energy and water sources, airports and ports and migrant shelters, as we saw in Tajoura; the shelling and killing of students of the military college in Tripoli; the laying of mines south of the capital, which continue to claim dozens of lives to this day; and, lastly and worst of all, the dozens of mass graves discovered in the city of Tarhouna, which were a shock and a tragedy for all. Nearly 200 bodies have been found so far, and more continue to be discovered. Most recently, five new graves were found near the link project in Tarhouna just last week. They contained families, including children and women, and the remains of victims who had been buried alive. I do not know what more the Council needs in order to hold accountable and punish the perpetrators. We all know full well who committed these crimes, who gave the orders to carry them out and who supported them with money and weapons. The Government has an obligation to the nation to uncover the truth of the violations and crimes committed and to hold to account the perpetrators and those responsible. There is no statute of limitations for these crimes. In that regard, we express our appreciation to the Human Rights Council, the International Criminal Court and other organizations that have already sent field teams and are helping us to uncover the facts, reveal who was involved and hold them to account. In that context, I would like to welcome the reference in Ms. Bensouda's report to the significant progress made in the investigations following the recent field missions conducted by the investigation team to Libya. We appreciate the team's praise of the assistance provided to it by the Government and reaffirm that we are always ready to cooperate with the Prosecutor, in accordance with the memorandum of understanding signed between the two sides. It has become obvious from our examination of the report that there is clear evidence of who was behind many of the crimes and violations, evidence on the basis of which charges can be brought. We express our appreciation and respect for the measures taken by the Court, including its biannual report on Libya, but we emphasize the need to expedite the investigations and announce their results exceptionally quickly, rather than wait another six months. The issuance of arrest warrants for those who committed the crimes, gave orders to commit them or supported them internally or externally, or for those who refuse to hand over the perpetrators, particularly in relation to the mass graves in Tarhouna, must also be expedited. That is the least that can be done for the victims' families and communities. A year and a half after the attack on Tripoli, no one has yet been charged, despite all the evidence presented in your reports. In this regard, we remind the Court that violations and crimes were not committed only in connection with the attack on Tripoli. Before that came the shelling of civilians in Murzuq, murders and executions in the field, and concealment and forced displacement, as happened in Benghazi, Darnah, Ajdabiya and Sirt. There was also the displacement that affected our people in the east for years, and the murder and abduction of women, such as Siham Sergewa and Maqboula Al-Hassi, whose fate remains unknown to this day, and, before them, the murder of Salwa Buqu'ayqays. Most recently came the horrific crime that took place just hours ago in the heart of Benghazi, in broad daylight and in plain sight: the murder by gunmen of the activist Hanan Al-Bar'asi, simply for criticizing Haftar's militias and his children. In conclusion, although today's session is dedicated to the briefing of the International Criminal Court, it coincides with the beginning of the political dialogue hosted by our sister country Tunisia and the resumption of the military track today in Sirt. These dialogues, which come at a critical time in the Libyan crisis, are certainly better than the sound of guns and bloodshed. While we affirm our support for all domestic and international efforts that contribute to finding peaceful solutions to the crisis, we hope that these efforts will be far removed from external dictates and interventions and from any form of tutelage. Libyans alone should have the right to determine their fate and all active forces should have the right to representation and participation. We affirm that, regardless of the results of these dialogues, and of their course and representatives, there will be no reconciliation or genuine social peace without the establishment of the principle of accountability, the realization of transitional justice, the payment of reparations and the elimination of impunity for anyone involved in the killing of Libyans and the commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity. There can be no peace without justice.
