Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I thank you, Mr. President,
for remaining in the Chamber and listening to
the non-members of the Security Council as well.
I would like to take this opportunity to say that
Hungary appreciates the intense work led by Japan
as former Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, and
that of countries currently represented on the Council,
as the wider United Nations membership benefits from
the recently adopted note by the President S/2017/507,
which not only provides the most complete summary
of the Council's working methods thus far but also
introduces many important developments.

First of all, we congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
I believe that it is unique that you are affording us the
time to talk about this matter in the Security Council.
In order to join forces in trying to find ways and means
to shape a more effective Council, let me reiterate the
views of Hungary while fully supporting the statement
that will be delivered on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group.

Hungary acknowledges the efforts to achieve
greater transparency and consistency when it comes
to the relationship between the Security Council
and the General Assembly. However, we believe
that current practices and measures should be used
more effectively in some areas. The Council's annual
report to the General Assembly should contain a more
analytical, substantive and comprehensive evaluation
of its work. The inclusion of the topic in the updated
note by the President S/2017/507 is a step forward,
but there is still room for the Council to continue to
expand consultations and cooperation to non-Council
members, in particular troop- and police-contributing
countries, and to regional organizations.

We highly appreciate the fact that the Secretary-
General, in his letter addressed to the President of the
Council of 2 September 2017 (S/2017/753), urged the
international community to take concerted efforts to
prevent further escalation of the crisis in Myanmar, as
we support a proactive role for the Security Council
and consider it very important. We strongly support the
proposal that the Council increase the number ofpublic
meetings, interactive briefings, informative interactive
dialogues and Arria Formula meetings. More wrap-
up sessions would enhance the flow of substantive
information, and thereby assist the wider membership
to better understand the Council's positions. We
welcome the developments concerning the adoption
of the outcomes of open debates. We encourage the
Council to take into account the contributions made by
non-members.

We believe that the Council should use existing
tools to prevent mass atrocities, and take into account
the results ofthe 2015 review processes ofpeacekeeping,
peacebuilding and women and peace and security.
That would improve the Council's response to atrocity
crimes and give it an opportunity to emerge from its
self-imposed silos.
As a member of the Accountability, Coherency and
Transparency group and one of the 114 signatories, to
date, of the code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes, Hungary advocates for refraining voluntarily
from the use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities. We
encourage all Member States that have not yet done so
to support the initiative.

The role of the International Criminal Court is vital
to ending impunity and bringing perpetrators to justice
when national mechanisms for criminal accountability
are not available or not satisfactory. The Security
Council is given a special role under the Rome Statute,
as it can refer situations involving non-State parties
to the Court in order to hold perpetrators to account.
Given the privileged role of the Council in the Rome
Statute system, the Council should utilize its referral
power in a consistent manner to ensure accountability
and justice whenever necessary. Overall, the Council
should also aim for more clear-cut communication to
clearly convey its work to the outside world.

We would like to conclude by calling for the
fullest possible implementation of existing measures
and improved measures that further strengthen the
Council's working methods, with a View to making sure
no drawback is possible.

