Mr. Abrams (United States of America): I
would like to respond briefly to the remarks of the
representative of the Russian Federation.

I think we are all aware of efforts that are being
made - far away from here, in Hanoi - over the
next couple of days to solve some problems that arose
during the Cold War. But that is not the rhetoric that
we heard in the Council today. We heard a lot of Cold
War rhetoric - the kind of rhetoric that we used to hear
when that sign said not "Russian Federation" but "Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics". It is a bit surprising.

First of all, what the United States did in providing
aid or attempting to provide aid was done at the request
of the legitimate Government - the legitimate interim
President of Venezuela, Juan Guaido, who requested
such aid from the international community. The Russian
representative said that his country delivered aid, but I
wonder how much of that aid will get to the people of
Venezuela, because it was not delivered to the people.
It was delivered to the regime, which will take it, and
we will never know how much of it was sold through
corrupt practices and how much of it was simply given
to supporters of the regime.

Then we heard a good deal about the freezing of
accounts and about gold. Here, I think we get to the
heart of the matter, which is that a lot of money is owed
to Russia and it is no doubt worrying whether that
money is going to be repaid. Well, my answer is - not
if this economy is driven further into the ground. The
only way the debts that are owed by Venezuela will ever
be repaid is if the economy can once again grow and if
this terrible period of decline, which has impoverished
what was once the richest country in Latin America,
can be brought to an end.

Finally, I would just say that I reject
completely - from start to finish and from top to
bottom - accusations of military intervention from a
country that is occupying the territory of Georgia and
Ukraine, in South Ossetia and Abkhazia and in Crimea,
respectively. We do not accept such accusations in this
situation; I reject them completely and I am amazed to
hear them in the Council.

