Austria would like to thank France for convening this open debate. We commend the work of Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the Secretary- General for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF, the Department of Peace Operations and the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, as well as the relevant civil society organizations. We also thank Mariam from Mali for her participation and her calls for more action to protect children in armed conflict. Austria fully aligns itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the European Union and of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and shares the following points in its national capacity. We thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/525). Our support for the Security Council's children and armed conflict mandate is steadfast. We need to rely on and preserve its integrity and impartiality to ensure the listing of all perpetrators of grave violations against children, based on the objective findings of the monitoring and report mechanism and on the criteria for listing and delisting established in the Secretary-General's report contained in document S/2010/181 of 2010. The 25,000 grave violations against children documented in the report and committed by all parties to conflict, both armed groups as well as Government forces, include multiple denials of humanitarian access to provide assistance to children are appalling. The reported increase in attacks against schools, hospitals and protected personnel is also deeply concerning. These breaches of international humanitarian law, international human rights law and refugee law need to be investigated and condemned. Austria is convinced that parties to conflict can prevent crimes against children and protect children by abiding by their obligations under international law as well as the comprehensive set of existing principles and commitments aimed at protecting boys and girls affected by the scourge of war. We encourage all Member States not yet having done so to adhere to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, and the Safe Schools Declaration. We welcome the adoption of several new actions plans by parties to conflict as well as measures to enforce criminal justice to protect children in armed conflict. We call for enhanced accountability, including by introducing laws to criminalize grave violations against children. Austria would like to take this opportunity to reiterate its full and unwavering support for the International Criminal Court and highlight its importance for the rule of law, accountability and the fight against impunity for the most serious crimes of concern to the international community as a whole. We need to address the high number of children killed and maimed due to the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. In October 2019, Austria therefore organized an international conference to raise awareness of the humanitarian impact of the use of the use of explosive weapons in populated areas, which started a process of the elaboration of a political declaration on that subject. The participation of 133 States, international organizations and civil society organizations underscored the importance attached to this matter. We are strongly supportive of the process and hope for a strong political declaration. We express our serious concern that children allegedly associated with non- State armed groups are too often perceived and treated as perpetrators rather than victims of grave violations. States need to ensure alternatives to detention and prosecution, whereas the impartial monitoring and reporting on the detention of children needs to continue. In this regard, Austria welcomes the 2019 United Nations Global Study on Children Deprived of Liberty. The Austrian Development Cooperation supports projects seeking to reduce the threat of violence against children. At present, the Austrian Development Cooperation is carrying out a project in the Sudan, where parties to the Darfur conflict receive training on the rights of the child. This project also supports the Child Protection Unit of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur in facilitating dialogue between the conflict parties. It is estimated that 2.4 million children in Darfur will indirectly benefit from this project, which seeks to contribute to the reduction of the six grave violations against children. For example, in 2019, representatives from rebel groups from Darfur were invited to Austria in order to provide them with a "safe space" for exchange and to foster dialogue, not least about children's rights. As a result, a joint declaration on explosive remnants of war and the situation of internally displaced persons in Darfur/the Sudan was signed. Reintegration and education programmes are of paramount importance in creating sustainable peace for every individual child and for the communities affected by conflict. In this context, it is important to provide assistance and support to children without parental care in armed conflict. Austria recalls, in this context, the most recent General Assembly resolution on children without parental care, resolution 74/133, and invites all Member States to follow up with its implementation. Foster parent programmes can serve as a best practice to allow children to find a new home and family. Austria particularly welcomes the engagement of the civil society organizations, such as SOS Children's Villages, in this field. Finally, the monitoring and reporting mechanism has yielded important results for the past 15 years in collecting evidence and information on the six grave violations against children. We pay tribute to the members of the country task forces of the monitoring and reporting mechanism, who collect this information, often risking their lives. The data generated through the monitoring and reporting mechanism has fostered accountability and helped the United Nations to engage with parties to conflict in elaborating action plans. We need the monitoring and reporting mechanism to remain the objective basis of information for the children and armed conflict mandate of the United Nations. Austria will continue to advocate in the General Assembly for a sufficient level of financing for United Nations child protection advisors to support the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the children and armed conflict mandate.
