The President: I thank the Secretary of State of
the United States of America for his important
statement.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf ofthe Council:

"The Security Council meets today in
remembrance and resolve. One year ago,
infamous and horrifying acts of terrorism took
almost 3,000 innocent lives. They included
nationals of half the countries of the world. These
attacks changed the way we see our world. Today,
the Council honours those innocents killed and
injured in the attacks of 11 September 2001. The
Council expresses solidarity with their families.

"New York is the home of the United
Nations. The Security Council admires this city's
determination to forge ahead, to rebuild, not to
give in to terrorism. The deaths and destruction of
11 September strengthen our common bonds and
aspirations. The Council affirms that these attacks
were an assault on global civilization and our
common efforts to make the world a better and
safer place. The world saw terrorists use civilian
aircraft for mass murder. They struck at the ideals
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations.
The attacks challenged each Member to rise to
the task of defeating terrorism, which has claimed
victims in all corners of the world.

"Following 11 September 2001, both the
General Assembly and the Security Council
reacted in outrage and condemnation. They
demanded that those responsible for these crimes
be brought to justice. The Council described such
acts, like any acts of international terrorism, as
threats to international peace and security.

"The international community has
responded to the atrocities of 11 September 2001
with unyielding determination. A broad coalition
of states has taken action against the Taliban, Al-
Qaida and their supporters. It did so in defence of
common values and common security. Consistent
with the high purposes of this institution and the
provisions of the United Nations Charter the
coalition continues to pursue those responsible.

"The international community as a whole
provides vital support as Afghans rebuild their
country. The Council applauds the efforts of so
many from every continent and corner of the
world. And today, the Council also honours those
who died in this common effort.

"The Security Council gave substance to its
determination to combat international terrorism
with its historic resolution 1373 (2001). In it, we
made the fight against terrorism a mandatory
obligation of the international community,
consistent with the United Nations Charter and
international law. The Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee promotes cooperation and
works to achieve the effective implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). The Council has also
established and oversees the worldwide sanctions
regime against Al-Qaida and the Taliban.

"The Security Council calls on all States
and regional and subregional organizations to
carry forward and build on their cooperation with
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Committee established by resolution 1267 (1999)
ofthe Security Council.

"The threat is real, the challenge is
enormous, and the fight against terrorism will be
long. The Security Council will remain steadfast
against the threat that endangers all that has been
achieved, and all that remains to be achieved, to
fulfil the principles and purposes of the United
Nations for all people everywhere.

"Now let us remember and reflect with a
minute of silence."

The Council observed a minute ofsilence.

The President: This statement will be issued as a

document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2002/25.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15pm.

