Mr. Ipo (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to express the regrets of Ambassador
Adom, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), for
being unable to attend today's meeting. I will make this
statement on his behalf.

"I have the honour to address the members
of the Security Council in my capacity as Chair
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the
Central African Republic, to review the activities
of the Committee since my previous briefing to the
Council, on 23 October 2018 (see S/PV.8378).

"During 2018, the Central African Republic
saw some encouraging changes, including the
signing of the peace agreement between the
Government and 14 armed groups, thanks to the
sustained efforts of the African Union through the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic, supported by the
United Nations and other regional and international
actors. The Committee is committed to providing
all possible support within its mandate to ensure
the implementation of this Agreement, as well
as compliance with its provisions by the Central
African Republic's stakeholders, including, where

appropriate, through the Security Council measures
mentioned in the peace agreement.

"As we all know, given the current context, the
level ofviolence in the Central African Republic has
not decreased. The number of internally displaced
persons and refugees continues to increase, and
civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian workers
have been regularly attacked by destructive armed
groups that are guilty of acts subject to sanctions.

"Since my previous briefing to the Council,
in October 2018, the Committee has held four
meetings: on 12 November and 7 December 2018
and on 21 and 29 January 2019. The Committee
also intends to meet on 22 February to discuss the
Panel of Expert's findings. Press releases on these
meetings are available on the Committee's website.

"The Committee held these meetings with the
aim of advancing the implementation of sanctions
and working more closely with key partners and
stakeholders. On 12 November, I convened a
meeting of the Committee to present the report of
my visit to the Central African Republic from 2 to
5 October 2018. This visit allowed me to continue
discussions with the Central African authorities
on a number of issues of importance to both the
Government and the Committee.

"As I indicated in my report, one of the main
concerns of the Central African Government is the
arms embargo imposed on it and which it demands
be lifted. This point was raised by the President and
the Prime Minister and by others we met, including
representatives of civil society. In essence, these
representatives requested that the import of arms
and related materiel by the Government should no
longer be subject to the Committee's approval.

"I have taken the opportunity of my meetings
with members of the Government to express to them
the concerns raised by the relevant actors about the
Central African Republic's difficulties in ensuring
the proper management of arms and ammunition on
its territory, and the fact that the lifting of the arms
embargo could facilitate the proliferation of arms
in the country. I also discussed with the national
authorities the applicable exemption procedures
and visited the capital's weapons and ammunition
storage sites to get an idea of the country's current
arms management efforts.

"On 7 December 2018, I held informal

consultations of the Committee to discuss the final
report of the Panel of Experts before it was sent
to the President of the Council on 14 December
and issued as a Council document (S/20l8/1119).
During the meeting, the Panel of Experts provided
an overview of its report and informed the
Committee of developments since its issuance.
While welcoming the African Union Initiative,
the Panel expressed concern about the continuing
violence and violations of the sanctions regime
in the Central African Republic. The Panel also
reported that armed groups continue to benefit from
the country's natural resources, and that livestock
transhumance and trade play a central role in the
financing strategies of some of these groups.

"On 21 January, at the request of the Central
African authorities, I convened a meeting of the
Committee from Bangui by video tele-conference
to discuss concerns regarding the arms embargo
with a Central African delegation led by the
Minister of Defence. During that meeting,
Government representatives informed the
Committee of the challenges that the arms embargo
created for the country, highlighted the progress
made in the management of arms and ammunition,
and reiterated their call for the Government to be
exempted from the arms embargo in order to protect
the population. The members of the Committee
welcomed the progress announced by the Central
African Republic, which delegations took into
account in the preparations for the negotiations on
the renewal of the sanctions regime by the members
of the Security Council.

"As Council members know, the Council took
action in this regard by adopting, on 31 January,
resolution 2454 (2019), in which it expressed,
for example, its intention to review, before
30 September 2019, the arms embargo measures
imposed on the Government of the Central African
Republic, in the light of the benchmarks to be
defined and the assessments that will be conducted.

"Finally, on 29 January, in accordance with
established practice to strengthen cooperation
with States in the region, I invited them, together
with all other interested States, to a briefing of
the Committee on the final report of the Panel of
Experts. During the meeting, the Coordinator of
the Panel of Experts presented an overview of the
report and its recommendations, and the States
present expressed their views.

"In conclusion, I announce my intention to
visit the Central African Republic again this
year in order to engage directly in a frank and
open dialogue with the relevant interlocutors on
the ground, to communicate the importance of
full implementation of sanctions, to stress that
any sanctions regime should be reviewed and
adapted periodically, according to the situation
on the ground, and to define the applicable
exemption procedures."

