Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We would like at
the outset to convey our appreciation to Ms. Louise
Frechette, Deputy Secretary-General, for her statement
earlier this morning. We found Ambassador Olara
Otunnu's rich and substantive introduction of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2000/712) to be very
valuable. The statement by Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), outlined what is being done on this
matter at the field level, and also what needs to be
done.

Children are the most helpless victims of
conflicts. Not only are they disproportionately affected
by war and violence, they are often compelled to
perpetrate atrocities against others. Denied the
protection of traditional institutions such as the family,
and faced with societal breakdown and the erosion of
values and the rule of law, children suffer lasting
adverse developmental consequences; this affects
peace and stability for generations to come. It is
encouraging to see that awareness about the damaging
impact of armed conflict on children has significantly
increased in the past four years, since the publication
of the Graca Machel report on that subject (A/51/306).
The Council's resolution 1261 (1999) has added
strength to the actions needed in this area.

Sadly, action to address the problem has yet to
match the increased awareness. It is in that context that
we very much welcome the report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict, presented both
to the General Assembly and to the Security Council.
To our satisfaction, we find that the report focuses on
action-oriented recommendations that we believe go to
what can be called the "heart of darkness" of this issue.
We have gone through the recommendations very
carefully and have noted the areas on which the
Council should pronounce itself and adopt specific
actions. Let me highlight some of those areas.

Last May, the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, was adopted
by the General Assembly. That was most certainly a
welcome development and added to existing
international instruments that address this issue.
However, as the Secretary-General mentioned in his
report, if the impressive array of humanitarian and
human rights standards intended to protect children
from armed conflict were universally and seriously
respected, the protection of children would be largely
assured.

How then to ensure that the international
standards are respected? One obstacle that persists is
the matter of how to ensure compliance by non-State
armed groups. As these days the nature of conflicts
tends to be intra-State, this question is becoming more
and more important. These groups violate human rights
standards, disregard international norms and perpetrate
violence, including mutilations, rape and abductions,
and international instruments seldom cover them
adequately. True, there is a move to hold the leaders of
such armed groups accountable, but we must be careful
that in holding leaders accountable we do not grant
impunity to the rank and file. Our responsibility cannot
stop with the leaders alone. There must be justice for
the victim and punishment for all perpetrators. The
Security Council must make it absolutely clear that
individuals committing atrocities will be brought to
book.

The second point that I would like to make in this
regard concerns the recommendations in the report
with regard to corporate sector activities and
initiatives. Useful approaches have been suggested that
merit further consideration, including legislative
measures and voluntary codes of conduct for
businesses. We see the Council's leading role in this
regard as seeing to it that, on the one hand, legitimate
business interests are not affected and, on the other,
that blanket commercial bans are not applied to
countries, while keeping the focus squarely on the
plight of children all the time.

In all that we do we must ensure that mechanisms
are in place to monitor and assess the impact of
initiatives we take for children. This is very important
for learning lessons from shortcomings, mistakes and
failures. The Council should encourage the United
Nations agencies on the ground and civil society actors
to put in place such mechanisms. One area where we
have learned of children's suffering is under sanctions
regimes. These unintended effects of sanctions must be
mitigated. The Council has a duty to design sanctions
regimes that do not affect the innocent.

Important work is being done by regional and
subregional organizations in Africa, Central America
and the Asia-Pacific region for promoting the cause of
children affected by armed conflicts. Quite often,
affected regions are in an advantageous position to
develop practical approaches and norms that can
contribute to global efforts. The Security Council
should encourage such initiatives. In this context we
welcome the idea of declaring child-soldier-free zones
in all parts of the world.

Non-governmental organizations and other civil
society actors, including traditional institutions such as
the family and indigenous conflict-prevention
institutions, can play a leading role in stopping and
preventing suffering of children. Children themselves
should be allowed to play a greater role in
peacemaking and conflict-prevention and should be
provided with education to better develop their
potential. The Arria formula meeting that the Council
held yesterday under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Andjaba was remarkable in terms of contents and
sharing of ideas. We hope such consultations with our
non-governmental organization partners will be held
more often.

This brings me to the greater question of
regeneration of traditional values and norms that are
eroded in a conflict situation. Local institutions and
organizations would have a leading role in this regard.
Governments would have to nurture the sustainability
of their efforts through legal and administrative
frameworks conducive to facilitating their work.
International actors have a great responsibility for
providing resources and developing the capacity of
these institutions.

The Security Council has already called for a
culture of prevention. This culture of prevention stems
from traditional values, norms and institutions and is
nurtured by a culture of peace. I cannot overemphasize
the importance of a culture of peace for the children. If
children were inculcated with a culture of peace
through education, advocacy and practice, they would
not perpetuate the cycle of violence that turns today's
children into tomorrow's perpetrators. Activities by the
United Nations and other organizations in post-conflict
situations have to address the need to promote a culture
of peace through coordinated efforts, and the Security
Council should stress the importance of such a culture.

In conclusion, let me mention a great contribution
made by Ambassador Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, as advocate, activist and leader in
addressing the plight of children in conflict situations. I
would be remiss if I did not mention the substantive
work of UNICEF in advancing the cause of children all
over the world, as well as that of other United Nations
agencies in the field and civil society actors.

Our special thanks go to you, Madam President,
for putting much-needed stress on the issue of children
and armed conflict during the presidency of Jamaica.
We consider that today's meeting will put forth ideas
that will be crystalized in concrete actions in a focused
and action-oriented Security Council resolution.

To be true to all the important statements we
make today in the Council, let us embark on an era of
application, as called for by the Secretary-General.

