Mr. Tello (Mexico)(interpretation from Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. I also wish to
congratulate your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Gabon, who presided with great skill
over the work of the Council in February, a month
characterized by intensive activity.
 

My delegation is participating in this debate today to
reaffirm Mexico's unswerving commitment to the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter. The history of
the Organization has undoubtedly recorded successes and
failures, stagnation and creative spirit. We are gathered here
today to pay tribute to diplomacy, to bear witness to the
glowing possibilities still offered by the Charter and its
institutions.

Mexico is a country firmly convinced that the peaceful
resolution of disputes must prevail at all times as a means
of choice to reconcile differences and foster understanding.
This is one of the immutable principles governing my
country's foreign policy, principles that are rooted in our
history and peaceful tradition and are enshrined in our
Constitution.

Mexico wishes to express once again its gratitude for
the steps taken by various countries and organizations to
reach a diplomatic solution to the dispute that arose with
respect to United Nations inspections in Iraq.

My Government has already expressed its full support
for and solidarity with the delicate and crucial mission
undertaken by Mr. Kofi Annan, Secretary-General of our
Organization, to find a political solution that would ensure
full compliance with United Nations resolutions and avoid
the use of force. For that reason, I am most pleased to
extend my sincere congratulations to the Secretary-General.
His mission, of course, had considerable means and
expressions of broad support, but his talent, skill and
perseverance showed the valued of diplomacy and raised
high the name of the United Nations.

The agreement reached, thanks to the Secretary-
General's endeavours with the highest authorities of the
Government of Iraq, contains the commitments necessary
to give full effect to the resolutions of the Security Council.
My Government welcomes this outcome. We trust that the
Government of Iraq will show good faith and will adhere
to the obligations entered into. This undoubtedly constitutes
the best path towards a new approach to international peace
and security: replacing acts of defiance and force with
measures to foster peaceful coexistence and make it
possible, respect for international law and negotiated
solutions to disputes.

The ideals of San Francisco are alive and well. Recent
events have shown that we can and should aspire to
civilized coexistence among the peoples of the earth, a
coexistence in which arguments of reason, equality, justice,
democracy and law prevail. The United Nations continues
to be the pre-eminent forum of human society in which to
achieve that objective.

