Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates Nigeria's initiative to hold this
debate on the maintenance of international peace and
security and security sector reform (SSR). I welcome
His Excellency Mr. Olugbenga Ashiru, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, to our meeting today to lead
our debate. I also welcome the statement made by
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous.

SSR is a part of the United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. Over the years, the United
Nations has made positive efforts to assist post-conflict
countries in SSR, in particular African countries,
producing good results. As United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations evolve,
how to assist the countries concerned in conducting
SSR more effectively and viably is an important topic
facing the international community. I would like to
focus on the following points.

First, SSR should be based on the leadership of
the countries concerned and fully take into account
their national circumstances and special needs. The
efforts of the international community should focus on
providing assistance and advice and helping those
countries enhance their capacity-building efforts. Such
efforts should also respect their will.

Secondly, SSR should serve the purpose of the
long-term stability and security of the countries
concerned and their sustainable development. It should
focus on restoring law and order through reforms and
ensuring stability and security for the people.
Moreover, SSR should enable armed forces and the
police and other sectors to participate in national
institution-building to maintain social order and to
promote economic development.

Thirdly, SSR should support a comprehensive
peacekeeping and peacebuilding strategy. SSR should
be well-coordinated with, and complement the efforts
to promote, reconciliation, rehabilitate the economy,
promote the rule of law and protect human rights.

Fourthly, SSR should benefit from the mediation
efforts of the international community. The United
Nations should draw on years of successful
peacekeeping and peacebuilding experience to
formulate a comprehensive strategy to help the
countries concerned in conducting SSR and act as a
good coordinator. The General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Secretariat should
pull together and build synergies. The United Nations
should also strengthen its coordination and
communications with the relevant regional and
subregional organizations.

China supports the draft presidential statement
submitted by Nigeria.

