Mexico thanks Indonesia for having convened this debate on the links between international terrorism and transnational organized crime. This is an excellent opportunity to analyse two different phenomena, with different legal frameworks, that manifest in different ways in national and regional contexts. Terrorism always represents a threat to international peace and security. We have seen how this phenomenon affects the stability of States, the development and well-being of their societies and the security of their inhabitants. In recent years, some terrorist organizations have used financing methods that are characteristic of transnational organized crime, including money-laundering, arms trafficking and human trafficking. However, an empirical analysis of the motives underlying the links between terrorism and organized crime reveals particularities in each national context. It is important to avoid generalizations that do not benefit national actions aimed at addressing both phenomena and international cooperation efforts in those areas. The common denominator of States' actions must be the application of the law and full respect for international law and human rights. It is necessary to prevent and combat these multidimensional phenomena in accordance with the law. The Secretary-General's report (S/2020/754) mandated by resolution 2482 (2019) provides an account of this as well as of the need to strengthen a pragmatic approach between the areas of security, financial intelligence and law enforcement. Likewise, it shows that beyond the measures that some States have adopted and the actions described by United Nations entities, the links that may exist between both phenomena remain to be documented and better understood. We must strengthen measures to prevent the financial flows derived from the illegal activities of transnational organized crime from promoting the activities of terrorist organizations. Sharing information among Government institutions will translate into better-informed and coordinated responses for the prevention of and an effective combat against illicit activities. It is vital at all times to fully respect the applicable legal framework and to refrain from applying anti-terrorist measures to other criminal acts in a generalized manner. Mexico deems necessary a more in-depth understanding of specific cases on the Council's agenda in which there may be an intersection between terrorist groups and transnational organized crime. For example, illicit financial flows and easy access to high-calibre weapons can benefit both transnational organized-crime groups and armed or terrorist groups. We must continue to promote international cooperation, including the universalization of existing mechanisms to prevent the diversion and illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons. Mexico condemns the fact that some terrorist groups are taking advantage of the pandemic to advance their agendas and reiterates the importance of respecting human rights at all times when addressing the challenges posed by this health crisis.
