The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

I will start off where Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
ended and thank you, Mr. Grandi, for your work. You
work to assist people who are in very dire circumstances.
Our colleague of the Dominican Republic gave
examples from all over the world. When we talk about
70 million refugees, we are talking about the fate of
70 million individuals - children, women and men.
Therefore, we encourage him to continue his work. He
always radiates hope and optimism. I think that that
is the only way to survive the challenge. But, we need
that. I ask that he please continue his work. Germany
will always support him. We try to be a reliable partner.
In 2018, I believe, we were the second-largest donor to
the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees. As
others have requested, I ask that he please convey to
all his staff our admiration and support for all they do.

As our French, Belgian and American colleagues
have said, the Global Compact for Refugees is a true
milestone and shows the capacity of the multilateral
system to tackle highly complex issues. The key, as
the High Commissioner said, is shared solidarity
and, as others here have said, equitable burden- and
responsibility-sharing. The proof of the pudding is in
the eating. We have to talk about implementation.

With regard to host countries, like others before
me, I would like to underline how much we value the
actions of Syria's neighbours - Jordan, Lebanon,
Turkey, Egypt. We also value the actions of Bangladesh
and Venezuela's neighbours, from Colombia to Peru
to Ecuador. Such action is extremely important. It is
also very important for refugees to be given a chance
because it allows them to return to their homeland.
When they are in third countries, it is less likely that
will return to their homes. We subscribe to what
Mr. Grandi and others have said with regard to returns.
Returns must be voluntary, safe, dignified and well-
informed. We also had a discussion regarding Rukban.
Russia and the Office of the High Commissioner for
Refugees must work closely to guarantee that returns
occur as described previously and that returnees do
not face arrest or forced conscription or find their
homes expropriated.

With respect to Libya's dreadful situation, I would
encourage the High Commissioner to remain engaged
and to stay there. There is one phenomenon in Libya I
would like to highlight. It is the fate ofwomen, children
and refugees. They are the most vulnerable, in Libya,
certainly, and in other places. We support what the
High Commissioner is doing and ask that he put special
emphasis on the fate of those refugees.

I would like to end by touching on Myanmar. Can
the High Commissioner say a bit more about the 34
projects? What do they entail? Can we build on them?

With respect to Bangladesh, I would like to pay
tribute to what that country, which is not one of the
richest on the planet, is doing. What is the situation of
the refugees there? I have also heard that they may be
placed on an island. What would the dangers be then for
the refugees in Bangladesh? What can or must be done
to support them?

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I would like to thank everybody again for having
observed the hourglass. In response to my Russian
colleague and his horizontal proposal, this approach was
used by the Foreign Minister of Haiti (see S/PV.8502),
but I think we can function without using the hourglass
horizontally. I also thank everyone for all the questions
that have been raised. There were so many of them.

I do not know if the High Commissioner shares my
enthusiasm about the number of questions, but I now
give him the floor to respond.

