Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing.

Over the past few months, we have witnessed
seismic shifts across the Middle East. There have been
tragic events, the loss of innocent lives and
Governments' brutal repression of aspirations to
change. However, there has also been the inspirational
determination of people to struggle for their universal
rights against seemingly insurmountable obstacles. The
key lesson has been that people's aspiration to freedom
cannot be crushed. The only credible answer to
legitimate popular demands is sustainable reform.

As we speak, events continue to unfold across the
region, including in Yemen and Syria. We
unequivocally condemn the violence against and,
indeed, the killing of peaceful demonstrators by the
security forces of both countries. Both Governments
must respect the right to peaceful protest and free
speech, address the legitimate aspirations of the
protesters, bring forward the reforms that have been
promised by Presidents Saleh and Al-Assad, and ensure
that those reforms mark the start of a sustainable
transition to new political systems that meet the
aspirations of their people.

Such events in the wider Middle East are relevant
to the efforts to find a long-term solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. Just as populations in the region are
finding their voices and, in some cases, winning their
rights, Palestinians, too, must realize their goal for a
viable independent State of Palestine. It would be a great
shame and, indeed, a source of continued instability if
the hopes of the Palestinian people were left unfulfilled
while the region is transformed around them.

It is therefore crucial that urgent progress in the
peace process be made. We are fast approaching
September, which is the time frame set out by
President Obama and the Quartet to welcome Palestine
as a full Member of the United Nations, and the month
that will mark the completion of the Palestinian
Authority's State-building programme. If progress is to
be made, the current impasse must be broken. The
parties should commit to a new phase of direct
negotiations. In order for negotiations to be credible,
they must be based on a clearly articulated set of
parameters that are well known to us all: two States
based on the 1967 borders with equivalent land swaps;
security arrangements that protect Palestinian
sovereignty, while also providing sufficient assurance
to Israel; Jerusalem as the capital of both States; and a
just solution for refugees.

For there to be credible progress, the leaders of
both parties must do more to narrow the gulf between
them and to counter the growing lack of trust. I would
highlight three points.

First, they must do more to avoid violence,
strengthen accountability, reduce tensions and avoid
further loss of innocent lives. The recent escalation in
violence is of great concern and only serves to widen
the gulf between Palestinians and Israelis. The surge in
rocket attacks from Gaza that have injured Israeli
citizens has to stop. Those responsible for the recent
attacks on a Jerusalem bus station and an Israeli school
bus must be brought to justice. Israel has a right to
defend its citizens, but it must take care to avoid
civilian casualties. As we have heard, action in Gaza
over the past month has killed 18 civilians, including
four children.

Secondly, settlement activity, which has
continued apace in the West Bank and East Jerusalem,
must stop. It is illegal and undermines trust and the
prospects for peace. We condemn Israel's decision to
approve more than 900 settlement units in Gilo and the
retrospective approval for construction in five West
Bank settlements. The Israeli authorities should
reconsider their decisions.

Thirdly, there needs to be improved access to
Gaza. Its isolation only breeds radicalism, extremism
and violence. However, the answer is not more
flotillas, which are likely only to provoke violence and
do not provide a solution. Israel must speed up the
approvals process for international projects and move
forward with the proposal of the Office of the Quartet
Representative for imports of construction materials by
private companies.

Skepticism about the prospects for peace in the
Middle East is not in short supply, but it is incumbent
upon both Israeli and Palestinian leaders to look
beyond immediate obstacles, to rise above domestic
pressures and to give their people a sense of optimism
for the future. As I said at the start, the lesson of the
past months across the Middle East has been that
people's demands cannot be crushed. Each country in
the region faces a unique set of circumstances, but at
the very core of all the protests has been a desire for
basic freedoms. Those aspirations must be met. That is
as true for Palestinians as it is for Libyans, Tunisians,
Egyptians, Yemenis or Syrians.

