Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia very much
welcomes the opportunity today, especially under the
Nigerian presidency, to discuss this critical issue before
the Council. First, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General, the High Commission for Human Rights, Ms.
Pillay, and the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Sir John Holmes, for their
presentations. It is essential, of course, that the Council
and the United Nations system generally keep this
compelling matter within its sights. I especially want to
recognize the role of Under-Secretary-General Holmes
in helping candidly to keep us honest about this
imperative, which, of course, goes to the core of why
we created the United Nations.

The presentations today remind us tellingly that
the plight of civilians in modern conflict remains very
dire. From the numbers of internally displaced persons
to the horrifying statistics on sexual violence, it is very
clear that the international community needs to do
much more to ensure that innocent and vulnerable
civilians in armed conflict situations are protected.

Given today's time constraints, I would like to
focus my remarks on one aspect discussed in the
briefings - the issue of protection of civilians in the
context of peacekeeping operations. When the Council
debated this issue in November last year (see S/PV.6216), there was still a wide gap in the
understanding among Member States of the meaning of
protection of civilians in the context of a peacekeeping
operation. The development of a draft operational
concept late last year in response to calls from the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the Security Council in its resolution 1894 (2009) was
a significant step forward in closing that gap, although
more needs to be done. This year, the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations subsequently
requested the Secretariat to develop a strategic
framework which, importantly, will contain elements
and parameters for mission-specific strategies to guide
senior mission leadership, to develop training modules,
and to outline resource and capability requirements.

As part of Australia's own continuing
engagement on this practical agenda, we have been
pleased to engage with other Member States to further
contribute to the efforts of peacekeepers to protect
civilians. In January, we were pleased to again partner
with Uruguay in hosting a workshop here in New York
to discuss the recommendations of the independent
study - jointly commissioned by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs - on the
protection of civilians. In April, as one of 17 member
countries of the Challenges Partnership, Australia
hosted the third International Forum for the Challenges
of Peace Operations, which examined the challenges of
strengthening the protection of civilians in
multidimensional peace operations. And most recently,
we have been very pleased to support the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, United
Nations Action Against Sexual Violence and the DPKO
in the development of an analytical inventory for
peacekeepers to respond to conflict-related sexual
violence. The inventory was launched here in New
York last week.

As noted by the Joint Special Representative for
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, Mr. Gambari, at the recent General Assembly
thematic debate on peacekeeping, regional
organizations have a critical role to play in
peacekeeping efforts. Australia has been pleased to
work with the African Union (AU) to assist with the
consideration of draft operational guidelines on the
protection of civilians for AU peace support
operations.

Despite some of the positive normative
developments, which have been explained to us, to
support the ability of peacekeepers to protect civilians
when mandated as part of a peacekeeping operation,
the deteriorating situation on the ground, which has
been plainly made clear to us, means that there is still
very significant work that needs to be done to ensure
that what we think is a shared understanding of what
the protection of civilians means actually does result in
improved conditions for civilians on the ground. The
drawdowns in recent peacekeeping operations have
been highlighted by many speakers today. Both the
Council and the host Government have critical roles to
play in ensuring that civilians are protected, including
during mission drawdowns.

For its part, the Council must clearly articulate its
expectations of the peacekeepers it mandates to protect
civilians. Peacekeepers on the ground are asking
unambiguously for that clarity and that guidance,
which does not necessarily mean the development of

even more lengthy, detailed or intricate mandates. In
turn, the development of measurable benchmarks will
go a long way towards ensuring the implementation of
the mandate and towards the management of
expectations.

As we look to the future, we are encouraged, I
have to say, by the work under way to develop a
strategic framework and the mission-wide strategies,
which is a marked improvement on the tools available
to implement protection of civilian mandates a decade
ago. But we must not lose sight of the reality that those
developments will be of very limited value without
direction from the Security Council itself and without
the support of Member States to ensure that all those
involved in the formulation, development and
implementation of peacekeeping operations that have
protection of civilians mandates have the guidance, the
training and the resources necessary to ensure that
peacekeeping lives up to the expectations that all of us
here share.

To conclude, peacekeeping is one tool to improve
the lives of civilians affected by conflict on the ground,
and peacekeeping missions obviously have a very
special responsibility for the physical protection of
civilians. It is therefore critical that we continue to
support those endeavours and, frankly, do a better job
in doing that.

