The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Ivanov for briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.

Today we are all faced with the issue of terrorism,
which is more acute than ever before. Terror
International, which is led by the Islamic State in Iraq
(ISIL) and the Levant and Al-Qaida, continues sowing
fear and destruction throughout the world. As a result of
terrorist activities, there is a very worrisome situation in
the Near East, including in Syria and Iraq. The terrorist
threat from that region is spreading rapidly through the
African continent, including Libya. Central, Southern
and South-East Asia are also becoming the stage for
savage acts of terrorism.

The issue of foreign terrorist fighters is now
at the forefront of our concerns, as the Secretary-
General mentioned earlier. Foreign terrorist fighters
are returning to their countries of origin or relocating
to third countries. Fewer and fewer States are spared
the threat of terrorism. In that regard, I draw the
Council's attention to the fact that several years ago,
my country's Federal Security Service established
an international databank on countering terrorism.
Fifty States and several international organizations,
including INTERPOL, participate in that initiative. It
provides genuine assistance in tracking the movements
of foreign terrorist fighters throughout the world. We
call on everyone to join that very important initiative.

The situation is such that the international
community is now making consolidated efforts to
counter terrorism. In 2015, right here at the United
Nations, President Putin called for the establishment of
a broad anti-terrorist front on the basis of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, without
politicization or preconditions (see A/70/PV.13). Today,
that initiative is becoming particularly relevant.

The double standards practiced by some States
make it difficult to respond to modern threats, including
terrorism. Ignoring the principles of a consistent,
collective fight against international terrorism is
fraught with dire consequences. I wish to emphasize
that using terrorist entities for political purposes is
unacceptable and there can be no justification for it.

Today, we are seeing an increased demand to
deepen cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. Our meeting this morning
is dedicated to the role of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) in the fight against terrorism in
cooperation with the United Nations. These regional
entities have a wealth of experience in combating
terrorist threats and make a weighty contribution to
strengthening stability across the Eurasian continent.
Their practical activities guarantee the security of their
States members and their effective counter-terrorist
efforts have led to a noticeable stabilization in the
situation in Central Asia. The importance of these
efforts is reaffirmed in particular in resolutions 73/331,
73/16 and 73/334, adopted by consensus this year by the
General Assembly, on cooperation between the United
Nations and the CSTO, CIS and SCO, respectively.

At the same time, we are concerned by periodic
attacks by foreign terrorists fighters on the territory
of Central Asian countries, as well as the recruitment
operations being conducted by various terrorist entities
in the region, including those associated with ISIL.
One of the most important aspects of the CSTO's work
is combating the involvement of citizens in terrorist
activities at all stages, from ideological indoctrination to
returning from regions with increased terrorist activity
after having gained so-called terrorist experience.
Concrete steps are being taken to block channels for
recruitment into terrorist groups and to combat illegal
migration. A great deal of attention is being given to
identifying threats on the Internet, which has become a
tool for spreading extremist ideologies.

Interaction between the CSTO secretariat and the
United Nations is becoming increasingly substantive
in the area of counter-terrorism. The memorandum of
understanding between the secretariat of the CSTO
and the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCT) is being successfully implemented. At the
upcoming CSTO summit in November, the next CSTO
plan of action to continue implementing the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy for 2019 to
2021, to which CSTO contributes on a regular basis,
will be discussed.

The SCO plays a significant role in ensuring stability
in the area. Its priority is to strengthen security in the
region, including by countering extremism, terrorism
and separatism. The defence ministries of member
States are also involved in counter-terrorism exercises.
The SCO has compiled a solid package of legal
documents regulating various aspects of the national
counter-terrorism activities of its member States, as the
Secretary-General of the SCO mentioned earlier. I wish

to highlight the Convention on Countering Extremism,
adopted in 2017 at the highest level, which enshrines
the fundamental principles of international cooperation
in this area, with decisive roles and responsibilities
falling to States. The Convention is open for accession
by all interested States, and we invite them to do so. I
would also like to note that the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure ofthe SCO, which is sorely needed in Eurasia,
is working effectively. In March, a memorandum of
cooperation was signed between the SCO Regional
Anti-Terrorist Structure and the Security Council
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.

The CSTO and the SCO are paying close attention
to the threats emanating from Afghanistan, including
threats to the Central Asian region. The north of
Afghanistan risks becoming a new platform for
international terrorist organizations led by ISIL. This
naturally requires appropriate external assistance to
Afghanistan in overcoming these threats and challenges.
Experience of recent years has shown that no plan for the
development of economic cooperation between Central
Asia and Afghanistan can be implemented without
an adequate response to threats emanating from this
State. In that context, I note that, based on this reality,
the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group is proceeding to
implement the road map approved earlier this year on
cooperation between SCO member States and Kabul.

The CIS Anti-Terrorism Centre has been active
since 2000 in ensuring the coordination of the work
conducted by national security structures, special
services and law enforcement agencies in the fight
against international terrorism. The Centre works
closely with the anti-terrorism sanctions committees
of the Security Council, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and UNOCT. I hope that all countries and
entities involved will continue their work.

I would like to conclude by expressing our
satisfaction with the fact that the CSTO, CIS and SCO,
as their leaders' statements have reaffirmed today,
are open to further deepening cooperation with the
United Nations in the area of combating terrorism in
order to maintain both regional and international peace
and security.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I call on the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.

