Mr. Ramos-Horta (Timor-Leste): First, allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to thank you for giving me an opportunity to address
the Council today. I would like to commend the
Secretary-General for the report before the Council
(S/2007/50), and for the statement just delivered by his
Special Representative, Mr. Atul Khare. I generally
concur with its observations and recommendations. On
behalf of the Timorese people, I thank the Secretary-
General for having appointed such distinguished
diplomats as Mr. Atul Khare and his team. I thank them
for their enormous efforts and good work in my
country.

Before I continue, I have to apologize; I may
have to leave before the end of this meeting for a
meeting with the Secretary-General. I apologize if I
have to step out before the meeting concludes, but
members of my staff will stay behind.

I would like first to address the question of the
security sector. In May 2006, when Portuguese,
Australian, New Zealand and Malaysian forces readily
came to our assistance, there was a different situation:
they saw a different Dili compared to the relative state
of calm and order that we have returned to today. Then,
5
in May 2006, the Timorese national police, our police
service, had disintegrated in the capital, and our
defence forces were besieged.

Since then, the security arrangements established
on the ground have been working. They provide an
indispensable mechanism for coordination and
cooperation in the security sector and thereby make an
essential contribution to preserving the integrity,
national reconciliation and development of the country.

In the police sector, the arrangement between the
United Nations and my Government on the restoration
and maintenance of public security in Timor-Leste is
addressing both policy and operational issues of police
reform. Because the Special Representative has
touched upon details of the training and reintegration
of our police force, and for the sake of saving time for
the Security Council, I will skip some of my prepared
remarks in that regard.

Under the United Nations Police Commissioner,
Rodolfo Tor, the policing operations are starting to
have an impact on returning law and order to the
streets of Dili. I thank Mr. Atul Khare for his
leadership and Police Commissioner Rodolfo Tor for
his efforts. I also wish to express our sincere
appreciation for the previous acting United Nations
Police Commissioner, Mr. Antero Lopes, for his
leadership in undertaking a planning and operational
assignment and bringing it to a successful conclusion
despite scant resources.

In view of the still-fragile and precarious
conditions in my country, the President of the
Republic, the President of the National Parliament and
I believe it prudent to request the Council to consider
the deployment of an additional formed police unit to
be provided by Portugal. The Portuguese authorities
stand ready to provide such a force in the lead-up to
elections. As the past six months have shown, the
Portuguese National Republican Guard (GNR) is a
very effective force that served very well in Timor-
Leste in 2001 to 2003 and has done so again more
recently. It is for that reason that we have specifically
requested that the GNR send us an additional unit to
our country. We know that the Portuguese side is ready
to deploy such a force, if requested by the United
Nations.

External support cannot be the solution in the
long run. Therefore, my Government, supported by the
United Nations, has made it an urgent priority to
review and reform the entire security sector: the police
and armed forces, including their management and
overall governance structure.

"Forca 2020" is a comprehensive study, just
issued by the Ministry of Defence, that defines the
objectives of the armed forces for the next 15 years and
provides an assessment of what is needed to face the
challenges ahead. That includes the creation of a
military academy to improve training and doctrine, the
deployment of military personnel to United Nations
peacekeeping missions and the use of engineering units
for civil protection tasks in the event of natural
disaster.

To that end, new legislation has been adopted
promulgating the regime for military promotions, the
code of military discipline, the organic law of the
Ministry of Defence, amendments to the organic law of
the defence forces and a draft law on conscription into
military service that has just been adopted by the
parliament.

With regard to reconciliation, allow me to say a
few words on the status of our armed forces, the
Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL).
As members know, I am Minister of Defence, which is
a role that I had not envisaged. When I accepted the
responsibility of that role in the midst of the crisis, I
stated to the parliament and to our people that I viewed
it more as that of a chaplain and moderator, building
bridges among the forces and with the communities.
Both President Xanana Gusmao and I have put a lot of
effort into healing the wounds between the police force
and the F-FDTL. A number of joint initiatives are
under way to facilitate that.

I can say proudly that our armed forces have
demonstrated remarkable discipline since the tragic
events of 25 May 2006. When they were ordered back
to their barracks - having been called in at the end of
the end of April to carry out law-and-order duties,
which was not their responsibility - they complied.
My recent decision to deploy them to guard the
Government palace has not been challenged by the
public.

Our defence force was the subject of malicious
rumours that proved to be unfounded. In its report, the
Independent Special Commission of Inquiry found no
basis for the allegation that the defence force had been
involved in massacres. The pride of the force was
wounded, but the combined effect of being cleared of
the rumours of mass killings and resuming some
regular activities is assisting them in healing that
wounded pride.

Regarding the issue of the so-called petitioners,
we have made some progress. On 27 April 2006, at the
beginning of the crisis, the then-Prime Minister, Mari
Alkatiri, alongside President Xanana Gusmao,
announced the establishment of a Commission of
Notables to look into the allegations contained in the
petition signed by 594 former members of the defence
force. The report of the Commission is ready and will
be released very soon, in the next few days.

With regard to the issue of national reconciliation
more generally, I wish to place on record our
appreciation to all our political, community and church
leaders for their efforts. I thank the Government of
Norway for engaging Gunnar Stalsett, retired Lutheran
Bishop of Oslo and a former member of the Nobel
Committee, as its special envoy to assist us in the
dialogue process. I wish also to thank the European
Commission, through the Club of Madrid, which has
also assisted us in the dialogue process. In particular, I
would like to highlight the event of 10 December 2006,
led by President Xanana Gusmao, which brought the
national leadership together in a traditional peace
ceremony during which Timorese leaders publicly
acknowledged collective responsibility for the crisis.

President Gusmao has also set up a commission
involving our youth, who are among the most
disadvantaged and disaffected groups in our society.
They have not yet earned the dividend of our hard-won
freedom, which we and they so eagerly expected and
fought for. We must pay attention to them. They need
to build a stronger sense of identity through stronger
participation in our nation-building and community
relations efforts.

The combined efforts of President Xanana
Gusmao's national reconciliation programme, the
Government's "Simu Malu" initiative, my personal
engagement and United Nations police security
measures are starting to bring under control criminal
gangs and martial arts groups, recruited primarily from
among the jobless youth.

The Government's "Simu Malu" policy initiative
was born of the need to address the problem of the
150,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) at that
time. "Simu Malu" - which, in our native Tetum
language, means "to receive each other" - means that

IDPs are being received back into their communities,
in line with the internationally accepted principle of
voluntary return in safety and dignity. The programme
has been successful to an extent. Still, 25,000 to 29,000
IDPs continue to live in camps in and around Dili.

Efforts are being made to access the real damage
that we suffered during the crisis, through the
development of an emergency reconstruction plan that
includes a survey in the field that will enable us to plan
for the relocation of families. At the same time, the
Government has made land available for the building
of new housing, which, although it will not cover all
needs, will be a first step in providing support to
displaced families, especially those at greater risk.

With the help of development partners, temporary
houses have been built in several areas of Dili to
provide shelter for IDPs, who are at risk owing to the
rainy season. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank all those agencies and the donor community for
their immense efforts and for responding generously to
the United Nations appeals, as well as for their
bilateral and local contributions.

The violence of last year led to the destruction of
an estimated 2,500 houses, most of which were burned.
The often violent manner in which many people were
forced to flee their homes - some under severe and
imminent threat to their lives, others intimidated by the
throwing of stones onto the roofs of their houses - has
brought to light a serious strain on our young country:
the violence of today is part of a collective trauma
caused by the violence of our past. Overcoming it
constitutes one of the greatest challenges for our
generation. We must learn to settle our disputes
peacefully and to enjoy our individual freedoms
responsibly.

We remain committed to achieving our long-term
vision for the justice sector: an accessible system
capable of delivering equal and efficient justice,
upholding the rule of law and protecting the
democratic system of the State, with the ultimate goal
of sustainable growth for the benefit of our people.
From a difficult starting point in 2000, we have come a
long way in constructing our legal and judicial system
with clear priorities: developing the legal framework
for the country and institutional and human resources
capacity, together with increased legal awareness
among the general population. With the support of like-
minded partners and through the United Nations

Development Programme, we are slowly but steadily
progressing. Since mid-2006, as a result of focused,
systematic capacity-building strategies and coherent in-
country training programmes, we have had a small but
qualified cadre of Timorese court actors working
alongside and under the mentorship of more than 15
international judicial practitioners.

However, the 2006 crisis has had an enormous
impact on our nascent judicial system, which was
created to deal with a normal development scenario.
The system is determined to provide justice for the
people and to help restore social peace. Clear steps
have been taken in that regard, with several sensitive
cases having been investigated and already being tried.
However, owing to the additional burden and
complexity of the caseload resulting from the events of
April and May 2006, the system is overstretched and
not prepared to deal with this post-crisis scenario.

The State is united and determined to see justice
done. The principal framework of assistance that the
United Nations is providing to the sector must be
enhanced, so that we can respond to the immediate
need for justice delivery without losing sight of our
long-term goal: developing the capacity of our
institutions and human resources.

We are facing a twofold battle: the delivery of
quick, efficient and impartial justice, as recommended
by the Special Commission of Inquiry, alongside the
long-term endeavour of forming - not reforming - a
judicial system from scratch, knowing that the
evidence indicates that the judicial reform process in
any country needs 10 to 15 years to bear fruit. High,
unrealistic expectations without adequate support to
fulfil them can create unnecessary anxiety and lead to
failure in both battles.

Notwithstanding our national reconciliation
policy, we cannot accept impunity. Several cases
currently on trial, including that of the former Interior
Minister and cases relating to F-FDTL soldiers,
demonstrate our commitment to equal and efficient
justice.

In the case of Major Alfredo Reinado and of
others implicated in the violence of May 2006, my
Government, with United Nations support, has opted
for dialogue - a prudent approach aimed at ensuring
that justice can prevail without the use of force.
Another critical milestone on Timor-Leste's path
to restoring stability will be this year's presidential and
parliamentary elections. Parliament has recently
adopted electoral laws governing both elections which
provide a legal framework for a parliamentary,
multiparty, party-list system, with a 25 per cent female
representation quota, and for the establishment of an
independent electoral commission. The United Nations
Independent Electoral Certification Team has provided
constructive feedback in the three reports it has
submitted to date. They are being considered in the
framework of the regulations to be submitted for
approval by the National Elections Commission and in
discussions on an interpretative law.

The President has set 9 April 2007 as the date of
the presidential elections and will announce the date of
parliamentary elections immediately following the
presidential ones. According to Timor-Leste's electoral
law, parliamentary elections must be held within 80
days of the announcement.

We are confident that, with extensive support
from UNMIT, the presence of international observers
and with an internationally supervised body of laws
and processes in place, we can organize and conduct
peaceful, free, fair and transparent elections.

Another cornerstone of Timor-Leste's
development is economic stability, in particular the
further exploitation of its petroleum reserves. Timor-
Leste is blessed with significant natural resources that,
if well managed, may guarantee our economic future.

The petroleum fund, which was established to
guarantee transparency in managing Timor-Leste's
petroleum income and to ensure that future generations
benefit from our resources, entered into effect only two
years ago and has already accumulated $1 billion.

The National Parliament will soon ratify two
additional agreements with Australia related to the
exploration of oil and gas in the Timor Sea, in
particularly in the area called Greater Sunrise. We
expect, following ratification by the two sides and the
exchange of notes, that the parties involved in the
Timor Sea will immediately begin additional
investments that will bring significant new revenues to
Timor-Leste within a few years.

In that context, I would like to commend my
predecessor, Mr. Mari Alkatiri, for his able and
pragmatic leadership in the context of the negotiation
of all petroleum treaties and concerning our maritime
boundary treaty with Australia. I wish also to commend
and thank Australian Prime Minister John Howard and
Foreign Affairs Minister Alexander Downer for their
equally pragmatic and sensitive approach to the
negotiations in regard to the three treaties.

In my inaugural speech as Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste in July, I emphasized the fact that I would
govern as an advocate for the poor. Poverty
eradication, progress towards reaching the Millennium
Development Goals, and the establishment of
conditions for good governance will thus continue to
be the guiding principles of my Government.

We have already increased the number of "cash
for work" programmes; we have expedited rural
development programmes across all villages; we have
ensured that local leaders such as the Chefes de Suco
have better and greater resources to do their jobs; we
have increased scholarships for the young; we have
provided financial support to widows, including those
affected by last year's events; we have undertaken a
radical review of our tax system, with the support of
the International Monetary Fund; and we have
streamlined the business development process,
including legislative changes aimed at ensuring that
doing business and creating jobs in Timor-Leste
becomes more a attractive proposition.

However, building a State almost from scratch is
a Herculean task. That is why, at this critical juncture,
we need the continuing assistance and sustained
commitment of the United Nations to successfully
carry out this lengthy and arduous task.

When we look at our own region and at the
success stories of Singapore, Malaysia, the Republic of
Korea and others, we are reminded that success did not
come to them overnight. It was the result of decades of
dedicated and disciplined institution-building, socio-
economic development, massive investment in
vocational training and education, and the ability to
convert setbacks into opportunities for the future.

Having said this, we do not wish to make excuses
for our own shortcomings in the area of governance.
But we believe that all of us have a better
understanding of the challenges facing us than we did
six years ago. I therefore plead with the United Nations
to stay the course with us, so that Timor-Leste can
eventually become a lasting success story. The
extension of UNMIT's mandate for another 12 months
would be a first step in that regard.

We know that Timor-Leste is not the centre of our
universe, and that, tragically, Timor-Leste is but one of
many of the conflict situations of which the United
Nations is seized and that requires its attention.
However, the international community has made
significant investments in our country since 1999. It
has been labeled a success story, and rightly so. Some
in the past have been overly optimistic, but that can
lead people to lose perspective, to lose sight of reality,
and turn pessimistic at the first sign of trouble. One
day they label East Timor a success story, the next day
they call it a failure.

We not a failing State. We are a State that has
existed for only five years, and what we have achieved
so far - thanks not only to our own people and our
own leadership but to the generous commitment of the
international community - has been impressive. The
crisis of April-May and of the following weeks is the
type of crisis that many developing countries face at
the beginning of their history and that some still face
many decades after their independence.

The important thing that we have learned in the
case of Timor-Leste and of other post-conflict
situations is that the international community,
bilaterally or through the United Nations, must remain
committed and steady for the medium and long term.
There are no quick fixes.

Again, I emphasize that we are conscious of the
fact that we are not the centre of the universe, and that,
unfortunately, there are many other conflict situations
that require the attention of the United Nations. But an
extra effort and investment in our country would go a
long way towards consolidating peace and security
there. Therefore, the extension of UNMIT for a another
12 months is absolutely necessary.

I would like to be frank - allow me the
frankness of someone who basically grew up with the
United Nations. I began lobbying this very body - the
Security Council - for the first time in December
1975, and that allows me some liberty to be frank with
the United Nations. I am sure that members would
agree that it would be unrealistic to expect even a
simple take-away food restaurant in Manhattan to
require less than one or two years of investment to
achieve profitable and sustained management.

Therefore, it might require a bit more time - more
than a year or two - to build a nation-State.

We believe, therefore, that - whether in Timor-
Leste or in any post-conflict situation - there has to
be long-term commitment. In the case of Timor-Leste,
we are talking about a six-month mandate - in this
particular case, six months after the establishment of
UNMIT by the Council in August. UNMIT has not
completely recruited the required personnel as set out
in the submission by the Secretary-General to the
Council. A six-month mandate creates instability for
those who are recruited and sent on mission. People are
individuals, with family commitments. They need
certainty before they are sent off to Timor-Leste, or
Afghanistan or the Congo. And when they have
committed to a mission for six months, before the end
of the mission - three months before - they begin to
search the Internet looking for other jobs. Their
attention begins to focus on job possibilities on the
Internet, rather than on the job on the ground. It is with
such frankness that I am asking the Council to
seriously consider extending the Mission for 12
months.

