Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I, too, would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, for her exhaustive presentation of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/85), which has helped
us to better grasp the political and security situation
prevailing in the young State of Timor-Leste. I also
welcome the presence here of His Excellency Mr. Jose'
Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
and of course I thank him for his statement, which
confirmed, if that were necessary, that the process of
consolidation is being carried out successfully.

Recent developments in the situation in Timor-
Leste, as we have just heard, bring to mind some
observations on the political process, the state of
security and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

At the political level, Gabon welcomes the
effective contribution of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste, particularly with respect to the
restoration of the rule of law, the reaffirmation of
political consensus, and Timorese ownership of the
organization and conduct of the various elections.
Gabon calls on the international community to help to
consolidate all of those efforts and encourages the
Government to persevere in maintaining political
stability.

With respect to security, Gabon welcomes the
results that have been achieved and welcomes the
important role played by UNMIT in the ensuring the
stability of Timor-Leste, in close cooperation with the
international security forces and the Falintil-Forcas de
Defesa de Timor-Leste. In that regard, Gabon supports
UNMIT's initiative to strengthen the capacities of the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste to better provide
security for property and people once UNMIT and the
international forces have withdrawn.

With respect to UNMIT's technical assessment
mission, Gabon welcomes its positive conclusions,
particularly its satisfaction with respect to the
objectives assigned to UNMIT in the four mandated
priority areas: review and reform of the security sector;
strengthening of the rule of law; promotion of a culture
of democratic governance and dialogue; and economic
and social development. However, Gabon believes that
the achievements that we have seen thus far in the area
of security and development must be strongly
supported by the international community so that they
can be maintained.

We support the renewal of UNMIT's mandate for
12 months, as recommended by the Secretary-General.

