Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
report of the Secretary-General and his presence with
us today are both exceedingly welcome, as is your
presence, Sir, underlining the importance of this
subject.

The report addresses key issues, many of which
we discussed during the mission of the Security
Council to West Africa last June. The discussions we
had there in the field and with the special
representatives demonstrated to us all the importance
and the vitality of the work being carried out in West
Africa and the job being done, day by day, making
clear why the United Nations is crucial to the
development and peaceful progress of West Africa.

I have to say that, as I am confronted by people in
New York and elsewhere who complain about the
inadequacies of the United Nations and why we are not
doing this, that or the other, it is striking in West Africa
that the message one gets consistently is appreciation
for what day by day the United Nations does on the
ground, and the plea is not so much "Could you get out
of our hair?", but "Please, can we have more of the
United Nations?".

We give particular thanks for the briefings we
have juts heard from the Special Representative and
from the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), whose contribution is immeasurable and,
of course, increasing.

I should like to associate myself with the
statement to be made later by the presidency of the
European Union, the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg.

Cross-border and regional cooperation in West
Africa is becoming a model for other regions facing
similar issues - a model showing the benefits that
cooperation can bring. The need for us to support
regional and subregional efforts in Africa seems to me
obvious.

The efforts being made to further peace and
security demand a response from the United Nations
and from the Council in particular. The need for
stronger institutional links between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU) is obvious; we discussed
that at our meeting in Nairobi. But the practical
cooperation now between the AU and what it is doing
in Darfur and what the United Nations wants to do as a
whole in the Sudan just demonstrates the practical case
for that cooperation.

Last year's mission was encouraging. It
demonstrated that progress was being made to
strengthen coordination on the ground between United
Nations bodies as well as cooperation with ECOWAS,
with national actors and with civil society
organizations. That collaboration is particularly
welcome, and it is essential if we are going to have a
coordinated, effective effort.

Why do we need a regional approach? Why did
the Secretary-General have the wisdom to appoint a
Special Representative on a regional basis as well as
the other special representatives? Well, partly it is
because the problems of Africa and of individual
countries quite evidently transcend national
boundaries. Indeed - and I think we heard this from
an earlier contribution - the free movements in the
unpleasant aspects of life are probably far more evident
in West Africa than are the free movements in trade
and in things that we should be encouraging on the
economic and the political side.

As we solve, or get close to solving, a problem in
one theatre, the risk is that one simply displaces the
problem to the neighbour next door. There is a need for
synergies of United Nations operations to actually be
harnessed, especially in terms of peacekeeping - I
apply that in terms of reserves, in terms of flexibility of
deployment. There is a lot more that we should be
looking at.

There is also a need for consistency -
consistency between what is done in one country and
what is done next door. We see the consequences and
the distortions which happen in terms of payments for
weapons handed in, in terms of handling disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), if there is not
a coherence - hence the wisdom of the approach.

If I may, I should like to specifically address the
subject of small arms and light weapons, to which the
report rightly gives prominence. But in West Africa, as
elsewhere, this scourge is both a feature of conflict and
instability and the main source of that conflict. We
should remember, as we address the grave problems
that Africa confronts in terms of disease and other
issues, this year of all years, that, actually, as many
people die from small arms in Africa as from any other
cause. That is the reality. The international community
for too long has addressed this problem more in a
rhetorical fashion than substantially; that has to
change.

Let me suggest four priorities. First, United
Nations missions need to be equipped, in terms of
mandate and resources, better to monitor and
implement arms embargoes, and, where we have
imposed an embargo, we have to will the means as well
as the end.

Secondly, we should agree and implement United
Nations proposals for the marking and tracing of small
arms and light weapons used in peacekeeping, and then
go beyond that to negotiate a binding international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace all
illicit small arms and light weapons.

Thirdly, we should agree international controls on
the transfer of those weapons by the next United
Nations review meeting in 2006 at the latest.

Fourthly and lastly, we should work towards the
goal of an arms trade treaty to extend and entrench the
international rule of law on conventional arms
generally.

If I could now turn to DDR, a key issue. The
report's findings on youth unemployment and the link
to recruitment by armed groups are very striking. That
aspect needs to be tackled if we are going to have any
prospect of sustainable peace. Case by case, DDR is
essential to actually develop sustainable peace and the
rule of law.

So what do we need? We need efforts by the
United Nations Office in West Africa (UNOWA), the
International Labour Organization (ILO), ECOWAS
and some others towards a more coherent approach to
address this problem regionally. It is an area where
donors can make a particularly important contribution,
because, unless we fund the reintegration and
rehabilitation in time of ex-combatants, what we face is
a recurrence of conflict.

If I can think laterally and forward for a moment,
one of the key proposals in the report of the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change is to
establish a peacebuilding commission. I should just
like to invite us all to think how a peacebuilding
commission could actually help West Africa. It seems
to me that it is the best example of why we need such a
commission, why we need to harness all the efforts of
the international actors, the different constituents of the
United Nations family, and say, this is what we are
going to do to promote sustainable peace and
development in post-conflict situations.

And I would go beyond that and say, as we look
at countries in West Africa - again, as mentioned in
earlier briefings - if I take Guinea-Bissau, where we
were all struck by our experience there in June, and if
one were to say to the Government of Guinea-Bissau
today that "There is a peacebuilding commission in
place, it addresses the problems that you confront, and,
actually, if you like, although you are not in a classic
post-conflict situation, would you like to be the subject
of a concerted effort by the peacebuilding commission
and the Bretton Woods institutions and everyone else
to try to tackle your problems?" I have no doubt what
the response of the Government would be.

One of the other reasons for this commission is,
very simply, that, actually, those countries that lack an
evident sponsor, that are, if you like, the orphans of the
international community - they need somewhere to
go, and the peacebuilding commission seems to be, to
the British Government, one of the best ways that we
can address these concerns.

In conclusion, can I say that out of this report, out
of this discussion, out of the mission, there is
encouragement, I think, to us all that cooperation and
coordination is actually becoming the norm, but that
we must do better and build upon that. In welcoming
that, may I pay particular tribute to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and to
the African Union, to commend them for what they do
and for the singular leadership that they are showing.

I will end by referring to one situation, picking up
on what the Secretary-General said earlier. ECOWAS
and the African Union have had the courage to take a
stance on Togo. The Secretary-General has done so on
several occasions. Yet the Council has been silent. We
have said nothing on Togo. The question the Council
must ask itself - this year, of all years, as we
approach a summit - is, when do the situation and the
developments in a country actually justify the
involvement of the Security Council? Is the failure of a
Government to protect its citizens a grossly
unconstitutional act? Whatever the circumstances, is
such failure a basis for the Council to say, "We ought
to stand up and be counted"? Or is the traditional view
of national sovereignty and non-interference to be
exercised without qualification, without regard to
developments in the real world? Does that mean that
the Council then must stand silent on these issues, or
do we have an obligation in terms of international
peace and security actually to stand up? I am quite
clear for myself what the answer is.

