Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We join other members in expressing our
thanks to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Lamberto
Zannier for the detailed briefings they have just
delivered and of which we have taken careful note.

My delegation pays close attention to the situation
in Ukraine, especially the complex crisis in the eastern
part of the country. We believe that the crisis must be
resolved politically in order to achieve the stabilization
of the country and to strengthen and improve relations
with the countries of the region. Given the complexity
and fragility of the security, stability and development
situation, which has yet to be resolved, we believe
that the parties involved must show greater resolve
and willingness to improve the situation in the east of
the country.

In that context, my delegation calls on the parties to
exercise restraint in order to prevent certain actions and
decisions from causing an escalation of the situation
between them, leading to long-term consequences.
We also encourage them to refrain from future actions
that could aggravate and destabilize the situation,
thereby undermining the efforts of the international
community, including those of the Security Council, to
seek a peaceful solution to the crisis. That is why we
call for their cooperation to reduce tensions.

As it has reiterated on other occasions, the
Government of Equatorial Guinea believes that the
implementation of the Minsk agreements in their
entirety remains essential to the restoration of peace
and the achievement of stability in the region. We
therefore regret the daily violations of the ceasefire, in
direct breach of the Minsk agreements, and urge the
parties to work towards a solution to the crisis in the
eastern part of the country, taking into account the
package of measures contained in that agreement.

We recall that the Minsk agreements, signed in
February 2015 and ratified in resolution 2202 (2015),
remain the foundation of the international community's
commitment to the peaceful settlement of the conflict
in Ukraine. We therefore encourage the parties to
respect the full implementation of the agreements
and to focus their efforts on facilitating an inclusive
dialogue, in which the interests of all citizens prevail,
that helps to strengthen harmonious relations among
the various ethnic groups of Ukraine.

In conclusion, we once again commend the work of
humanitarian actors in delivering humanitarian aid in
the region in order to provide vital assistance. We also
express our support for and welcome the efforts of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission, in particular to facilitate
dialogue, as well as to maintain stability in the region.
We encourage the parties to prioritize dialogue and to
show greater political will in order to help to reduce
tensions and find a lasting solution to the crisis.

