The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Liberia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual practice I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ball (Liberia)
took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the outbreak of fighting in Monrovia and
the rapidly deteriorating situation throughout Liberia.
This new outbreak of factional fighting, the
harassment and abuse of the civilian population and
humanitarian and relief workers, threatens the peace
process and raises serious doubts about the
commitment of the factions to its implementation.

"The Security Council reminds all parties of their
responsibility fully to respect international
humanitarian law with regard to the civilian population
and to ensure the safety of United Nations and other
international personnel, and calls upon them to take
immediate steps to this end. The Council calls on all
parties to fulfil their obligation to respect the
inviolability of diplomatic personnel and property.

"The Security Council expresses its deep concern
at the failure of the Council of State and the faction
leaders to demonstrate the political will and
determination required for implementation of the
Abuja Agreement. Unless Liberia's political leaders
immediately show by concrete positive actions a
reaffirmation of their commitment to the Abuja
Agreement and fully honour their obligation to
re-establish and maintain the cease-fire, they risk
losing the support of the international community.
The Council underscores the personal responsibility
of Liberia's leaders in this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support for
the Abuja Agreement as the only existing framework
for resolving Liberia's political crisis and the crucial
role of the Economic Community of West African
States in bringing the conflict to an end.

"The Security Council calls on the Liberian
National Transitional Government and the Liberian
parties to work with the West African States
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) immediately to
disengage all forces, re-establish peace and law and
order in Monrovia and an effective and
comprehensive cease-fire throughout the country.
The Council calls on the parties, in particular
ULIMO-J, to release all hostages without harm. It
further calls upon the parties to return all captured
weapons and equipment to ECOMOG.

"The Security Council reminds all States of
their obligation to comply strictly with the embargo
on all deliveries of weapons and military equipment
to Liberia imposed by resolution 788 (1992) and to
bring all instances of violations of the arms embargo
before the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 985 (1995).

"The Security Council declares its intention,
based on the progress made by the Liberian parties
in implementing the steps set out above, and after
consideration of the report of the Secretary-General
on developments in Liberia, to determine what
further measures may be appropriate regarding the
future United Nations presence in Liberia."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/ 16.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.30 pm.

