Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her usual enlightening words and applaud the efforts
of her Office to bring about justice and peace for the
Victims in Libya.

We would like to begin by expressing our deepest
condolences to the families of the civilians who died
in recent months, in particular the families of United
Nations staff, victims of the heinous acts in Benghazi.
The loss of innocent lives affects us all. We therefore
reaffirm our commitment to cooperating with the
Court in order to ensure that justice is done and that
due reparations take place.
The Dominican Republic supports and echoes
the call by Prosecutor Bensouda on the parties to
the conflict to respect the norms of international
humanitarian law, emphasizing the need to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure, such as hospitals,
schools and detention centres.

We would also like to express our deep concern
with regard to the migrants and refugees in Libya.
Incidents such as the horrific bombing of the detention
centre in Tajoura must be stopped and those responsible
brought to justice. In that regard, we encourage further
investigation and review of evidence relating to crimes
committed against migrants and refugees in official
and unofficial detention centres in order to bring a
case before the Court if the relevant legal requirements
are met.

In that regard, the Dominican Republic wishes to
emphasize the importance that countries recognize the
complementary role played by the International Criminal
Court in ensuring the prosecution, investigation
and punishment of crimes against humanity and war
crimes. We therefore welcome the focus on strategic
cooperation and coordination with Libya and other
States, in line with the Strategic Plan for 2019-2021 of
the Office of the Prosecutor of the Court.

In addition, we welcome updates on the progress
in the trial of Mr. Saif Al-Islam Gaddafi. We await the
outcome of the upcoming hearings.

We regret the fact that there has not been progress
with respect to the cases against Mr. Al-Werfalli,
Mr. Al-Tuhamy and Mr. Al-Senussi. However, above
all, we regret receiving the news that Mr. Al-Werfalli,
despite having been accused of having murdered 43
people, has been promoted to the rank of Lieutenant
Colonel in the Libyan National Army, which
is unbelievable.

We wish to once again reiterate the urgent need for
the Libyan authorities to cooperate with the Office of
the Prosecutor. Without that commitment, we will not
be able to see the desired results of her term. We call on
Council members to continue to encourage cooperation
between the Libyan authorities and the International
Criminal Court so as to execute outstanding
arrest warrants.

As the international community, we are committed
to maintaining international peace and security. We
must therefore rally behind the efforts of Prosecutor
Bensouda to end impunity in Libya. Furthermore,
we should not forget the preventive and deterrent
role of the Court, which is fundamental to reducing
violations of fundamental rights and restoring peace to
Libyan society.

