Ms. Modirzadeh: I appreciate the opportunity
to share some of my reflections on the intersections
between international humanitarian law and counter-
terrorism measures. My primary objective here is to
raise key considerations to help inform this afternoon's
discussion. I will focus on the importance of ensuring
that counter-terrorism measures, including measures
adopted by the Security Council, do not inhibit the
principled humanitarian action foreseen in, or required
by, international humanitarian law. I will also focus
on steps that the Council can take to further safeguard
humanitarian action and strengthen compliance with
international humanitarian law.

In short, I am concerned that counter-terrorism
measures may be interpreted and applied in ways that
might ultimately diminish commitments to principled
humanitarian action. I urge the Council to build on
a recently adopted resolution by taking more robust
and more concrete steps to ensure implementation of
the extensive and vital international humanitarian law
protections for principled humanitarian action. In this
regard, settings where counter-terrorism measures
may overlap with situations of armed conflict warrant
particular attention.

The common story about the relationships between
counter-terrorism frameworks and international
humanitarian law presents these regimes as sharing
a unitary purpose. This story tells us that these
frameworks are alternative sets of norms created to
solve the same problems. Under this narrative, which
I believe misapprehends the fundamental purposes
of these frameworks, any divergences between these
regimes can be managed merely by technical or legal
solutions. I ask the Council to consider an alternative
approach - namely, that the challenges that I discuss
here may require political solutions crafted by Member
States. Let me explain.

International humanitarian law is a body of treaty
and customary rules, drafted and ratified over the
course of more than a century. States have developed
international humanitarian law as the primary legal
framework designed to regulate the exceptional
situation of armed conflict. Under international
humanitarian law, some forms of violence, irrespective
of who undertakes them or for what purposes they are
undertaken, are not unlawful in themselves so long
as the conduct comports with the applicable rules.
International humanitarian law regulates means and
methods of warfare in respect of all parties to armed
conflict. It also permits - and even demands - that
principled humanitarian action be undertaken in armed
conflict. These rules are designed, first and foremost,
to protect civilians and other non-combatants.

In comparison, counter-terrorism measures aim
to prevent, suppress and punish acts characterized
as terrorism. Building on sectoral conventions and
regional treaties, since 2001 the Security Council has
taken the lead in regulating terrorism globally. But that
is only part of the picture. As several recent reports
have detailed, the increasingly complex web of counter-
terrorism measures encompasses an ever-growing
range of laws, policies and prevention initiatives. This
framework contrasts with the relatively narrow and
specific purview of international humanitarian law.

When these two regimes come into contact with
one another, tensions may emerge between them. For
instance, international humanitarian law foresees that
humanitarian actors may provide impartial medical care
to wounded fighters hors de combat as well as provide
life-saving goods and services to civilian populations
under the de facto control of non-State parties to
armed conflict. Yet under several counter-terrorism
frameworks, these same activities are characterized as
illegitimate and unlawful.

Where principled humanitarian action is
considered to constitute a type of illegitimate support
for terrorism, counter-terrorism measures may inhibit,
or even impede, the work of humanitarian actors in
wide-ranging and consequential ways.

Those actors may thus experience difficulties
in providing relief and protection in line with
humanitarian principles. Humanitarian actors may
become understandably wary of engaging in conduct
that they believe can expose them to legal liability, and
they might accordingly limit or halt their operations.
Nevertheless, to maintain operations where needs are
greatest, humanitarian actors have taken diverse steps
and invested extensive resources in seeking to comply
with counter-terrorism requirements while adhering to
humanitarian principles.

For their part, researchers have gathered evidence
of the impact of counter-terrorism measures. For
example, in 2017 the Harvard Law School Program on
International Law and Armed Conflict carried out a
pilot empirical survey study. The study represented an
initial attempt to gather concrete data regarding these
matters. Sixty-nine per cent of survey respondents
indicated that counter-terrorism measures had curtailed
their work. In my view, the question is not whether
counter-terrorism measures might adversely affect
principled humanitarian action, but the scope and scale
of that impact.

Alongside other bodies, the Security Council itself
has increasingly recognized some of these possibilities
and the imperative to safeguard principled humanitarian
action in counter-terrorism contexts. For example,
in 2010 the Council established a limited sectoral
humanitarian exemption in relation to the Somalia
sanctions regime. The General Assembly, in the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review - first in 2016 and
again in 2018 - urged States to guard against counter-
terrorism risks to humanitarian and medical activities.

Furthermore, four days ago, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2462 (2019), on counter-
terrorism financing. That resolution directs Member
States to ensure that their domestic laws and regulations
establish "serious criminal offenses" related to the
provision of certain kinds of financial support to
terrorist organizations or individual terrorists. The
resolution also demands that Member States ensure that
all measures taken to counter terrorism comply with
their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law.

On the one hand, the adoption of the resolution
reaffirms the Council's commitment to the centrality
of international humanitarian law as a matter of
international peace and security. Yet, on the other
hand, the Council is in a position to do much more.
For example, consider the generic references by the
Council to complying with international humanitarian
law and other applicable rules of international law while
combating terrorism. While important in principle,
those references do not sufficiently comprehend and
address the diverse and consequential ways that counter-
terrorism measures and international humanitarian law
protections for principled humanitarian action may
conflict in practice.

In conclusion, I wish to urge the Security Council
to expand upon and prioritize its efforts to safeguard
principled humanitarian action. As the many
Government officials and policymakers in the Chamber
today will know from first-hand experience, counter-
terrorism measures may prove very difficult to amend
once they have been instituted. Any tension with the
agreed norms of international humanitarian law should
be of urgent concern to the Council. Consequently,
it is imperative to ensure that counter-terrorism
measures at all levels are crafted and implemented in
ways that respect principled humanitarian action and
do not degrade it. I therefore urge the Council to take
several steps.

First, the Council may wish to guard against overly
broad and vague notions of what constitutes unlawful
support to terrorism, including in its own practice
concerning designated individuals and entities.

Secondly, the Council and its subsidiary bodies may
wish to ensure that none of the activities that underlie
principled humanitarian action form part or all of the
basis for subjecting individuals or entities to sanctions
or other restrictive regimes.

Thirdly, the Council may wish to urgently consider
comprehensive exemptions for principled humanitarian
action that are grounded in a steadfast commitment to
international humanitarian law.

Fourthly, and above all, the Council may wish
to uphold and ensure respect for hard-won legal
protections for principled humanitarian action amid the
tumult of war. Far too much is at stake for the millions
of people suffering in armed conflict for it to pursue
anything else.

