Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): Allow me to extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadic', President
of the Republic of Serbia, and His Excellency
Mr. Skender Hyseni, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kosovo. My delegation is happy to welcome both of
them, as well as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, with us today.

I would like to thank Mr. Zannier for his
informative and comprehensive briefing. We greatly
appreciate his efforts and would particularly like to
acknowledge and express our appreciation for the past
and current role of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
ensuring peace and stability in Kosovo. Welcoming the
deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) throughout Kosovo, we
support the efforts of the Special Representative to
reconfigure UNMIK to adapt it to the current
circumstances and to the proposals of the Secretary-
General on its future tasks. We have actively
participated in UNMIK and continue to contribute to
the Kosovo Force, and we are now providing police
officers to EULEX. We have continued to do all that
we can to assist both UNMIK and EULEX.

We are encouraged that the overall situation in
Kosovo is stable and that there is progress towards
consolidation of its statehood. We fully support that
process and remain ready to further contribute in any
way that we can. We note that while there are certain
concerns, there have also been positive developments
in the areas of community issues, returns, property, and
cultural and religious heritage. We look forward to
further progress on those issues.

Harmonious inter-ethnic relations are imperative
for Kosovo to be a viable, multi-ethnic democratic
State. That is of particular importance when the
complexity of the political atmosphere in the Balkans
still requires our close attention. Any major challenge
to stability in one place could be contagious. The
independence of Kosovo should also be seen in the
framework of lasting peace, stability and prosperity in
the entire region. It was the end result of a long and
unique process, and it is irreversible. That being the
case, the assistance given to Kosovo in its efforts to
integrate with the international community and
institutions should be further encouraged and
strengthened.

I must also underline that a democratic and
prosperous Serbia at peace with all of its neighbours is
crucial for regional stability and cooperation. Serbia
should not be isolated from Europe in any way. The
international community should continue to encourage
and to help Serbia in its efforts to integrate with the
European and Euro-Atlantic structures.

As for Turkey, we are determined to carry
forward our good and mutually beneficial relations
with Serbia. Being very much a part of the Balkans, we
are committed to working with all of our partners
towards ensuring a safe, stable and prosperous future
for the region. That is one of the top priorities of our
foreign policy.

