Mr. Chungong Ayafor (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My delegation would like to thank you, Mr.
President, for this excellent initiative that makes it
possible for our outgoing members to produce a kind of
last work based on a two-year experience at the heart
of this unique world body that, through a resolution
consisting of a few paragraphs, can decide on peace or
war.

At a time when much attention is focused on the
Security Council, this experience reveals more than
ever its usefulness and importance. Cameroon will
certainly be in a better position to participate more
meaningfully in evaluating the Security Council in 12
months, when it, like all five departing members, will
be free from the constraints and obligations of
solidarity, even complicity, that binds people who
belong to the same club.

This morning I would like to focus primarily on
two or three concerns. The first has to do with the
decision-making process within the Security Council,
and in particular the role that elected members are
expected to play in the Council. The presence of
permanent members in an institution is in itself a
decisive advantage. It implies an almost perfect
mastery of issues, procedures, practices and even of
what is not said. When that permanent membership is
accompanied by a particularly favourable relationship
of power, there is a tendency to take advantage of that
position to advance one's views and interests,
sometimes to the detriment of missions of general
interest that led to the establishment of the institution
in the first place.

Despite appearances, there is a pattern of
behaviour that is shared by the members of the
Council, who, willingly or not, are often tempted to
believe that agreement between five is the same as
agreement between 15. The Security Council would
benefit from returning to its initial composition. It is
composed of 15 members, but little by little, it is
becoming a body of five plus 10 members. That
dichotomy can only affect the transparency and the
legitimacy to which we all aspire. The most tangible
example is resolution 1441 (2002). It was adopted by
the 15 members unanimously and responsibly.
However, as soon as it was voted on, we returned, in
the implementation, to our reflexes as a club of five, of
10, of 2, and so forth. That remark is meant less to
criticize the Security Council than to alert it to a
problem. During the open meeting on Iraq in October,
the General Assembly got itself invited - there is no
other way to describe it - to the Council to say, in
particular, that missions to maintain international peace
and security had been entrusted to the Council more for
reasons of effectiveness and pragmatism than anything
else. The Charter does not give anyone a blank check,
because, in the long run, it is the body that includes all
Members of the Organization and has full legitimacy.
The obligation to be accountable must be maintained
by all of the principal bodies of the United Nations.
This should also remind us that it is the members
elected by the General Assembly that give Security
Council decisions their democratic legitimacy. In the
absence of sound practice, the Council would risk
losing its legitimacy and credibility.

The other concern that I should like to emphasize
at this wrap-up meeting concerns the problem of
sanctions that the Council imposes against certain
States that violate the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations. The Council is still
searching for a global strategy for exiting sanctions
regimes. It is also struggling to find effective ways of
countering strategies aimed at bypassing sanctions that
are used increasingly by organized crime networks.
The growing criminalization of economies under
sanctions also makes that difficult. The Council must,
therefore, find balanced formulas that avoid pushing
the situation to the breaking point, because, once a
conflict has erupted, it becomes increasingly difficult
to return to normal economic and social life in the
countries concerned.

That just balance, in our View, is also
indispensable for the management of sanctions in a
strict sense. Indeed, many examples show that
sanctions generally have a more devastating impact on
vulnerable populations - women, children and the
poor - than on the regimes in place. Thus, we must do
a better job of taking the humanitarian dimension into
account when the Council makes decisions concerning
sanctions. A formula that is beginning to bear fruit -
and that we should certainly stress more - is the
targeting of sanctions at very specific objectives. In
any case, the sociological tailoring of such targeting
should be discussed. The Council must have a
substantive debate in the near future on the impact of
sanctions on the populations and economies of third-
party States whose only mistake is to be a neighbour of
States that are at fault.

In conclusion, I should like to raise a subject that
is important to my delegation and is particularly
topical. In addressing situations of civil war or internal
conflicts that pit democratically elected Governments
against rebel movements or, more generally, against
armed oppositions, the Council has - because of its
passivity and a certain complacent condescension -
sometimes left the impression of having surreptitiously
legitimized certain rebel movements. That problem
needs to be explored; it is a source of great concern to
which the Council should find an ethical and adequate
response.

