Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
preparing the new semi-annual report (S/2017/1030)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and
we would like to thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
We note the effective work done by Ambassador Cardi,
the Permanent Representative of Italy, the Council's
facilitator for the implementation of the resolution,
and since he is speaking before the Council in that
capacity for the last time, we would like to thank him
and the Italian delegation for their effective efforts in
this important area of the Council's work. He and the
Italian team have made a constructive contribution to
our work.
In our view, preserving the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) for regulating the Iranian
nuclear programme is one of the international
community's major tasks. The Plan of Action is a
foundational achievement of the work of the past few
years in nuclear non-proliferation and diplomatic efforts
for regional and international peace and security. It
was the outcome of a joint and collective effort. The
Secretary-General's report is a clear testament to Iran's
unconditional compliance with its commitments under
the JCPOA. That has been consistently confirmed by
both the International Atomic Energy Agency and
the Secretariat of the United Nations, which, as the
report indicates, has no reason to believe that Iran has
made transfers either of goods or technology, whether
nuclear or dual-use, which would be in violation of
paragraph 2 of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).
Unfortunately, despite this positive evidence for the
implementation of the JCPOA, we are obliged to note
that some countries are attempting to torpedo this
breakthrough collective agreement. We hope that
reason will nonetheless ultimately prevail, that issues of
international security and stability will cease to be held
hostage to domestic political processes and that JCPOA
will finally be allowed to function at full force and
demonstrate its unique potential. The best guarantee of
that is every State party's good-faith fulfilment of its
voluntary commitments.

We support the Secretary-General's call to the
JCPOA participants to comply fully with its provisions,
including the importance of ensuring that Iran's
compliance with the agreement brings it concrete
dividends, as well as the appeal to all countries and
organizations to act in full accord with the JCPOA and
to support its implementation in every possible way.

We feel once again compelled to draw attention
to the Secretariat's continued practice of conducting
investigations for which it has neither the authority nor
the expertise. Such actions, undertaken without the
Security Council's prior consent, are not legitimate,
and any information obtained through them cannot
be considered reliable and should not be included in
the report. Information based on such visits should
not be considered equivalent to normal consultations
conducted with Member States. Since we are worrying
about budgets, I would like to point out that such
trips are paid for with budget resources allocated
under resolution 2231 (2015) exclusively for the
implementation of its mandate. We continue to believe
that the report should not include information obtained
from open sources or references to information provided
by individual countries that is unverified or clearly
unverifiable. Such information must first be submitted
to the Security Council, which has the authority to take
decisions on further steps, including on conducting
investigations. Independent action in that regard cannot
be considered legitimate.

Similarly, without the Council's unanimous
agreement it is impermissible to hold 2231 format
meetings jointly with subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council and expert groups. We would also like to recall
paragraph 3 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015), which
states in black and white that Iran is called upon not
to undertake any activity related to ballistic missiles
designed to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons.
We would like to draw the attention of Council
members to the fact that regional issues and the
situation in the Middle and Near East do not generally
have to be discussed in the context of the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015). Discussions on those topics
should be held in other formats and should be conducted
on a basis of mutual respect with the aim of eliminating
existing differences and suspicions exclusively through
direct, political dialogue. A few years ago, the Russian
Federation developed an initiative aimed at establishing
a collective security system and confidence-building
measures in the region that is still relevant. We should
also be implementing resolution 598 (1987), which
asked the Secretary-General to present to the Security
Council measures to enhance the security and stability
of the region. That request was not implemented
and the time has come to do so, since this type of
methodology would be more effective than the recent,
punitive decisions.

Two years of the J CPOA in action have demonstrated
its effectiveness and that it is fully capable of carrying
out its tasks. We believe firmly that there can be no
alternative to the Plan of Action nor any justification for
revising it. The Russian Federation is committed to the
unconditional and comprehensive implementation of
the provisions ofresolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA,
which represents an outstanding accomplishment
for global diplomacy and has enabled us to resolve a
crucial regional issue. The importance of the nuclear
deal is recognized by an overwhelming majority of the
members of the international community. We can use it
as a model for dealing with other current problems and
serious regional crises. We have the power to ensure
its successful implementation, but we must first refrain
from the language of threats and sanctions, instead
using instruments of dialogue and concentrating on
broadening cooperation and mutual trust.

In that regard, we note that during the Joint
Commission's most recent meeting, on 13 December
in Vienna, all the participants - I repeat, all the
participants - affirmed their commitment to
implementing their obligations under the JCPOA.
That creates a solid foundation for the future, and we
hope that our countries will continue sticking to this
line in strict accord with the letter and spirit of this
historic agreement.

