Mr. Escalante Hasbl'in (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, and the Indonesian
presidency for convening this open debate. We also
welcome the briefings, and take note of the Secretary-

General's report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2019/373).

As we are all aware, this debate is taking place in the
context of the seventieth anniversary of the four Geneva
Conventions, which form the cornerstone of international
humanitarian law, and the twentieth anniversary

of resolution 1265 (1999), which incorporated this
important issue into the Security Council's debates for
the first time. El Salvador emphasizes the relevance of
the spirit of that resolution and other related resolutions,
which, in recognition of the international community's
deep concern about the failure of guarantees in times
of crisis, guide us in ensuring that international human
rights and humanitarian law are upheld and respected,
especially with regard to civilian populations in times
of armed conflict.

My country remains deeply concerned about the
humanitarian damage resulting from hostilities in
populated areas. Despite all the efforts to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law, the protection of
civilians is still injeopardy. It is civilians who constitute
the majority of casualties in conflict situations and their
aftermath, and it is civilian children, women and men
who continue to suffer from forced displacement and
starvation as methods of war, who are denied access
to humanitarian aid and endure sexual and gender-
based violence. At the same time, we continue to see
attacks on humanitarian personnel, medical facilities,
civil infrastructure and the assets and livelihoods of
civilian populations. As we all know, international
humanitarian law lacks the instruments necessary to
make its provisions binding in practice. Ultimately,
the Security Council must rise to the challenge, and all
its members, permanent or not, should set an example
through their respect for international humanitarian
law. Against that backdrop, we want to highlight the
following points.

Given the unfortunate selectivity that we see in the
practice of respecting international humanitarian law,
as evidenced by intensifying hostilities and increasing
complaints of violations with serious, credible and
documented evidence, there is an urgent need for
more effective and robust approaches through national
policies on the protection of civilians in all Member
States, which should establish harm-mitigation teams
and develop risk and impact assessments for all actions
in populated areas, and incorporate the principles of
international law into all defence policies.

One of the greatest failures in that regard is
accountability. It is therefore important to enhance
the capacities of judicial institutions, both nationally
and internationally, and provide them with adequate
resources. Accountability should respond to the
need to offer reparations to survivors of violations of
international humanitarian law, and Council members
have an obligation to lead the way, collectively
and individually.

There is overwhelming evidence that the use
of weapons can have a long-term impact on the
recovery and development of affected communities.
It is therefore essential to identify the obvious links
between violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and the export and indiscriminate
use of weapons. Without compromising their right to
ensure their national defence, States should refrain
from exporting conventional arms and ammunition
to places where they are likely to be used to commit
or facilitate serious violations of international
humanitarian law. In other words, the implementation
of international humanitarian law goes hand in hand
with respect for and the universalization of the Arms
Trade Treaty, the Ottawa Convention, the Convention
on Cluster Munitions, the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons and all its Protocols, the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

In that regard, we welcome the high priority that
the Secretary-General accords the issue of explosive
weapons in populated areas in his new Agenda for
Disarmament, and we are grateful for his call for
all States to support the development of measures to
address the humanitarian impact of such weapons. We
firmly believe that that can be achieved with adequate
political will and through the development of shared
operational policies and standards and the exchange of
good practices. We hope that the Security Council will
take the initiative to draft a political declaration in those
terms so as to progress from words to concrete action.

In conclusion, we want to acknowledge the
praiseworthy efforts of humanitarian workers, including
medical personnel, in areas of conflict. We condemn
all attacks on them, which are unacceptable and may
constitute war crimes. We also want to acknowledge
the efforts of civil society in empowering and giving a
voice to those affected by armed violence.

