Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today's meeting and to express appreciation
to the Chairs of the sanctions Committee on Al-Qaida
and the Taliban, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) - Ambassadors Verbeke, Arias and Burian -
for the thorough reports on the work of the Security
Council counter-terrorism committees that they lead.

We fully share the priorities and assessments
contained in the statements. For our part, we would
like to draw attention to those issues whose resolution,
we believe, will require additional and more focused
and vigorous efforts. It is our View that through
stepping up counter-terrorist work - first and
foremost by the efforts of the three Committees and
their expert group - to implement the relevant
resolutions, the Security Council can more effectively
assist in the implementation of the United Nations
comprehensive counter-terrorist strategy.

We wish to emphasize the need for closer and
more coordinated interaction on the part of the three
counter-terrorist Committees and their expert group.
Some positive progress has been made. There has been
exchange of information on implementation by States
of the relevant resolutions; the experts of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
Monitoring Team of the 1267 Committee are jointly
participating in country Visits; and there is a general
strategy for action for States that are late submitters,
based on providing them assistance in meeting
resolution commitments. Along with that, it would
seem that more can and should be done in that respect
so as to eliminate duplication, to optimize dialogue
among States and to give them the necessary technical
assistance.

The question of national capacity-building in the
complex fight against terrorism is a great priority for us.
We would like to emphasize that work to improve the
technical assistance system must be conducted in close
linkage with monitoring of compliance with Security
Council resolutions. For us, it is obvious that identifying
concrete needs of States for technical assistance and
providing it to them is possible only on the basis of
developing direct dialogue with States, with their consent
and participation in these processes. We would hope that
in the very near future we will finalize all procedures for
sending States the new Preliminary Implementation
Assessments for resolution 1373 (2001). We positively
assess the practice of country Visits by CTED, improving
the quality of technical expertise and organizing
systematic work to implement their results.

We expect that, after the upcoming discussion on
the draft comprehensive survey on implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), the CTC will be able to give
the Council a general analysis, which would allow us
to clarify the priorities of the Committee's work,
including support for the efforts of States to establish
or build their counter-terrorist capabilities.

We need to do our utmost to strengthen the
interaction of the CTC with international, regional and
subregional organizations. We welcome and deeply
appreciate their important contribution to the joint
work of the field missions of CTED. We attach great
importance to fifth special meeting of the CTC with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
to be held this fall in Nairobi, and to regular contacts
between them and the Committee in CTED.

As was noted in the statement of the CTC Chair,
the Committee has adopted an action plan to
implement the results of the four preceding meetings.
The Committee has continued the practice of inviting to
the CTC representatives of international organizations
that deal with the problem of terrorism. Notably, in

February of this year the Committee heard a briefing by
Mr. Alexey Kuzyura, Chairperson of the Working Group
of the Meetings of Heads of Special Services, Security
Agencies and Law-Enforcement Organizations.

Another issue to which we would like to draw the
Council's attention is resolution 1624 (2005). We are
concerned at the virtual absence of progress in its
implementation and in the development of a dialogue
of States with the CTC and CTED. We believe that it is
possible to resolve this problem within the ambit of the
relevant provisions of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in particular those relating
to incitement to terrorism.

We continue to View the 1267 Committee and its
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team as
one of the most effective and viable mechanisms at the
disposal of the Council in its counter-terrorism efforts.

We welcome the efforts of the 1267 Committee
and the Monitoring Team to improve the accuracy of
the sanctions list. The importance of that instrument in
the implementation of the anti-Taliban sanctions
regime has been emphasized in resolution 1735 (2006).
We call on Member States to continue to petition the
Committee to list individuals and entities associated
with the Taliban and Al-Qaida and to provide any
additional information that is available.

We note the progress achieved in terms of
improving the guidelines for the work of the 1267
Committee. In our view, that will help to strengthen the
sanctions regime itself. It is also important that the
positive achievements of the Committee, as reflected in
Security Council resolution 1730 (2006), be made use
of, in a broad-based manner, by other Council
sanctions committees. We look forward to a continued
interactive and beneficial discussion in the 1267
Committee on these questions, and we are prepared to
participate constructively therein.

We are convinced that substantive attention
should be paid to strengthening national mechanisms
for decision-making on the inclusion of new names on
the sanctions list. The commitment of Member States
to the full and conscientious implementation of their
obligations will determine the success of our joint
efforts to counter the real and ever-changing threat to
international peace and security posed by the Taliban
and Al-Qaida.

We attach great significance to continuing the

practice of country visits by the Chairmen of the

Committee and members of the Monitoring Team. We

call for closer coordination in that respect, first and
foremost with the CTC and the CTED.

The Russian Federation, which was the initiator
and one of the co-authors of resolutions 1540 (2004)
and 1673 (2006), views these as key non-proliferation
instruments aimed at preventing weapons of mass
destruction, the means of their delivery and related
materials from falling into the hands of non-State
actors, especially terrorists. We are convinced that
ensuring the full implementation by all States of the
Council's decisions is one of the key elements in
fighting the serious threat to international peace and
security posed by the spread of weapons of mass
destruction around the globe.

We believe that the central task of the 1540
Committee at this time remains the provision of
assistance to States in the submission of their national
reports. Unfortunately, the momentum here is clearly
insufficient. Since September of last year, only four
countries have sent their first national reports to the
Committee. We need, through joint efforts, to step up
our efforts to deal with the late submitters. Here the
provision of technical assistance must be based on
constructive dialogue, without pressure or interference
in the affairs of States and without prejudice to
legitimate international economic, scientific and
technological cooperation. For our part, we are
prepared to provide comprehensive expert assistance to
those countries requiring it.

Effective work on non-proliferation is impossible
without strengthening the interaction between the
United Nations and lead organizations, such as the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
We believe that it would be useful for the Committee to
conduct in-depth discussions on ways to enhance the
assistance provided by international and regional
organizations and export control regimes with respect
to issues relating to the provisions of resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1673 (2006). The outcome of such
discussions should be a substantive reinvigoration of
contacts with those organizations that have significant
experience and expertise.

We believe that, in spite of the tremendous
complexity of the problems dealt with in resolution 1540

(2004), we will be able, through joint efforts and under
United Nations auspices, to close existing proliferation
gaps in domestic legislation and strengthen the basis for
coordinated efforts to counter the black market in WMD.

