Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General O'Brien and the World
Health Organization Country Director Hoff for their
comprehensive and deeply disturbing briefings. I thank
them, as always, for presenting us with the unvarnished
and unbiased facts. Their remarks show once again what
happens when the conflict continues and when Russia
and the Al-Assad regime relentlessly pummel civilian
areas from the air and regularly block deliveries of
humanitarian aid on the ground.

In opposition-held eastern Aleppo, at least 289
people are reported to have been killed since Tuesday.
One Syrian volunteer reported 180 air strikes on
eastern Aleppo on Saturday alone. Think of what you
were doing on Saturday and imagine being subjected to
180 air strikes while doing it. A horrifying video from
eastern Aleppo affirms a shocking inhuman barrage on
civilian neighbourhoods.

Of course, we will hear today from the Syrian
regime and the Russian Federation a very different
narrative. Russia will no doubt talk at length about how
its unilateral pause in air strikes over eastern Aleppo
was some kind of humanitarian gesture. The reality
is that the Al-Assad regime and Russia are continuing
their starve-get-bombed-or-surrender strategy in
eastern Aleppo: bombing the city's 275,000 residents
and pausing to see if any will surrender to the Al-Assad
regime - a regime that, as both we and the Syrian
people know, has systematically tortured those who
have found themselves under its custodial authority.
Would any of us trust that regime with the lives of our
family members, with our kids, with our parents, with
our siblings?

Consider that when Russia paused its air strikes
over eastern Aleppo they did so unilaterally, meaning
that they never deigned to coordinate their efforts with
the United Nations or any other organization actually
providing aid. That was not a humanitarian gesture.

Consider that during this pause in strikes Russia
and the Al-Assad regime never gave the United
Nations permission to deliver a single parcel of food or
medicine to eastern Aleppo - not one. That was not a
humanitarian gesture.
Consider that Russian war regime planes dropped
leaflets warning the people of eastern Aleppo to leave
or be annihilated, as many of us discussed at our
previous briefing (see S/PV.7795).

Consider that residents of eastern Aleppo reportedly
received text messages warning people to flee before a
"strategically planned assault" would happen.

Consider that last month (see S/PV.7785) Russia
vetoed a draft resolution (S/2016/846) in the Security
Council meant to end atrocities in Aleppo.

Those also were not humanitarian gestures.

Remember that eastern Aleppo is not an isolated
case, it is part of a countrywide strategy across Syria.
Russia and the Al-Assad regime are waging a campaign
that includes sieges, the blocking of humanitarian aid,
the indiscriminate bombardment of civilian areas and
the use of barrel bombs.

Therefore, we members of the Council need to
separate fact from fiction today. When we renewed
the Joint Investigative Mechanism for Syria last
week (see S/PV.7815), I and many members spoke of
how we could not uphold the norm against chemical
weapons use if we did not know which party was using
chemical weapons. In that regard again, to uphold the
humanitarian demands of the Council, we need to
speak frankly and very specifically about which parties
are responsible for the suffering of the Syrian people.
That means condemning the atrocities committed by
terrorist organizations like Jabhat Al-Nusra and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) - which the
United States has done and will continue to do - but
it also means telling the truth about Russia and the
Al-Assad regime's actions. Today I will focus on just
two features of regime and Russian terror.

First, the Al-Assad regime and Russia must
stop the campaign of attacks that has destroyed
countless schools, hospitals, homes and other civilian
infrastructure. Take just some of the recent air strikes.
Between 13 and 15 November, five hospitals in Syria
were struck - five hospitals in two days. After
air strikes hit another hospital in eastern Aleppo
on 18 November, every hospital in that city is now
reportedly out of service due to attacks by Russia and
the Al-Assad regime: every single hospital, serving a
population of 275,000 civilians, is out of commission.
On 6 November, an attack by the Al-Assad regime on a
Damascus suburb reportedly killed at least six children
in a kindergarten.
The United States recognizes that it is not just the
Al-Assad regime and its allies that are causing civilians
to suffer in Syria. We condemn, in the strongest terms,
all indiscriminate shelling by opposition forces into
the civilian areas of western Aleppo. Those attacks
have reportedly caused more than 60 casualties since
1 November. We agree with Russia that there can
be no justification for such attacks, but I ask: Will
Russia condemn - here in the Chamber today, or any
day - even a single air strike by the Al-Assad regime?
Choose any of the hospitals that the A1-Assad regime
has destroyed, or any of the schools. Will Russia ever
condemn its ally, Bashar Al-Assad, here at the Council
for a single one ofthose attacks? We have been attending
meetings like this one for more than five years. Despite
all ofthe carnage inflicted by the regime partners, they
have uttered not one critical, nor even skeptical word.

Today I would like to specify some of the names
of those involved since 2011 in killing and injuring
civilians by conducting air and ground-based Syrian
Government military assaults on cities, residential
areas and civilian infrastructure. The United States
will not let those who have commanded units involved
in these actions hide anonymously behind the facade
of the Al-Assad regime. We know who some of these
commanders are. They include Major General Adeeb
Salameh, Brigadier General Adnan Aboud Hilweh,
Major General Jawdat Salbi Mawas, Colonel Suheil
Al-Hassan and Major General Tahir Hamid Khalil.

Russia and the Al-Assad regime's merciless attacks
must end and those behind such attacks must know that
we and the international community are watching their
actions and documenting their abuses, and that one
day they will be held accountable. I know right now
today, with the wind at their backs, these individuals
feel impunity. However, so did Slobodan Milosevic,
Charles Taylor and countless war criminals before
them. Today's atrocities are well-documented, and the
civilized world's memories are long.

Secondly, the Al-Assad regime must end the
suffering and torture in detention centres throughout
Syria. The regime continues to imprison tens of
thousands of Syrians, including women, children,
doctors, humanitarian workers, human rights defenders
and journalists, subjecting many to torture, sexual
violence and inhumane conditions. Here is how a
Syrianjournalist named Shiar described his experience
at military intelligence branch No. 235:

"They had me stand on a barrel and they tied
rope around my wrists. Then they took away the
barrel. There was nothing below my feet. They
were dangling in the air. They brought three sticks;
they were hitting me everywhere. After they were
done beating me with wooden sticks, they took the
cigarettes. They were putting them out all over
my body. It felt like a knife excavating my body,
cutting me apart."

We know where torture has taken place and
where it continues to take place: facilities that include
military intelligence branches numbers 215, 227, 235
and 251; the air force intelligence investigation branch
in Mezzeh military airport; the Sednaya Prison and
the Tishreen and Hharasta military hospitals. The
commanding officers and prison officials who work at
those facilities should know, too, that the international
community is watching and that they, too, will one day
be held accountable. They include Major General Jamil
Hassan, Brigadier General Abdul Salam Fajr Mahmoud,
Brigadier General Ibrahim Ma'ala, Colonel Qusay
Mihoub, Brigadier General Salah Hamad, Brigadier
General Shafik Massa, Major General Rafiq Shehadeh
and Hafez Makhlouf. The United States will not forget
the cases of the many Syrians who have suffered so
much at the hands of individuals like those, and we will
continue fighting to hold them accountable for their
hateful crimes.

I wish to stress that the United States recognizes
that non-State groups have also committed many abuses
against detainees, including torture. We condemn any
group using such tactics in the strongest terms and we
demand that immediate access be granted to monitor
all detention facilities, whether regime, terrorist or
opposition. ISIL atrocities are in a category unto
themselves, which is why the United States leads a
67-member coalition to defeat that terrorist organization.

Let me conclude: in January, the United Nations
and the world raised the alarm that the people in the
community of Madaya, besieged by allies of the
Al-Assad regime, were starving. Today we have
reports of starvation again. Save The Children reported
recently that Madaya is now also seeing an increse in
child suicide attempts, something virtually unheard of
in the town before.

One of those kids is a 15-year-old named Omar.
Omar told a reporter recently,

"There is nothing left for me here, and I felt the
easiest thing to do was to kill myself. I tried to
throw myself from the balcony, but it wasn't
high enough."
Omar's father is in jail. His mom had to leave
Madaya but left Omar behind, so he did not get recruited
into the Government's security forces. Omar says,

"There is nothing to eat. We are being strangled
here. It is like I am in prison".

Omar has one other thought; one that you might expect
from any teenager:

"I miss my mum waking meup in the morning."

We - not just members of the Security Council,
but all States Members of the United Nations - must
be clear that the Al-Assad regime, Russia and their
allies are responsible for that destruction, which is
both physical destruction and, for countless children
like Omar, psychological destruction. In the face of
that destruction and overwhelming suffering, the
perpetrators must know that the pursuit of a military
solution is as foolish as it is brutal. Attacks on
civilians fuel terrorism; they do not defeat terrorism.
The perpetrators must also know that, like their
ignominious predecessors throughout history, they will
face judgment for their crimes.

