Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to appear
before this body.

I want to associate my delegation with the statement
made by the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). Reading that statement alongside
the statement made by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations helps us to become more enlightened
about the situation in Africa as it is today.

Last week, at the opening of the General Assembly
general debate of the fifty-fourth session, the Secretary-
General gave an important address in which he sharply
raised the issue of humanitarian intervention in conflict
areas. One of the many challenges he posed to the United
Nations was contained in the following statement:

"As we seek ways to combat the ancient enemies of
war and poverty, we will succeed only if we all
adapt our Organization to a world with new actors,
new responsibilities and new possibilities for peace
and progress." (A/54/PV.4)

That entire address by the Secretary-General
deserves serious discussion in a different forum. It raised
issues that are fundamental to the work of our
Organization and even relevant to this open meeting on
conflicts in Africa.

Today we are here to take stock of developments
that have taken place since the Secretary-General issued
his report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa. This
report distinguishes itself because of its holistic approach
to the sources of conflict in Africa and the valuable
guidelines it provides on conflict prevention, management
and resolution.

We believe that those guidelines can make profound
contributions to the efforts of African countries to assert
their sovereignty, rediscover their meaningful role as
independent nation States, define their role within the
international community and, indeed, rid the continent of

 

the scourge of conflict. My delegation would again like to
associate itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
OAU and also with other statements that have been made.

African countries such as ours, which have fought for
liberation and against colonial rule with the help and
support of the United Nations, believe that it is important
for multilateral institutions to provide a forum at which the
international community can continue to debate positive
ways of articulating and advancing the interests of
developing countries in crisis. We note that this debate is
taking place on the threshold of a new millennium, and we
urge that it spell out concrete steps to be taken to enhance
peace, security and development in Africa.

While noting with appreciation that the Security
Council remains seized of matters of peace and security in
Africa, we believe that similar debates in the General
Assembly would add to the collective wisdom needed to
address these issues. We further commend the Security
Council for its consideration of the Secretary-General's
report, which culminated in its adoption of resolution 1197
(1998), specifying areas of cooperation with the
Organization of African Unity that need strengthening so
that the OAU is better equipped to play a supportive role
with regard to United Nations activities aimed at achieving
peace and stability in the continent.

We are equally appreciative of the fact that the
Secretary-General's report resulted in the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 53/92 in December 1998.
Most important, we strongly support the idea of establishing
a follow-up mechanism to implement recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General. This is a
bold, meaningful, and action-oriented step that goes beyond
mere declarations. It sends a long-overdue, positive
message that the United Nations is indeed ready to act on
this crucial matter.

Much as we welcome the momentum these resolutions
introduced to the debate on peace, stability and
development in Africa, it is disheartening to note that little
has been done to keep that momentum and to establish an
open-ended ad hoc working group of the General Assembly
to monitor the implementation of resolution 53/92, or, in
particular, to implement the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General. It is incumbent on the
United Nations and Member States to rededicate their
efforts to the implementation of the provisions of resolution
53/92. Our inaction in this regard, largely due to the lack of
political will, is a manifestation of a fundamental problem
that continues to impede the United Nations in taking
resolute and immediate action. We should not allow this
lack of political will to continue to hinder the United
Nations from playing its rightful role in the pursuit of
international peace and security and thus preventing it
from getting closer to the people it should serve.

Whereas the United Nations continues to be the
foremost Organization in the maintenance of international
peace and security, we African countries would like to
declare that we are ready to address issues of conflict in
the continent - in fact, we are already doing so. But for
us to consolidate our modest successes and increase the
authority of the decisions we have taken so far, we will
need support from the international community, especially
the Security Council.

It is for this reason that most of the leaders who
addressed the General Assembly in the general debate last
week, including President Mbeki, underscored the
importance of creating a more democratic system of
international governance, as would be reflected by a
restructuring of the multilateral institutions, including the
United Nations and the Security Council.

South Africa believes that there exists an intrinsic
link between peace and development which requires an
integrated approach to conflict prevention, resolution and
management. In this regard, we commend all global
advocacy for African development and efforts to mobilize
the international community further in support of our
continent and, in particular, to bring the United Nations
system, including the Bretton Woods institutions, to
support African development within a coordinated
framework. Continued support by the international
community for this endeavour is of the utmost importance
to the efforts of African countries to create an enabling
environment for sustainable development as well as for
the restructuring of their economies in order to improve
their economic situation. The Secretary-General reached
the same conclusion when he wrote in paragraph 5 of his
report (S/1998/318) on the causes of conflict in Africa:

"By not averting these colossal human
tragedies, African leaders have failed the peoples of
Africa; the international community has failed them;
the United Nations has failed them. We have failed
them by not doing enough to ensure peace; and
by our repeated inability to create the conditions for
sustainable development. This is the reality of
Africa's recent past. It is a reality that must be
confronted honestly and constructively by all
concerned if the people of Africa are to enjoy the

 
human security and economic opportunities they seek
and deserve."

Another frustration experienced by developing
countries is the lack of timely and decisive United Nations
response to conflict situations in Africa; this has resulted in
sharp criticism being levelled at the Organization. Swift
United Nations involvement in places such as Kosovo and
elsewhere is cited as a typical example epitomizing the lack
of enthusiasm for the United Nations responding with
similar zeal to African conflicts such as the tragic situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is urgent for
the Security Council to move swiftly in deploying the
necessary peacekeeping force in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo so as to allow the peace process to take hold.
In Africa - and elsewhere for that matter - the dangerous
notion is beginning to develop that the United Nations is
increasingly abrogating its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and ceding
it to regional arrangements. Needless to say, it is of
utmost importance that the United Nations should
improve its record with regard to response to conflict
situations. The United Nations has an obligation to be
seen by the peoples of the world as a truly even-handed
interlocutor and peacemaker.

The trend for the international community to wait
for conflicts to develop into violence and even war, and
subsequently to intervene through costly peacekeeping
operations, no longer reflects a worthy method of
intervention. The demand for the United Nations to
become involved in preventing the outbreak of hostilities
in countries that are caught in conflict, or to clean up
after wars, imposes a difficult and expensive mandate on
this Organization. At this rate, peacekeeping missions are
becoming instruments for freezing conflict, perpetuating
polarization and making timely conflict-resolution more
difficult. The men and women of violence simply have to
wait long enough for United Nations peacekeeping
missions to depart from areas of conflict before resuming
shooting at each other.

My delegation has already said that we look forward
to a debate that will result in concrete steps to inform our
activities to enhance peace, stability and development in
Africa. Eighteen months after the issuance of the
Secretary-General's report, it cannot escape us that it has
become something more concrete. We are pleased that the
report has not been forgotten. We realize that the task of
putting more life into the report cannot be accomplished
by this meeting. However, we hope that by discussing it
here we are taking a modest step towards meeting the
need for a different format to evaluate and review United
Nations measures that can be undertaken to resolve
conflicts.

The meeting was suspended at 1.05 pm.
