Mr. Annabi: There have been several questions
linked to the expected completion of the judicial system
assessment programme by the end of this year. As is
indicated in the report of the Secretary-General, it is
indeed our expectation that this programme can be
completed by the end of this year; in other words, what
will be completed will be the judicial assessment
programme. Judicial reform, of course, will have to
continue. That is more of a long-term process, which is
under the overall responsibility of the High
Representative. Should the High Representative turn to
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), as he did in the case of the judicial
assessment programme, and request its assistance in the
field of judicial reform, such a request would of course
have to be considered and discussed with all concerned,
including the members of the Council. We would come
back to the Council in due course if that should happen.

We see the judicial assessment activities of
UNMIBH as being separate from its general mandate,
which is the implementation of annex ll of the Dayton
Agreement. The general mandate of UNMIBH is not, in
our view, restricted to police, but also covers - as
indicated in annex 11- monitoring, observing and
inspecting judicial organizations, structures and
proceedings. This mandate existed before UNMIBH
became involved in judicial assessment, before judicial
assessment was added to the tasks of UNMIBH. It will of
course continue to exist once the judicial assessment
programme is completed.

There have also been several questions on a possible
exit strategy for UNMIBH. In this regard, I want to point
out that the present report of the Secretary-General is only
a progress report. In three months' time there will be
another report, which will be an end-of-mandate report
and which will take stock of the situation in a more
comprehensive manner and take a more forward-looking
approach in which it will be our intention to provide
UNMIBH's plans and recommendations for future action.

There have also been several questions on the State
Border Service, and in particular on the calendar for its
establishment and on its funding. As I indicated in my
briefing, the structure of the State Border Service has now
been agreed by the Joint Presidency, and we therefore
hope that this can move forward. Under the revised
timetable foreseen for the setting up of the Border

 

Service, it is envisaged that a headquarters and four units
will be established by mid-July. Those four units would be
responsible for controlling border entry at Sarajevo airport,
which is now under Federation control; at Buljanie, which
is currently under Bosnian Croat control; at Zvornik, which
is currently under Bosnian Serb control; and at Izacic,
which is now under Bosniac control. It is envisaged that to
perform those activities a total of some 300 officers and
personnel will be needed. Ninety of them have already been
trained, with the generous cooperation of the Government
of Austria. Training for another 180 is now being planned.

With regard to funding, UNMIBH has been successful
in ensuring that the State Border Service will be treated as
a separate line item in the budget prepared by the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This will ensure
that interested donors - and we understand that there are
quite a few - will have a clear picture of the costs of the
Border Service and of the use of the funds that will be
made available to support the establishment and functioning
of the Service.

There was also a question about the suggestion by
UNMIBH, in the context of the Stability Pact, regarding the
establishment of a South-East European Police Staff
College. This is only a suggestion by UNMIBH. Such a
college could be established in Bosnia and Herzegovina, or
elsewhere. We feel that the funding would need to be
provided through the Stability Pact mechanisms and that the
members of the Stability Pact would also have to assign an
implementing agency for this regional staff college. We do
not, however, see UNMIBH as the sponsor or the
implementing agency for the staff college.

Finally, there was a question regarding the linkages
between the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
rest of the region, in particular Kosovo and Croatia. There
is no doubt, of course, that - as the Ambassador of France
has said progress in some areas, and perhaps in many
areas in UNMIBH and in Bosnia, is linked to improvement
in the overall political and economic situation in the wider
region, as the Secretary-General has indicated in his report.
It is in this context that the Secretary-General has
welcomed the pledge by the newly elected Government in
Croatia to respect the sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to cooperate with its people and with the
international community in what it is trying to achieve
there.

 

The Secretary-General, in this context, has asked his
Special Envoy for the Balkans, Mr. Carl Bildt, in
consultation with the other Special Representatives in the
region, to reflect on some of these interlinkages. As has
been mentioned by at least one member of the Council,
Mr. Bildt will be preparing a report on some of these
issues, and we will have more to say about them at that
time.

