Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
express my appreciation to the presidency of Nigeria
for organizing this important open debate. Let me
also thank you, Madam President, for being here with
us at this late hour and doing us the honour of being
personally present here.

In view of time constraints, I will read out a
shortened version of my statement. The full version
will be available on my Twitter account.

I align myself with the statement made earlier
by the observer of the European Union (EU), which
gave an extensive overview of the ways in which the
EU is playing its role as a regional organization and
as a partner in confronting contemporary challenges to
global peace and security.

Only by forging stronger partnerships can the
international community effectively address current
challenges to peace and security. These partnerships, in
our View, should include cooperation not only between
international, regional and subregional organizations,
but also between Governments, civil society, business
communities and development organizations.

Regional organizations play an essential role in
addressing issues of peace and security. This applies
to the prevention of conflict, the containment and
resolution of conflict and rebuilding in the post-
conflict phase. It is the ambition of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands to be a partner for peace, justice and
development in all these three phases. Let me touch on
each of the three.

First, on prevention, we believe that regional
and subregional organizations are well positioned to
understand the root causes of armed conflicts. They are
often aware of emerging conflicts very early on, and
they are well placed to use tools such as mediation for
conflict prevention, a point just made by our Armenian
colleague. An interesting example is the Organization of
American States Mission to Support the Peace Process
in Colombia, implemented with the support of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands. As many here are aware,
Colombia is one of the neighbouring countries of our
Kingdom. Our Kingdom consists of four autonomous
countries, three of which - Aruba, Curacao and Sint
Maarten - are in the Caribbean,

(spoke in French)
and we also consider Haiti to be a neighbouring country.
(spoke in English)

We are intensifying our Kingdom's cooperation
with the the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
regional organization to address current regional
security challenges, and therefore CARICOM. is also a
very important cooperation partner for us.

The third example relates to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, of which the
Netherlands is a founding member State. It usually
follows a multidimensional approach, focusing on
the politic, economic and human dimensions of
conflict, and is therefore able to play a crucial role in
monitoring and verifying the implementation of the
Minsk agreement, which is the basis for a sustainable
solution to the conflict in full respect of Ukraine's
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Also during conflict, regional organizations are
crucial. In that phase, the international community must
do its utmost to contain and mitigate the consequences
of conflict and to resolve it. Peacekeeping is often
needed to protect civilians and to create the conditions
for peace. In Mali, the Netherlands is proud to be an
active partner in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali to that effect.

Of course, a political process is crucial to achieve
peace. On the African continent, the Kingdom of
the Netherlands pays tribute to the increasingly
important role that the African Union (AU) is playing
in maintaining peace and security. Great progress has
been made in recent years in implementing the African
Peace and Security Architecture. The Peace and
Security Council has proved to be a key force behind
the increased action and visibility of the AU. Today,
AU missions are increasingly deployed ahead of United
Nations missions, making them important instruments
for stabilizing conflicts and guaranteeing security.

In the political process, subregional organizations
are often the best placed to help steer countries in
conflict back onto the road to peace. Important recent
examples in Africa are, of course, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the East African
Community and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). In very tense and complicated
situations, their efforts need to be enhanced and
supported by the international community, for example
by the IGAD-Plus formula. As was said earlier today,
the European Union takes pride in our close cooperation
with the African Union.

My third point concerns the importance of regional
organizations in the post-conflict phase. There, timely
and coordinated efforts are needed to prevent a relapse
into conflict. If exit strategies are nothing more than an
afterthought, countries are at great risk of falling back
into conflict. In our view, therefore, peacebuilding
must be an essential element of every mission. It must
be included in initial planning, and it must be part of a
comprehensive vision for peace, justice and sustainable
development for conflict situations. The United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations have to
make that shift together in order to save lives and
prevent cycles of violence.

In conclusion, I would like to quote from the
report of the High-level Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), which says:

"We have truly entered an era of partnership
peacekeeping, indeed of partnership in all aspects
of the international peace and security agenda."

Now is the time for the United Nations to reach out
and strengthen those partnerships, developing mature
and productive relationships based on trust, mutual
responsibility and accountability. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands is committed to remaining a partner in
peace, justice and development for that worthy purpose.

