Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Iwould
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her report and
her detailed briefing. Luxembourg fully supports the
objectives presented by the Prosecutor. We can never
overstate the importance of respect for the principle of
accountability and the fight against impunity. Those
universal goals guide the work of the United Nations
and are at the centre of the international community's
concerns. I also wish to commend the Prosecutor for
the investigations her Office has undertaken on all
the facts and evidence necessary to establish the legal
accountability of the perpetrators, in accordance with
the Rome Statute.

We welcome the significant progress made in Libya
in terms of political and democratic transition, even
though challenges undoubtedly remain, in particular
with regard to security. Through the adoption of 1970
(2011), the Security Council decided that the Libyan
authorities should fully cooperate with the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the Prosecutor and provide
them with all necessary assistance. In that regard, we
welcome the visit to The Hague on 19 April of the
Prosecutor-General of Libya and the Libyan focal point
for the ICC to discuss cooperation and the coordination
of efforts to move the investigations forward, in
accordance with the principle of complementarity. We
commend the intention expressed by the Prosecutor
this morning to visit Tripoli in the near future to deepen
those exchanges. We believe that it is highly important
for the Libyan authorities to continue to cooperate with
the ICC and that the Prosecutor should enjoy the support
she needs from all States, including those that are not
parties to the Rome Statute, without precondition or
limitation.

We await with interest the decision to be taken by
the Court with regard to the admissibility challenges
of Libya in the cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. That decision will require
the Libyan legal system to be assessed for sufficient
impartiality and independence, and for the necessary
capacity to respond to the post-conflict challenges it
faces. We trust that the Court and its assessment will
ensure that the cases will be in full conformity with
international standards. Regardless of the Court's final
decision, we agree with Ms. Bensouda that the Office
of the Prosecutor must be informed of all measures and
decisions taken by the Libyan authorities in those cases.

We are concerned by the reports, especially
those coming from the International Commission
of Inquiry on Libya, with regard to sexual violence
and the recruitment and use of children. We thank
Ms. Bensouda for the information she provided on the
ongoing investigations. We insist on the need to ensure
the protection of the victims of those acts in order to
prevent any risk of new suffering or potential reprisals.

With regard to the allegations of crimes committed
by rebel forces, we share the concerns of the Office of
the Prosecutor on the situation in Tawergha, where the
violence against the civilian population perpetrated by
Misurata militias could constitute war crimes or crimes
against humanity. We deplore the fact that the security
situation currently makes it impossible for the Office of
the Prosecutor to have access to those areas.

Reprisals, such as those committed against
civilians and described in the Prosecutor's report, are
unacceptable. Arbitrary arrests, violence in detention
centres and forced disappearances must stop. The
perpetrators must be held accountable. We welcome the
ongoing efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor to that
end. We call on the Prosecutor and her Office to sustain
their commitment along those lines, in cooperation
with the Libyan authorities .

In conclusion, like Ms. Bensouda, we would like
to encourage the Libyan authorities to draw up, publish
and implement a comprehensive strategy to end the
crime and impunity in Libya. The process initiated by
resolution 1970 (2011) must run its course. That calls
both for Libya's full cooperation with the Office of the
Prosecutor and the full support of the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya. Justice must be done. Impunity cannot be
tolerated. Those responsible for the crimes committed
in Libya must be brought to justice and undergo a fair
trial.

