Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
takes note of the report presented by the ambassadors
of the United States and the United Kingdom,
representing the Coalition Provisional Authority
(CPA), concerning the situation in Iraq.

We are encouraged by the signature of the 15

November agreement between the CPA and the
Governing Council to initiate a political process aimed
at the election of a transitional national assembly to
assume sovereignty of Iraq in 2004. We believe that
there should be an international follow-up mechanism
to strengthen legitimacy and give transparency to this
process. Unquestionably, the fact that Iraqis are
assuming control of their country will have a direct
impact on pacification. Improving security conditions
will enable not only the reactivation of normality in
social and economic activities of the country, but also,
very importantly, will help bring about the return of
personnel of the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations, who will help supervise conditions for
the Iraqi people.

With regard to disarmament, let me point out that
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is
important because of the threat they represent, but with
equal determination, the international community
should act in controlling small arms and light weapons,
explosives and munitions. Unfortunately, as shown by
the attacks in recent days, terrorism today uses
explosives and small arms and light weapons. Despite
that fact, there is no international legal instrument
regulating illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, explosives and munitions.

Today, there is the technology and the ability to
determine the origin of explosive materials. This
Council could go from words to acts and adopt a
resolution containing obligations with respect to the
production, sale and brokerage of this kind of weapon.
Such an act unquestionably would have an immediate
and concrete impact in the fight against terrorism.

With regard to human rights, we believe that the
grave violations that took place under the previous
regime in Iraq should be investigated, and the various
models of justice applied by transitional regimes to
prevent crimes from going unpunished should be
examined.

To conclude, I should like to pose two questions
to the representatives of the CPA. First, is there
coordination by the Authority with neighbouring
countries? If so, could you give us information about
that, about what kind of coordination is taking place
with neighbouring countries? The second question is,
does the Authority have criteria, or has it established
criteria, to distinguish between terrorists, former
members of the old regime, Iraqis resisting foreign
presence, and ordinary criminals?

