El Salvador considers it highly opportune for the Security Council to discuss the consequences of international pandemics and health crises on international peace and security, as well as the role and leadership that this United Nations organ should assume in its work to prevent conflicts in those contexts. Health crises can cause or exacerbate instability and, in turn, could reverse the progress made in development, peace and human rights. HIV/AIDS and Ebola have shown us that the repercussions can be much more profound when countries are in the process of transition to peace or, in the worst-case scenario, in conflict. The consequences could also have an effect on all sectors and levels of society because, if not properly addressed, they can generate social tensions and a deterioration in the political and security climate. To date, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has affected more than 10 million people around the world, and more than half a million have died. COVID-19, listed as a pandemic by the World Health Organization, is the largest health crisis in recent years and, as the Secretary-General has previously mentioned, the greatest challenge the Organization has faced in its almost 75 years of existence. Its implications are therefore much broader than other health crises and will require wide-ranging and exceptional measures. For all of these reasons, El Salvador recognizes that the COVID-19 pandemic is an unprecedented health, social and economic challenge, as well as a threat to international peace and security, which requires innovative and supportive responses from all Members and relevant actors of the Organization. El Salvador, concerned about the plight of women, children and all civilians in conflict and other humanitarian crises, strongly supports the global ceasefire in order to provide assistance and protection to those most vulnerable groups, thereby reducing the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak. In this regard, El Salvador has heeded the call of the Secretary-General for an immediate ceasefire worldwide. We welcome the fact that the majority of the States Members of the Organization have accepted the call, and the progress that this action has made possible. We note with satisfaction the recent adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2532 (2020), endorsing the Secretary-General's call to address the consequences of the pandemic. El Salvador sees in this action a hopeful sign for those who are suffering the consequences of conflicts and, at the same time, urgently need health support. El Salvador joins the Security Council's recognition of the role women play in response activities to COVID-19, as well as the reduction of the negative and disproportionate impact of the pandemic on the most vulnerable sectors of the population. We highlight the commendable efforts of peacekeeping operations and the hard work of the more than 100,000 men and women working in them, in close collaboration with other actors in the United Nations system, particularly those supporting local authorities to contain the outbreak of COVID-19. El Salvador also commends the efforts to rapidly adapt to the evolving exceptional circumstances so as to fulfil the mandates assigned and assist in preventing, mitigating and responding to the effects and repercussions of COVID-19. We support the actions of the Secretary-General on the ground where peace operations are being carried out, particularly those in support of measures taken by the host countries to mitigate the consequences of the virus. We believe it essential to continue to strengthen the training of peacekeeping personnel on issues related to the prevention and spread of COVID-19. We would like to take this opportunity to honour the memory of peace operations personnel who recently lost their lives, particularly Lieutenant Colonel Carlos Moises Guillen Alfaro, a member of the Torogoz V battalion, deployed in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, who died in support of the tasks that El Salvador is carrying out as part of implementing the Security Council's mandate in Mali. The COVID-19 pandemic has increased the many challenges for countries such as El Salvador, as the Secretary-General has stated in recent reports in which he highlights the economic impact across the world, in particular in developing countries impacted by the health crisis, through a reduction in their tax revenue, lower levels of productivity and decisions taken that may result in higher levels of debt to respond to the effects of the pandemic. El Salvador is currently facing a major dual challenge - on the one hand, working tirelessly to combat COVID-19 and investing valuable resources to mitigate the effects of the virus, and, on the other hand, dealing with the consequences of the tropical storms Amanda and Cristobal. In that regard, we emphasize the urgent need to work on specific proposals that will not only bring about a recovery but also place us on the right path towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda, based on the premise that there can be no sustainable development without peace and there can be no peace without sustainable development. The pandemic has the potential to increase dissatisfaction with public institutions, particularly if citizens perceive that the authorities are mishandling the response. As a result, levels of social division and unrest could increase, creating fertile ground in weaker countries for groups outside the law to take action to stall peace processes and prevent diplomacy in times of crisis, as well as possibly undermining or weakening human rights protection for many vulnerable sectors of society. That is why El Salvador believes that it is crucial to discuss and take immediate action to prevent a health crisis from becoming a security crisis due to the negative socioeconomic repercussions that often trigger conflict. States must commit to multisectoral policies, including plans for social and economic recovery, with a human rights-based approach, taking into account the needs of traditionally excluded groups, the most vulnerable and those who face multidimensional poverty. It is important to ensure and safeguard food security and nutrition for all, including women, children, young people, the elderly, indigenous peoples, local communities, persons with disabilities and persons living in vulnerable situations, among others, by promoting economic and social policies that counteract the impact of COVID-19 and facilitate the eradication of hunger. The challenge for States, international organizations and other relevant actors is to implement policies that seek equality and non-discrimination in mitigating, and recovering from, this crisis, providing them with the opportunity to respond appropriately and effectively to the needs of the entire population, especially the most vulnerable. The inclusion of a gender-based approach and the promotion of gender equality must be a priority throughout the COVID-19 crisis preparedness and response cycle, as well as in all stages of transition to normality, to ensure the protection and empowerment of women and girls, thereby promoting gender equality and gender equity. In such crisis situations, the participation and representation of women in developing policies to transition to normality are crucial to addressing all the various impacts of the current pandemic crisis in a fair, effective and efficient way. Women have a voice in ensuring the gender perspective in crisis mitigation and recovery policies at all levels. It will also be important to put in place measures that address the impact on women's mental and physical health caused by the effects of COVID-19 on their lives due to the many additional tasks and roles as a result of the pandemic and the kind of violence suffered in their homes. Moreover, new recovery policies must address the gender digital divide. Technology must also become an enabler for women's access to information, filing of complaints and access to essential services. Furthermore, the use of sex- and age- disaggregated data and gender-based analysis should be explored in order to promote gender equality in mitigation and planning measures during humanitarian crises. El Salvador would like to take the opportunity of this open debate of the Security Council to express its appreciation to the United Nations system, through the humanitarian country team, for the support that it has provided to the Government in addressing various emerging and priority needs, such as the Grand Specialty Hospital and the quarantine centres, by providing medical supplies, protective equipment, tests and early detection equipment for COVID-19, hygiene kits, food baskets, basic necessities, supply systems and water systems, among other things. Finally, El Salvador wishes to state that the fight against this pandemic requires greater cooperation and solidarity at all levels and a coordinated, inclusive and comprehensive international response in which the United Nations system plays a coordinating role. For that reason, we call on the entire membership to continue to support the efforts of the specialized agencies of the United Nations system, in particular to provide a response and humanitarian assistance with equal access for all, without discrimination.
