Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Iwould like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Miroslav Jenca and Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller for their briefings. I would also like to welcome
my former colleagues, Ambassador Ertugrul Apakan
and Ambassador Martin Sajdik, and to thank them
for their insightful briefings on the implementation of
resolution 2202 (2015), the Minsk agreements and the
situation in eastern Ukraine.

The United Nations was established in order to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. Its
fundamental role is to prevent conflict. Pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council has

the primary responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security. The Council takes the initiative to
identify threats to peace and security and calls on States
parties to a conflict to settle their differences through
peaceful means in order to prevent an armed conflict.

This meeting falls on the fourth anniversary of the
Minsk agreements, which provide a road map to settle
the conflict in Ukraine. On this occasion, we would
have hoped to achieve lasting peace. However, there
continue to be violations of the ceasefire with weapons
that should have been withdrawn under the agreements.
Those weapons are still present in an environment
characterized by insecurity and a lack of trust, leading
to more acts of violence. We therefore call on all parties
to immediately cease hostilities and commit themselves
to fully respecting the ceasefire and refraining from
provocations that could lead to more tension.

We renew our support for the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders, as well as non-interference in its
internal affairs. We hope that all parties concerned
will fully implement resolution 2202 (2015), the Minsk
agreements and presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12
of 6 June 2018. We call on those parties to achieve a
comprehensive and balanced solution to this issue
through dialogue, as stipulated in Article 33 of the
United Nations Charter, and within the framework of
the Normandy format as well as the Trilateral Contact
Group in order to achieve immediate progress in all the
agreed areas.

We commend the Special Monitoring Mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and its efforts on the ground, in particular its
endeavours towards facilitating a dialogue among the
parties to the conflict. We call on Ukraine and the
Russian Federation to activate a dialogue between them
and take confidence-building measures to show greater
political will not only to strengthen the ceasefire
arrangements and implement previous agreements,
but also to revitalize a lasting and comprehensive
negotiation process towards a peaceful solution to
the crisis.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, the crisis
in the eastern part of Ukraine is now in its fifth year.
The consequences are becoming increasingly serious
owing to the daily hostilities, which have an impact on
the infrastructure and undermine the daily life of the
people in the region. The conflict also affects more than
5.2 million people, of whom 3.5 million people are in
need of urgent humanitarian assistance and protection,
as mentioned by Ms. Mueller. In addition, there are
1.5 million internally displaced persons, according
to the report of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs of31 December 2018.

The humanitarian situation remains precarious
due to many obstacles impeding relief work and lack
of funding for the humanitarian response plan. The
situation in eastern Ukraine is still unstable despite
some improvements. We stress the importance of
providing humanitarian assistance to all the affected
areas in order to improve the living conditions of the
population there.

In conclusion, we urgently call for a peaceful
solution to the crisis in the eastern part of Ukraine in
line with the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the agreements signed by the parties involved. That
includes the Minsk agreements, which represent the
only agreed framework to settle the crisis in the region,
along with the mediation efforts of the stakeholders
who enjoy the respect and appreciation of the two
parties to the conflict and the international community
as a whole.

