Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his very informative
briefing on the recent developments in Mali. I would
also like to warmly welcome His Excellency Tiebile
Drame, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali.

At the outset, I want to express our condolences to
the Government and the people of Mali for the tragedy
in the Sobame-Da village. That horrific event in the
Mopti region is the most recent sign that the violence in
Mali is spiralling out of control.

I would like to focus my statement on three
issues - the political process, the security situation
and the upcoming renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

First, with regard to the political process, while
recognizing the progress made in the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
including through the follow-up committee, Poland
calls on the Malian Government to accelerate the full
implementation of its provisions, in particular on the
effective reintegration of combatants, security-sector
reform, decentralization and the establishment of a
development zone in northern Mali. The constitutional
review process should also be as consultative and
inclusive as possible to ensure the participation of all
key stakeholders representing Mali's diverse society. In
that regard the full inclusion of women, youth and civil
society is of the utmost importance.

Secondly, on the security situation, we remain
grievously concerned about the critical security situation
in the centre, where the levels of intercommunal violence
and the number of civilian casualties are unacceptable.
Therefore, we call on the Malian authorities to step up
their efforts to protect the population from violence,
to restore the State's authority and to ensure access
to social services. The disarmament of ethnic-based
militia and self-defence groups and the fight against
impunity for the atrocities committed against the
population in recent months have to be one of the top
priorities for the Malian authorities.

Lastly, on the upcoming mandate renewal, Poland
believes that support for the implementation of the
agreement remains paramount and should remain the
most important priority of MINUSMA. The good
offices and presence of the Mission in northern Mali
remain essential to preserving the gains made since the
signing of the agreement.

In central Mali, MINUSMA should strengthen its
efforts to facilitate the return of State administration,
including by supporting the redeployment of the Malian
defence and security forces and protecting civilians.
That should be combined with proactive measures to
prevent potential attacks and help to create a secure
environment for the delivery of humanitarian access.

MINUSMA's role in achieving stability and
reconciliation in Mali remains essential despite the
difficult and dangerous context. In the light of that,
we are looking forward to the upcoming important
discussion on the Mission's mandate renewal.

Finally, let me express my gratitude to Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif for his leadership and dedication, as well
as to the personnel of MINUSMA, the United Nations
country team and the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their commitment in extreme and
challenging conditions.

