Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I should like at the outset to welcome to the
Security Council His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadic',
President of the Republic of Serbia. I also wish to
welcome the presence of His Excellency the Secretary-
General, Ban Ki-moon, at this meeting and to thank
him for the information that he has provided to the
Council.

My country hopes that Kosovo's unilateral
declaration of independence yesterday will not signal a
return to what the Balkan region experienced during
the 1990s, when the former Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia was dissolved amid Violence and threats of
Violence. We are full of hope, particularly since both
parties have reaffirmed their resolve to follow the path
of a peaceful and negotiated settlement. Both parties
should be reminded that, unfortunately, the recent
developments that led to Kosovo's declaration of
independence can be traced back to a failure to respect
the legitimate rights of minorities, a lack of respect for
basic freedoms and the use of force instead of dialogue
and reconciliation.

Perhaps at this juncture it would be useful to once
again renew our call to both parties, at this critical and
important stage in their history, to avoid any
provocative action and to remain committed to what
they have repeatedly pledged before the international
community, that they would renounce violence or
incitement to violence. We welcome the renewed
pledge by His Excellency President Boris Tadie and his
reaffirmation that they will not resort to violence and
that Serbia will always follow a policy of peace as a
source of its strength. We wish to welcome the pledge
by Kosovo officials that they will implement the
Ahtisaari plan in terms of minority rights and
guaranteeing their security and that they will work to
provide all necessary conditions for the sustainable
return of internally displaced persons, to maintain
freedom of movement, protect rights and correct any
illegal situations.

My country calls upon the friendly State of Serbia
to refrain from any actions that would have a negative
impact on the already difficult living conditions of
Kosovo citizens, because such actions would only
deepen the gap that was created by practices that
Kosovars suffered at the hands of Serbia's former
rulers. Everyone must work on bridging that gap
instead of widening it - regardless of bitterness at this
stage.

Libya has been, and always will be, supportive of
complete commitment to the principles of justice and
to international law, which stipulates complete respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States.
We wonder how our world would be today if those
noble principles, entrenched through centuries of
sacrifice and pain, were forfeited.

We are confronted with an exceptional situation
in an exceptional region in an exceptional time, during
which a certain group - unfortunately, for cultural and
ethnic purposes - has suffered from repercussions of
blind Violence, ethnic cleansing and deprivation of the
most basic of their rights. That has led to intervention
in order to put a stop to those inhuman practices, and it
led to the developments that have just taken place.
My country cannot accept that the situation
before us today constitutes a precedent in order to
undermine the territorial integrity of States. I do not
think we are alone in that. This Council must state its
complete abidance with respect for the territorial
integrity of States, and that what has taken place,
regardless of developments that might ensue, cannot
constitute a precedent to be used as a term of reference
or as an excuse.

