Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Sir, the delegation of Egypt welcomes your
efforts and those of the delegation of Japan, which
holds the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of April. We also welcome your convening of
this open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding, one of
the most pertinent issues within the Council's mandate
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
As Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement, I would like
to express my support for the statement to be delivered

by the delegation of Bangladesh, coordinator of the
Movement, on this very important issue.

Over the past few years, post-conflict
peacebuilding has witnessed unprecedented
developments, such as the General Assembly's
establishment of an integrated system enabling it to
play a pivotal role in the coordination of international
peacebuilding efforts. In this respect, Egypt reaffirms
its full commitment to support the peacebuilding
efforts of the United Nations through the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Commission's activities have gained increased
importance through several years of accumulated
experience. It is playing an important role in
coordinating international and United Nations efforts
to prevent countries from relapsing into conflict.

Peacebuilding is a multifaceted and
multidimensional process. For one thing, international
peace and security cannot be successfully maintained
without ensuring the centrality of security sector
reform in both the military and social spheres;
furthermore, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes may not achieve their
objectives unless the essential development, social and
economic needs are met. In addition, ensuring
sustainable peace requires an enabling environment
based on comprehensive national dialogue, social
justice, judicial integrity and independence, and the
rule of law. These factors must go hand in hand with a
comprehensive socio-economic development process
based on the national strategies and priorities of
countries emerging from conflict.

In this regard, we are witnessing the fading of the
clear boundaries which used to define the stages of
succession and overlap between conflict resolution,
peacekeeping, post-conflict peacebuilding and
sustainable development; that is true also of the less
well defined interconnection and synchronization
among those phases and the roles of the principal
organs of the United Nations in dealing with them
within a coordinated, mutually reinforcing and
inclusive framework.

Recently, calls for the simultaneous start of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations have
increased. Egypt believes that such views merit
detailed and cautious consideration and recognizes the
need to comprehensively study this approach with a
view to strengthening the capacity of Governments in
post-conflict countries to shoulder their

responsibilities - but without undermining the flow of
resources needed to support these efforts. Successful
peacekeeping depends on comprehensive peace
agreements to which all involved parties adhere and
that enjoy wide popular support, in order to create the
enabling environment needed to sustain the peace and
lay the foundations for a peacebuilding process that
will provide Governments with what they need to
shoulder their responsibilities in the security and
defence sectors. This in turn will make it easier to
formulate exit strategies for peacekeeping operations in
the countries concerned.

Similarly, due consideration must be given to the
overlap between peacebuilding processes and the
launch of sustainable development efforts in post-
conflict countries. Efforts to lay the foundation for
good governance, the rule of law and the application of
the principles of democracy and justice in societies will
not realize their full potential in communities plagued
with poverty, disease, hunger and continued lack of the
basic living standards as enshrined in internationally
agreed development goals. Thus, it is of the utmost
importance to launch a peacebuilding process in an
appropriate manner and at the proper time to ensure the
successful establishment of the key political, economic
and social pillars needed to create an enabling
environment for implementing comprehensive
development strategies supported by timely,
predictable and sustainable financial resources.

The building of comprehensive and sustainable
peace in post-conflict countries requires our sincere
commitment to several objectives. First, we should
maximize the chances of success of peacebuilding
efforts through an unconditional and total commitment
to the principle of national ownership by post-conflict
countries of their national peacebuilding strategies, in
which the national authorities are fully responsible for
defining, planning and implementing peacebuilding
strategies, with the support of the Peacebuilding
Commission and in accordance with clear and
objective national political, economic, social and
development priorities defined without any external
pressure.
Second, we should ensure that the Peacebuilding
Commission continues to effectively provide advice
and proposals, based on in-depth studies and in
coordination with all influential actors, with a view to

formulating and implementing comprehensive
integrated peacebuilding strategies that lay the
foundation for sustainable development in countries
emerging from conflict.

Third, we should build on the accumulated
multidimensional experiences of the United Nations
system in the field of peacebuilding through the
development of clear, defined, balanced, synchronized
and equal relations among the Peacebuilding
Commission, the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, with
full respect for their mandates as defined by the
Charter.

Fourth, we should ensure that the Peacebuilding
Commission is actively involved at the early stages of
peacebuilding processes, which can coincide with
peacekeeping operations, and that it cooperates fully
with national stakeholders to create an enabling
environment and incentives to launch a comprehensive
peacebuilding process within the country concerned.

Fifth, we should ensure a genuine international
political commitment to peacebuilding processes and
provide the needed civilian capacities, technical
capabilities, financial resources and best practices,
through the Peacebuilding Commission, to support
these processes.

Sixth, we should maximize benefits from
available capacities of the United Nations, the
international financial institutions and donor countries
to support peacebuilding efforts. In that regard, it is
imperative to establish a monitoring, evaluation and
follow-up mechanism to ensure the implementation of
all national and international commitments made
within the framework of nationally agreed
peacebuilding priorities.

Seventh, and finally, we should ensure that the
priorities of international funding mechanisms,
including the Peacebuilding Fund, are consistent with
the national peacebuilding priorities of the countries
concerned. We must consider innovative methods to
bolster the resources of such mechanisms, in particular
through the Peacebuilding Fund, so that these
resources can be the cornerstone of the funding of
peacebuilding strategies.
