Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Let me begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. I am particularly pleased to salute, through
you, the friendly country of the People's Republic of
China, with which the Democratic Republic of the
Congo enjoys excellent relations. I would also like
to thank you for taking the initiative to organize this
important meeting to consider the electoral process
and the implementation of the political agreement of
31 December 2016 in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I would also like to thank all the members ofthe
Council for their unwavering interest in the situation in
my country.

I should not omit to greet Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), and to express our appreciation for her
very informative briefing.

I would like to take this opportunity to convey the
views of my Government on the issues under discussion,
as we have always done when addressing the Council.
Before doing so, however, I should point out that as the
report under consideration (S/2018/882) underscores,
the political situation in my country remains focused
on the elections of 23 December, for which preparations

are going well. In fact, a month or so before the long-
awaited date, we have completed all the activities
scheduled to be done by this date, in line with the
Independent National Electoral Commission's electoral
calendar. The current and pending activities can be
broken down into the areas of recruiting and training
the 511,901 electoral agents; educating and raising the
awareness of voters and civic educators, including on
the use of the voting machines and the application of
the code of conduct; training the trainers of officials
for polling and counting stations and local centres
for compiling results; deploying electoral equipment
throughout the country and accrediting witnesses,
observers and journalists.

With regard to electoral equipment, it is important
to point out here that the various logistics centres
around the country - in Matadi, Kinshasa, Bunia,
Kisangani, Goma and Lubumbashi - have received the
voting booths, polling and counting station kits, ballot
boxes and other accessories. The same goes for the
voting machines, which arrived at the port of Matadi to
be sent to the country's western and central provinces
and at the ports of Dar es Salaam and Mombasa to be
assigned to polling stations in the eastern provinces.
With regard to logistics, the Government has provided
the Electoral Commission with land, air and sea
equipment, including motor vehicles, aeroplanes,
helicopters, motorcycles and speedboats, along with
a total of $50 million to enable their deployment
throughout the country. Regarding funding, everything
is going according to the established disbursement
plan and showing an implementation rate of more than
72 per cent. The Government is working to provide the
Commission with the $122 million in funding required
for the remaining critical stages.

On the security front, additional police units have
been recruited and trained. They will be deployed
shortly in accordance with a security plan whose
implementation should shortly be fixed through a new
regulatory act. Some of those units will also be used
for security for the candidates for the presidency of
the Republic.

Concerning the management of electoral disputes,
courts of appeal have been set up in the country's 26
provinces and the magistrates who will lead them have
been appointed, assigned and trained. They have already
done good work in managing disputes that have arisen
during the submission of candidacies and have made
proposals for improving and securing their workplaces.

To return to the issues that continue to be sources of
concern for the opposition and some members of civil
society, as noted in the report under discussion, my
delegation was pleased that the Council members were
able to make a working visit in October to Kinshasa,
where they had the opportunity to discuss all these
issues with Electoral Commission officials and my
country's authorities, as well as all other stakeholders
in the electoral process.

I firmly believe that where the voting machines
are concerned, our discussions and the testing of the
machines that was done on the ground will now have
ended any apprehensions that Council members may
previously have had about their use. In our view, the fact
is that when we are dealing with 35,016 candidates for
three combined elections that will all be held at once,
the voting machines - compared to a 54-page electoral
register with photos of all the candidates - is manually
the easiest for voters to use. The representatives of
the political opposition and civil society whom the
Commission invited to test the machines can also attest
to this. They understand that the machines cannot
undermine the reliability of the voting results because,
as we have already explained, the machine merely
prints out the ballot paper that the elector deposits in
the ballot box. After this operation, the counting will be
done manually before witnesses and observers.

As it has done for the voting machines, the Electoral
Commission has also provided clarifications for the
electoral register. It was audited by the International
Organization of la Francophonie, who concluded that it
was inclusive, comprehensive, reliable and up-to-date.
It now numbers 40,024,897 voters. The provisional lists
were posted for consultations on potential amendments,
and 6,500,318 voters' names were expunged from
them following a purging process and another 337,208
following the audit, so that 40,024,897 voters now
remain on the electoral lists. As for the 6 million
voters who were registered without fingerprints, the
International Organization of La Francophonie, which
carried out the audit of the electoral register and noted
the issue, emphasized in its conclusions that it did not
jeopardize the voting status of those concerned.

With regard to the implementation of the
confidence-building measures and restrictions on
the political space, I would be grateful not to have
to repeat the explanations that have already been
provided to the Council on many previous occasions.
In our humble opinion, however, it is important to
note that the Government has already taken a number
of measures to meet the requirements outlined in the
political agreement of 31 December 2016 regarding
the release of the so-called political prisoners. All
those classified in that category have been released,
with the exception of two people who are still being
held for ordinary infractions rather than for political
reasons. In view of that, my delegation therefore does
not share the view stated in paragraph 16 of the report
that no progress has been made in implementing the
confidence-building measures.

On the contrary, with regard to restrictions on the
political space, we feel we can say that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is now one of the countries in the
Central African region whose citizens - politicians,
ordinary civilians, journalists and activists of various
kinds - enjoy a very broad and sometimes perhaps
excessive scope of freedoms. With 601 political parties,
476 radio stations, 210 television channels and 445
print and other media outlets, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is setting a record in terms of political
freedom and expression. Of course, not everything is
perfect, as is true of any country. But we remain open
and always do our best to adapt to the requirements
of human rights and democracy. In that regard, as
the report acknowledges, the public protests held in
Kananga, Kasai Central and Kinshasa are generally
permitted. If some in other parts of the country have
not been authorized, that is not in any way meant to
stifle freedom of speech, assembly or expression but
rather to protect public order.

To close this chapter, my Government would like
to assure Council members that the electoral campaign,
which will begin in nine days, will be conducted in
full respect for electoral law. All the candidates will
be treated equally and have access to the media under
the same conditions. They will be entirely free to
campaign. It is important to note that these will be only
the third elections to be held in the country's history.
Given their importance, all candidates will be called
on to adhere to the code of conduct established by the
National Independent Electoral Commission for the
smooth holding of the elections. The stakes are high,
but things must not get out of hand.

To touch on the security situation, while things seem
relatively calm elsewhere in the country generally, the
situation in the Beni and Butembo areas in North Kivu
remains worrying in the wake of repeated attacks by
some armed groups, particularly the Allied Democratic
Forces. That situation could have a negative impact on
the holding of the elections in that part of the country, as
well as on the management of the response to the Ebola
epidemic. That is why my country welcomes the joint
operation to address the attacks recently launched by
the Forces armees de la Republique Democratique du
Congo and MONUSCO. As for the Ebola outbreak, my
Government, together with the support of our partners,
is continuing its efforts to eradicate it.

As we have previously emphasized in addressing
the Council, my Government believes that the road
to the elections is irreversible. The Congolese people
are determined and are preparing to exercise their
sovereign right to elect their leaders on 23 December.
In that context, the Council will agree with us that
those who call for the rejection of the voting machines
and a new assessment of the electoral register just a
few weeks before the elections are not actually ready
for the elections, or have no real wish to participate in
them. Now that the process is coming to an end, my
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo expect the international community and
the United Nations to provide the necessary support
and guidance for its successful conclusion. I should not
conclude without thanking all those who are directly
or indirectly committed to my country's cause so as to
enable it to restore the stability and lasting peace that
we so sorely need to rebuild it. To all the members of
the Security Council, I reiterate our deep appreciation.

