Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): I, too, would like to thank Ms. Ameerah Haq,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, for her briefing and for the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/641). I welcome the
presence at this debate of Their Excellencies
Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, and Mrs. Vera
Lucia Machado, Vice-Minister for Political Affairs of
Brazil, and thank them for their statements.

In my statement, I would like to focus on
democratic governance, the ongoing dialogue and the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

With regard to democratic governance, my
delegation welcomes the firm commitment of the
Timorese President to promote democratic values and
confidence among the political leaders. I also welcome
the steps taken by the Timorese Government, with a
view to the presidential and parliamentary elections of
2012, to support unity, mutual respect and women's
participation. On that point in particular, we are
pleased to highlight the increase in the number of
women on the party lists of candidates.

Furthermore, we welcome the democratic
functioning of Timorese institutions, in particular the
open debate within Parliament, as well as the
commitment of political leaders to unity and stability.
The meetings organized by Ms. Haq between the
Government and the party leaders for the organization
of credible elections are proof of that. It is the wish of
my delegation to see the presidential elections of 2012
take place in a calm climate, with respect for the rules
and interplay of democracy.

With regard to lasting dialogue, my country
supports the continuation of the Maubisse initiative, to
which all the players in Timor-Leste, including heads
of parties and civil society, adhered in August 2010.
That initiative must be institutionalized, like the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
and the Commission of Truth and Friendship.

With respect to security, I am pleased with the
calm prevailing in the country. We call for operational
capacity-building in law enforcement in certain areas.
We also hail the progress made in the judicial
framework, particularly the first results of the legal
proceedings in corruption cases. This helps strengthen
confidence and the struggle against impunity and
corruption.

I turn now to the mandate of UNMIT. My
delegation is of the view that it has achieved
significant objectives, such as reconciliation and
national unity, social cohesion, security, the transfer of
responsibilities for law enforcement to the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste, respect for human rights, and
integration of women. Social and economic
development is also moving forward, and we are most
pleased with this development.

Regarding that domain in particular, we
encourage the implementation of the Strategic
Development Plan approved by all parties, as well as
of good government practices so as to stay on track and
attain sustainable and integrated development in the
country.

Thanks to the assistance from the international
community, the Timorese people can now take in hand
most of the tasks that up to now have been carried out
by UNMIT. Therefore it is important to consider the
period after UNMIT. In that spirit we hail the adoption
by the Government and UNMIT of a joint transition
plan for the transfer of responsibilities to the Timorese
people. Next, Timor-Leste must present an assistance
plan that will enable the Security Council to transfer
the mandate to an appropriate structure that can help in
areas where Timor-Leste is still in need of support.

I conclude by reiterating Gabon's support for the
actions of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste. We also express our appreciation for the
professionalism, dynamism and competence of
Ms. Haq, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and to all her team. Their contribution is that
of building a more stable, unified Timor-Leste, moving
towards development prosperity. Such endeavours have
become part of the history of this country.

