Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak on
behalf ofthe European Union and its 28 member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate country Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

I will focus today on what the European Union (EU)
and its member States are collectively doing to further
strengthen the range of tools of the African Union (AU)
and its regional mechanisms in preventing, managing
and resolving conflicts, while also illustrating how
the AU-United Nations strategic partnership can be
leveraged to help Africa achieve the ambitious goal of
silencing the guns.

The European Union welcomed the adoption of the
African Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps for
Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 and the launch of
African Amnesty Month in the context of the Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020 flagship initiative. We
fully share the African Union's concern about the
illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons as
a major source of insecurity. We therefore commend
you, Mr. President, and your country for the initiative
to use your presidency of the Security Council to hold
today's open debate on how cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations can further
contribute to its key effort of ending conflicts on
the continent.

Agenda 2063 is a bold and ambitious strategic
framework for the sustainable development of the
African continent. The European Union is working
closely with the African Union to make those ambitions
come true, as witnessed by the AU-EU Summit in
Abidjan in November 2017 and, more recently, by the
first AU-EU annual joint ministerial meeting, held in
Brussels in January 2018.

Peace and security during all phases of the conflict
cycle are a central pillar of the AU-EU strategic
partnership. Our memorandum of understanding on
peace, security and governance, signed in May 2018,
puts the EU-AU partnership on a solid and structured
basis, taking into account the complexity of the
emerging threats and the need to address their root
causes. Our two organizations are also operationally
active in the Sahel, the Central African Republic and
Somalia. While cooperation is ongoing in all those
theatres, it is particularly strong in Somalia, where the
African Union Mission in Somalia is a key partner of
the EU civilian and military missions. Moreover, the
EU and the AU are exploring opportunities to further
strengthen operational cooperation on peace and
security, including between missions and operations.
The same goal is being pursued with the United Nations
and trilaterally. Progress in that area has the potential to
contribute significantly to Africa's ambition to silence
the guns by 2020.

Another important area where progress has been
steady is the operationalization of the African Union
Peace Fund, a clear sign of the AU's dedication to take
charge of the continent's peace and security. We also
see it as an important tool for the alignment of partners'
support. We are honoured to be offered a seat on the
Fund's Board of Trustees.

Under the African Peace and Security Architecture,
the AU regional economic communities, regional
mechanisms and subregional ad hoc coalitions are
building tools to respond to a wide variety of crisis
situations. The means range from diplomacy and
mediation to peace support operations and post-
conflict reconstruction and development. While peace
support operations generally receive the most attention
and resources, it is the quiet forces of diplomacy and
mediation and structural attention to fragility triggers
that contribute greatly to any successful intervention in
preventing or resolving conflict. The European Union
has therefore allocated €20 million for the continuation,
until 2020, of the early response mechanism of the
African Peace Facility, making possible a range of
African Union activities of both a preventive and a
mediatory nature.

At the working level, the European Union and
the African Union are engaged in conflict prevention
dialogue. That is a dialogue of peers through which we
seek to learn from one another. A number of subjects
have been identified as entry points for cooperation,
including joint analyses, conflict prevention, climate
change, mediation and, last but not least - and
particularly relevant in today's discussions - United
Nations-AU-EU trilateral cooperation. The European
Union is also committed to continue supporting a
stronger linkage between the African Peace and Security
Architecture and the African Governance Architecture
in order to reduce fragility and foster political stability
and effective governance across Africa for the benefit
of all.

The prevention of violent conflict is our key
endeavour. Beyond short-term actions to prevent an
imminent outbreak of violence, fragile situations
require tailored approaches and support to help create
sustainable peace, while addressing the underlying
causes of conflict. The successful prevention of violent
conflict must aim at local ownership and at prioritizing
the concerns of local communities. The protection of
human rights and responsive and accountable political
governance, as well as inclusive economic growth,
are essential elements of addressing the root causes of
conflict. Gender equality is a prerequisite for peace,
security, sustainable development and justice, all of
which positively influence our global, regional and
national economies. Women's perspectives need to be
equally represented, as do the hopes and aspirations
of young people, who are ultimately responsible for
the future.

Indeed, an active role for youth and women in the
prevention, management and mediation of conflicts
is of paramount importance. That is recognized in
the declaration of the Abidjan Summit and is an area
in which we would like to see greater trilateral AU-
EU-United Nations cooperation. Building sustainable
and peaceful societies will require the utilization of all
African Peace and Security Architecture and African
Governance Architecture components to ensure a
comprehensive approach that brings together peace and
security, sustainable development and human rights.
Bringing those responsible for alleged violations and
abuses to justice and holding them accountable by
ending impunity is essential to reconciliation.

Allow me to end by assuring the Council and, in
particular, our African friends and colleagues that the
European Union will continue to encourage concrete
initiatives and bolster projects to support the African
Union and its regional mechanisms in enhancing their
capacity to deal with conflict and crisis situations on
the continent and meet its ambition of silencing the
guns by 2020.

