Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia welcomes and fully subscribes to the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Peru on behalf of the Rio Group. However, the
Government of Colombia has decided to make a
statement in this open debate of the Security Council in
connection with the item "Threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts" because the
terrorists acts that my country has suffered in recent
months demonstrate the international dimension of the
Colombian internal conflict.

In the name of the people and the Government of
Colombia, allow me to extend our gratitude to this
Council for the adoption last Thursday of resolution
1465 (2003) condemning the terrorist attack in Bogota
on 7 February, in which 35 persons, a number of
children among them, were killed and close to 200
were injured.

Unfortunately, last Friday, the day following the
adoption of that resolution, we had to lament not
another car-bomb attack, but this time a house-bomb
attack in the city of Neiva, in southern Colombia, that
left 15 dead, several children among them, and more
than 50 wounded and destroyed more than 70 homes
belonging to poor people. Our country has undergone a
surge in terrorism owing largely to the guerrillas of the
so-called Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
(FARC), who have announced that there will be more
terrorist acts of this kind.

The Government of Colombia wishes to offer a
few thoughts in this open meeting of the Security
Council on terrorism. In our already protracted
conflict, there are nowadays two inseparable aspects:
the internal and the external. Generally speaking, only
the first is considered: killings, attacks, terrorism,
bombs, anti-personnel mines, kidnappings, extortion
and illicit drug trafficking are all committed by armed
illegal perpetrators and are carried out within our
territory.

With regard to this aspect, the Government of
Colombia recognizes the obligations incumbent upon
it. Taking as a paradigm respect for the constitution,
the law, international treaties, human rights and
international humanitarian law, my Government is
stepping up the State's presence with larger numbers of
better-trained soldiers and police officers with the
mission to protect all Colombians. We seek to provide
democratic security for civilians, unionists, human
rights defenders, businesspeople and workers. This
aspect, the internal one, is a variable that we
Colombians must tackle and control.

But there is another aspect of which little is
spoken, namely the external aspect. The attacks to
which I have referred were made possible by the
deadly alliance between drug traffickers and the
guerrillas, who finance themselves through that
activity. The death-dealing explosives were negotiated
for and acquired abroad and were paid for through
external bank accounts fed by the drug trafficking. The
chemical precursors that are essential to produce the
illicit drugs reach Colombia through similar
procedures. Generally speaking, the same process is
used for the weapons that fuel our conflict.

That is why Colombia cannot stand alone in its
fight against terrorism and its inseparable ally within
and outside of the country: the worldwide problem of
illicit drugs. Without the cooperation of the
international community, not only in terms of money,
but also in terms of legal and police activities such as
those required by resolution 1373 (2001), we shall not
be able to combat this terrorism and its sponsor: drug
trafficking.

For this reason we turn to the United Nations so
that, in keeping with its role in difficult times, as far as
the international aspects of the Colombian internal
conflict are concerned, it may indicate a course to
follow and induce the international community to
support peoples and States that are striving to preserve
the lofty principles of the Organization and that daily
struggle to protect the dignity of individual human
beings.

In reaffirming the support we expressed as a non-
permanent member of the Security Council for the
work of the Council and its Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), under the wise leadership of
Ambassador Greenstock, to combat this universal
scourge, I wish to state our certainty that the Security
Council will be able to meet the expectations of our
peoples concerning its historic role in countering
terrorism in all regions of the world.

