Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your friendly country and to extend
our most sincere congratulations on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month. We
would also like to thank you, Mr. Foreign Minister, for
convening this important debate.

I take this opportunity to express my most heartfelt
condolences to the Government and people of Pakistan
and to the bereaved families whose members were
subjected to the odious terrorist attack that killed 141
students and wounded dozens of others. Those terrorist
attacks demonstrate the nature of the nihilistic ideology
of terrorists linked with Al-Qaida, such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra
Front, Boko Haram, the Taliban, the Eastern Turkestan
movement, the Caucacus Emirate, Ansar al-Sharia,
the Al-Shabaab movement and, unfortunately, several
others. At the same time, that event strengthens our
commitment to bolster efforts to eliminate the scourge
of terrorism.
The threats looming over international peace and
security due to terrorism and transnational organized
crime could not have reached this magnitude or
become so dangerous were it not for the organic link
of terrorist groups, in terms of their interests, with
the Governments of certain States that have adopted
terrorism as an approach and even a tool of their
foreign policy. Therefore, it falls upon United Nations
Member States, together and individually, and relevant
bodies within the Organization and beyond it in the
international arena to intensify efforts and cooperation
internationally and regionally to combat terrorism and
crime and their masterminds.

The concept note (S/2014/869, annex) that you
have prepared, Mr. President, underscores the crisis
in Syria, where conflict has led to the growth in a
war economy, including trafficking in human beings,
weapons, drugs; taking hostages for ransom; and the
seizure of oil facilities. Revenue generated by such
activities has created incentives for some armed groups
to prolong the conflict and has increased their wealth,
significantly reducing our ability to compel them to
engage in peace talks. That is extremely significant, and
many Governments of Member States, whether in this
Council or outside it, continue to ignore the irrefutable
truth that this threat did not arise in a vacuum. It is rather
the fruit of the policies and practices of Governments,
of some States that have decided to fan the flames of
the crisis in Syria and continue it by providing their
support in various ways to armed terrorist groups. They
seek to erode the foundations of the Syrian State and its
institutions by using terrorism as a political weapon,
thereby impeding a peaceful political solution based on
inclusive national dialogue among Syrians under the
Syrian Government.

On many occasions, we have spoken in the Council
about acts perpetrated by terrorists active in Syria, in
particular ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front, with regard to the
extraction of and trade in oil resources belonging to the
Syrian Arab Republic and the brotherly country of Iraq;
the pillaging of archaeological sites, the shared heritage
for humanity, and the sale of these archaeological
items; and the dismantling of hundreds of factories,
which are pillars of the Syrian economy, and their
transfer to Turkey. All that has occurred in addition to
the taking of hostages, the slavery and sale of women
and children, and other crimes that are abhorrent to
humanity. How has the Council responded? For several
years, three permanent members of the Council, before
the exacerbation of the threat and danger, stopped the
United Nations from taking even the smallest practical
measure to defeat terrorism, which has been invading
Syria, the Middle East and the world. For three years
or more the position of those States and others in the
Council was limited to shy condemnations.

Moreover, in April 2013 the European Union
authorized the purchase of stolen Syrian oil from what it
called opposition-controlled areas, in flagrant violation
of that same international law concerning which some
States ofthe Union have been ranting. This is robbery of
the Syrian people's livelihood, the impact of which we
are seeing every day. Now the European Union has once
again imposed sanctions to ban the provision of fuel to
the Syrian Air Force. That is irresponsible behaviour;
it is also illegal and runs counter to the resolutions
of the International Civil Aviation Organization. It
does all this instead of working to seize looted Syrian
antiquities being smuggled to Europe vie Turkey.

Most members probably read several days ago the
statement by the former Deputy Director of the European
police, Europol, now head of the Belgian Federal Police
Council, published in The Times of London, to the
effect that Western dealers in archaeological artefacts
are now directly dealing with ISIL, whereas in the past
they had to use middlemen to buy looted archaeological
masterpieces stolen from the Middle East.

The adoption by the Council on 28 July 2014
of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/14, which
was drafted by the Russian delegation, called for the
prohibition of all transactions in Syrian oil sales with
ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front. That was a good first
step in countering the terrorism represented by these
two organizations and other entities and individuals
affiliated with Al-Qaida. This step was strengthened
by the Council's adoption of resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014).

Nevertheless, ignoring the activities of those
Governments that support terrorism within and outside
the region will definitely undermine any possibility
of producing tangible results in countering terrorism
and transnational organized crime. Syrian oil and
archaeological artefacts are transported to their buyers
across our common borders with neighbouring States,
especially Turkey, at a time when armed foreign
terrorist fighters are being transported into Syria with
their weapons through the same routes by the Turkish
Government, with the knowledge and complicity
of the intelligence services and senior officials of
Governments that sponsor terrorism, as well as their
partners in other States. That fact has been corroborated
by numerous reports published by the United Nations,
including the reports of the Panel of Experts on Libya,
which have presented cogent evidence of the complicity
of those States in transporting terrorists and arms from
Libya into Syria, Egypt and the Sahel region.

My delegation reiterates its appeal to the Security
Council to condemn States supporting terrorism and
to force them to cease their destructive practices, to
hold their regimes accountable, and compel them to
respect the relevant Security Council resolutions on
counter-terrorism, including resolutions 2167 (2014),
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 1989 (2011) 1540 (2004), 2133
(2014), 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014). These resolutions
were all adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter ofthe
United Nations in order to ensure that the Governments
sponsoring terrorism in my country comply with them.

We have provided to the team tasked with the
analytical support for resolution 2178 (2014) a list of
and highly important information concerning foreign
individuals killed in Syria recently. These include
110 from Chechnya, the Caucasus and Dagestan and
other areas. We have also provided the list to the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). We will distribute it to Member States shortly.

I also call attention to an extremely important
report that appeared in Washington, DC. recently.
It is entitled Qatar and Terror Finance, published in
two volunes. It outlines Qatari authorities' support for
terrorism, not only in Syria, but throughout the world. I
present this information for the Council's consideration
in the context of the debate on counter-terrorism.

