Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
congratulating Mr. Angelino Alfano, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Italy, on his assumption of the
post of Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I would
also like to thank him for his comprehensive briefing
and for outlining the priorities of his chairship in
addressing current threats and challenges to peace and
security in the Euro-Atlantic, Euro-Mediterranean and
Eurasian regions.

We welcome the significant contribution that the
OSCE, as one of the world's largest regional security
organizations, continues to make in support of the
maintenance of international peace and security. Its
comprehensive approach to security, which includes
its political, military, economic, environmental and
human dimensions, is in line with the new global
paradigm aimed at ensuring sustainable peace and
development. In that connection, we take note of the
OSCE's efforts in conflict prevention and resolution as
well as post-conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding.
We particularly appreciate the important role that
it is playing in the efforts to resolve the protracted
conflicts, and newer ones, in South-Eastern Europe,
Eastern Europe, the South Caucasus and Central
Asia, in cooperation with the United Nations and the
European Union.

Dialogue and negotiation remain the only way
to find durable political and diplomatic solutions to
some of the difficult and extremely delicate peace
and security challenges affecting member States of
the OSCE. Where reaching a peaceful settlement is
concerned, we cannot overemphasize the importance of
political will and commitment on the part of the parties
to some of these conflicts. Enhancing the necessary
trust and dialogue between and among the parties is
also very critical to making tangible progress. We are
pleased to note that the Italian chairship has made that
one of its important priorities.

As in other regions ofthe world, the growing threats
of terrorism and violent extremism pose a significant
security challenge to OSCE member States, and the
role that the OSCE has been playing in preventing
and combating terrorism, by promoting a coordinated
approach among member States, is very important.
In that context, it is only appropriate that the Italian
chairship is placing a greater emphasis on sustaining
durable peace in the OSCE area by promoting a holistic
approach to countering terrorism. There can be no doubt
that transnational security threats, including the illicit
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, money-
laundering, drug trafficking and, most importantly,
human trafficking, are among the most serious threats
to the security and stability of Europe. It is therefore
fitting that Italy has chosen the Mediterranean region,
where most of those transnational organized crimes
originate, as one of its geographic areas of focus during
its chairship.

Promoting cooperation with other relevant regional
and international organizations will be vital for the
OSCE, not only in countering terrorism but also in
other dimensions of its work. Ethiopia attaches great
importance to the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in line with Chapter
VIII ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations. In that regard,
we appreciate the partnership between the OSCE and
the United Nations, which has been maintained through
high-level dialogues and information-sharing, as well
as cooperation in the field.

Lastly, we wish the Italian chairship success in
implementing its priorities in the work of achieving
greater security and stability in the entire OSCE area.

