Mr. Rapp: In beginning my presentation, I would
like to reiterate the comments made by President King
and thank the Council for its decision to convene this
briefing on the Special Court for Sierra Leone.

I would also like to thank the Security Council
for its invaluable role in strengthening peace and
security in Sierra Leone and the West African region
and for the assistance provided to the Special Court in
its pursuit of justice.

As members are well aware, this past Monday
saw the commencement of the trial of former Liberian
President Charles Taylor. His trial marks a watershed
event for international justice, and the Security Council
deserves tremendous credit for helping to make that
happen. In 2005, the Council adopted resolution 1638
(2005), which included in the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) the apprehension,
detention and transfer of Charles Taylor to the Special
Court in the event of his return to Liberia. In March
2006, that resolution made possible Taylor's handover
to the Special Court in Freetown after he was arrested
attempting to cross the border from Nigeria into
Cameroon and had been brought to Liberia. Then, in
June 2006, the Council adopted resolution 1688
(2006), requesting that all States cooperate to effect the
transfer of Charles Taylor to the Netherlands for the
purpose of his trial by the Special Court. That
endeavour stands as a remarkable example of
collaboration by the international community. In
addition, in March 2007 - not very long ago - the
Council adopted resolution 1750 (2007) mandating
UNMIL to provide support to the Special Court for
activities conducted in Liberia with the consent of the
Liberian Government.

I am therefore most grateful for this occasion to
brief the Security Council in my capacity as Prosecutor
of the Special Court for Sierra Leone and to provide
the Council with an overview of the work my Office is
performing and the challenges that lie ahead.

The Special Court has a very focused jurisdiction.
It is mandated to prosecute those who bear the greatest
responsibility for the violations of humanitarian law
committed in Sierra Leone since 30 November 1996.
The Office of the Prosecutor has therefore concentrated
its investigations and prosecutions on a limited number
of individuals alleged to have been in a position of
responsibility and/or command and to have played a
major role not only in carrying out the crimes, but also
in planning and implementing the campaign of terror
that engulfed Sierra Leone for almost 10 years.

The prosecution has issued 13 indictments, all of
which were confirmed by a justice of the Special
Court. Eleven individuals have been apprehended and
transferred into the Court's custody. Two of them,
Foday Sankoh and Hinga Norman, died of natural
causes while in detention; one was killed in Liberia
before arrest; and, as President King indicated, the
whereabouts of another remain unknown. Nine
individuals are currently before the Court as accused
persons in four trials.

The prosecution and defence concluded the
presentation of evidence in the trials of Allieu
Kondewa and Moinina Fofana of the Civil Defence
Forces (CDF) and Alex Tamba Brima, Brima Bazzy
Kamara and Santigie Borbor Kanu of the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council (AFRC) at the end of 2006.
With the trial phases of both the CDF and AFRC cases
now complete, our Office is awaiting judgments and
devoting its efforts to preparing for possible appeals.
On 2 August 2006, the Prosecution concluded its case
in the trial of Issa Hassan Sesay, Morris Kallon and
Augustine Gbao of the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF). The defence began the presentation of its
07-37400
witnesses on 3 May 2007, and it is anticipated that the
trial will be concluded by early 2008.

The Office of the Prosecutor has continued to
conduct investigations in Sierra Leone and elsewhere
in relation to the case against Charles Taylor. On 7
March 2003, the Special Court confirmed the
indictment of Charles Taylor for war crimes, crimes
against humanity and other serious violations of
international humanitarian law. On 29 March 2006,
Mr. Taylor was surrendered to the Special Court.
Taking note of concerns expressed by regional leaders,
the President of the Court formally requested that
Taylor be tried in The Hague, in the Netherlands, by a
Trial Chamber of the Special Court. On 20 June 2006,
Taylor was transferred to The Hague.

Last Monday, four days ago, the case officially
began in a courtroom of the International Criminal
Court in The Hague. In my opening statement, I made
it clear that the prosecution will seek to ensure that the
trial embodies the principles of fairness and due
process at all times. In the months to come, the
prosecution will be calling witnesses and offering
documentary evidence that, in our evaluation, will
provide strong and compelling proof of Mr. Taylor's
culpability in planning, instigating, ordering, aiding
and abetting the crimes charged in the indictment:
crimes against humanity, war crimes and, additionally,
the crime of violating other provisions of international
humanitarian law by conscripting or enlisting children
under the age of 15 years into armed forces or groups,
or using them to participate actively in hostilities.

The Special Court is indeed the first international
criminal tribunal to charge and try individuals for the
recruitment of child soldiers as a violation of
international humanitarian law. In addition, the Special
Court is the first international tribunal to charge forced
marriage as a crime against humanity. The judgments
as to those crimes that are expected 12 days from today
in the AFRC case will be the first of their kind in the
history of the world.

These trials are evidence of the international
community's commitment to ensuring accountability
for crimes as heinous and widespread as those
committed in Sierra Leone. They make a clear
statement that crimes such as mutilations, the chopping
off of arms and legs, the sexual enslavement of women
and girls, and the use of child soldiers cannot continue
to go unpunished. The historic trial of Charles Taylor

shows that, after the mayhem and terror that were
rained upon Sierra Leone and its people, there are
those in the world who are ready to uphold the law and
decide that, no matter how high the position of the
person responsible, there will be a day of justice.

As President King indicated, it is expected that
the Court will complete its legal proceedings by
December 2009. However, the actual implementation
of the Court's completion plan will require continued
support from all Member States.

In the course of the CDF, AFRC and RUF trials,
the prosecution presented 220 witnesses. Overall, 354
have been heard by the Chambers to date. In the Taylor
trial, the prosecution estimates that it will be calling
139 witnesses. Many of the witnesses who appear
before the Special Court do so at great risk to their and
their family's safety, demonstrating courage and
determination. The Court has an obligation to protect
them and to relocate high profile and vulnerable
witnesses. Thus far, the Court has signed agreements
for the relocation of witnesses with three countries and
entered into ad hoc arrangements with two more.
Additional agreements are needed to ensure that all
witnesses of the Special Court receive the protection
they deserve.

All of the accused before the Special Court have
declared themselves to be indigent and are receiving
legal assistance at the Court's expense. It is important
that the Court's Registry have the capacity to conduct
further investigations to ascertain the validity of those
claims of indigency. The investigations require
extensive cooperation from Member States to track,
freeze and gain access to possible assets.

That may lead to the discovery of substantial
assets that could also be made available to a national
process of victim compensation. In our view of the
evidence, the crimes that we are prosecuting were
motivated in part by a desire to control and exploit
mineral resources. Justice requires that any remaining
proceeds of that plunder be made available to its
victims. I know of the ongoing efforts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521
(2003) concerning Liberia to implement the freeze of
assets of Charles Taylor and his close associates in
compliance with Security Council resolution 1532
(2004). The success of those efforts would open the
way for compensation for victims and also send a
signal to others that they cannot gain from such crimes.
We urge Member States to provide all appropriate legal
and technical assistance. We in the Office of the
Prosecutor are ready to cooperate in any way to ensure
success.

Finally, as Justice King stated, the Special Court
needs funding. The Court has demonstrated itself to be
a transparent and cost-effective operation. In order to
provide Member States with a clear picture of the
resources required until the conclusion of its work, a
completion budget has been presented for each of the
remaining years of its mandate, namely, 2007, 2008
and 2009. Current funds in the Special Court's
accounts will be exhausted at end of October 2007.
Additional funds of approximately $60 million are
needed to finance the Court's operation until the
completion of its mandate. The challenges facing the
Special Court are serious, and I encourage all Member
States to renew their support for the Court and its
efforts to ensure justice for the crimes committed in
Sierra Leone.

I would like to leave members with these words
from our opening statement in the Taylor trial.

"The people of Sierra Leone have a saying: no
matter how long the night, light will come again.
For years the accused's crimes have remained in
the dark. Today we start to shed light on his
responsibility for the suffering of the people of
Sierra Leone."

Let us continue to work together to help the
people of Sierra Leone look forward to a future of light
and of hope.

