Mr. Skinner-Klee Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): This open debate is of particular relevance
because terrorism is a criminal scourge that continues
to affect us all. The evidence of that, Mr. President, is
in your organization of this open debate.

Due to the geographical position of my country,
the Central American region, and Guatemala in
particular, has been besieged by transnational networks
that generate crime in all its forms, especially drug
trafficking, trafficking in persons, money-laundering
and the indiscriminate and illicit use and trafficking
in arms. Despite the enormous efforts that my
Government is making to strengthen and modernize
the justice sector, thus allocating more resources and
reinforcing the prosecution of crime and the operational
capacities of the Office of the Prosecutor, we are still
victimized by international networks that overwhelm
our capacities, because not only do they possess high-
calibre firearms and other tools of violence, their
financial power is inexhaustible, all of which only
increases their criminal behaviour.

We recognize that, when weapons fall into the hands
of criminal organizations, the threat against our civilian
populations looms, despite existing legislation. The
abject behaviour of terrorists takes aim at what is most
important to the human being: one's integrity and one's
life. When we see how innocent civilians are attacked
by radical extremists who, in an atrocious and cowardly
way, snatch innocent lives through a perversity taken to

the extreme, we must urgently reflect on joint actions
that would prevent or counteract this scourge.

For that reason, Guatemala reiterates that terrorism
is a global phenomenon that, apart from causing
anxiety, trauma and desolation, must be addressed at
its roots. International terrorism and transnational
organized crime present some similarities, despite
being two different phenomena. While terrorism is
a form of violent struggle that victimizes civilians
indiscriminately in order to grab attention and confuse
and frighten populations, all with political, ideological
or sectarian ends, organized crime is a way of
committing planned crimes in order to profit financially.
Both benefit from the clandestine nature of illicit arms
trafficking, which weakens democratic institutions,
undermines the rule of law and subverts life in society.
Of course, both branch out and sometimes feed off one
other, taking on a symbiotic relationship that causes
anxiety in our peoples. This pernicious link between
the two phenomena is the issue that we must address.

That is why, in our view, there has been some
progress but also some setbacks to strengthening
multilateral mechanisms that promote better
coordination in combating terrorism and transnational
organized crime. As members are well aware, one of
those milestones is also a regional achievement, namely,
the adoption of the Inter-American Convention against
the Illicit Manufacturing ofand Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives and other Related Materials,
ratified by the vast majority of States in our hemisphere.
Its objective is for the countries that produce, export
or import weapons to adopt measures to eradicate its
illicit production and its attendant trafficking.

Although the international community has valuable
legal instruments at its disposal to combat terrorism
and organized crime, the general perception of our
people is that such instruments are insufficient in the
face of the devastating consequences of terrorism and
transnational crime. Therefore, the United Nations, in
general, and the Council, in particular, should combine
efforts for the balanced implementation of the four
pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and contemplate shared actions to attack
this scourge.

I reiterate that such efforts will be insufficient if
the international community does not achieve more
rigorous control of the illegal trade in small arms and
light weapons, as well as their ammunition, since the
illicit trade and indiscriminate use ofsuch weapons make
it easier for terrorist networks and organized crime to
acquire them for their own perverse purposes. The Arms
Trade Treaty provides specific regulations to prevent
their misuse, as does the Inter-American Convention.

Let us remember that threats to international peace
and security are largely the cause of the proliferation
and possession of weapons of mass destruction and
light weapons that jeopardize innocent populations
and undermine international peace and security.
Our countries must therefore ensure the correct
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and urge
States to adopt and enforce effective laws that prohibit
the provision of such weapons and the lending of support
of any kind to non-State actors that seek to develop,
acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or
use nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
means of delivery.

Finally, we urge the international community to
redouble efforts to collectively counter transnational
terrorism and organized crime. We believe that the
Council, in accordance with its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, must take
into account the main links between the two scourges
in such a way as to address the root causes in a
comprehensive manner.

