On 20 March 1970, 26 countries, partially or entirely French-speaking, founded the Agency for Cultural and Technical Cooperation (ACCT) in Niamey. Cultural cooperation was then the core of the initiative of the founding fathers at the origin of this beautiful initiative. After several changes, in 2005 the ACCT became the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF). In tune with global evolution in terms of political pluralism and the emergence of civil society organizations defending human rights, this change of name went hand in hand with the broadening of the organization's competencies and the improvement of its mode of operation. Henceforth, the OIF dealt with issues of peace, democracy, human rights, sustainable development and digital technologies, in addition to culture and education. It is therefore with real pleasure that we welcome today Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Secretary-General of the OIF, whose dynamism and commitment make the role of that institution even more relevant and topical. The excellent presentation that she just gave us, as well as that of Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General, are proof, if need be, of the complementarity that exists between the United Nations and the International Organization of the Francophonie. I would also like to welcome the participation in this debate of His Excellency Mr. Zohrab Mnatsakanyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia, President of the Ministerial Conference of the OIF. I would like to welcome the happy coincidence of this debate with the first use of the interpretation platform, which allows for the return of multilingualism to the Security Council. It should be emphasized that cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in the area of peace and security is based on Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, which enshrines the principle of subsidiarity and the comparative advantages of partner organizations. It is within this framework that cooperation between the United Nations and the International Organization of la Francophonie is carried out, in particular on the importance of early-warning and conflict prevention mechanisms, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and support for networks of women and youth involved in conflict prevention and peacebuilding. Two areas eloquently illustrate the complementarity that exists between the two institutions. The first is the preventive diplomacy that the OIF conducts to anticipate the risks of crises, through monitoring and exchange of information with international partners; facilitating dialogue through mediation and good offices; supporting the implementation of political and peace agreements; and reforming or strengthening national institutions in periods of transition, including support for democratic governance and for security systems. The second is to support electoral processes in ending crises and consolidating democracy, thereby contributing to the establishment of a stable and peaceful environment in its 88 member countries, and to promote free, credible and transparent electoral processes through legal, institutional and technical mechanisms. In doing so, OIF participates in the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, including the target of building effective, accountable and transparent institutions at all levels. The cooperation that the International Organization of la Francophonie is developing with the United Nations in peacekeeping is based on the organization's Charter, adopted in 1997 at the Hanoi Summit. The Charter, by stating that "the Francophonie, aware of the links created between its members by the sharing of the French language, wishes to use those ties in the service of peace", invited French-speaking States to become involved in issues relating to the establishment, maintenance and strengthening of international peace and security. Therefore, the question of the participation of French-speaking countries in United Nations peace operations, which has been specifically raised since the 2000s, revolves around two issues: on the one hand, the significant increase in the number of peace operations conducted in French-speaking countries and, on the other hand, the relatively low volume of personnel deployed by French-speaking States to contribute to these operations. To that end, la Francophonie, in close cooperation with the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations, carries out advocacy actions among its members and supports, at the political and technical level, the increase in francophone peacekeeping capacities; promotes multilingualism, particularly the use of French, in peace operations; and contributes to the dissemination of United Nations standards and procedures in French, including recruitment procedures, in order to promote the candidacies of francophone personnel in peace operations, particularly women. In addition, with respect to peacebuilding, the International Organization of la Francophonie plays a major role in contributing to conflict prevention and management and in supporting transitions. In that regard, it pursues a dual purpose: security, by strengthening peace through the implementation of conflict prevention and management mechanisms and providing support for national actors in their efforts to internalize mechanisms for the peaceful resolution of disputes and a political purpose, by promoting the Francophonie's approach to crisis prevention, as well as by giving concrete expression to the Francophonie's commitment to fighting terrorism and violent extremism, alongside national and multilateral actors, with a view to guaranteeing stability in its space. To that end, it contributes to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, namely, the target of supporting national institutions responsible for strengthening the means to prevent violence and to fight terrorism and crime, particularly in developing countries. It should be recalled that the International Organization of la Francophonie is a pioneer in involving women and youth in conflict prevention and peacebuilding. In accordance with the framework agreement of 21 May 2012, the OIF and UN-Women have deemed it essential to establish an institutional dialogue among Governments, partners and actors within their respective networks and bodies, with a view to promoting women's empowerment and gender equality within the States and Governments that are members of la Francophonie. This cooperation led to the organization, in Abidjan in 2016, of the international seminar for the promotion of women's participation in peace processes, the recommendations of which included investment in and support for the training of women in crisis prevention and preventive diplomacy; training for and the provision of technical and financial support to women's organizations to participate in the negotiation of peace agreements and in the follow-up thereto; strengthening the role of women in parliaments, through training in conflict prevention and management techniques; and integrating women into the development and implementation of programmes on preventing and responding to radicalization, violent extremism and terrorism. In addition, in implementation of resolution 2250 (2015), on the youth, peace and security agenda, the OIF has launched a call for francophone youth, peace and security initiatives. On the strategic level, that call is aimed at mobilizing francophone youth, on the five continents covered by the francophone space, in support of the prevention dimension of that resolution. Specifically, it consists, among other things, of strengthening the resilience of francophone youth and consecrating their role as an agent of change and peace promotion, and fostering the development and enhancement of youth organizations of francophone civil society, working on youth and peace issues. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the Niger's commitment to the principles and ideals embodied by the OIF and commend the eminently positive role played by the Secretary-General and other bodies of la Francophonie in the promotion and protection of these ideals of peace, the defence of human rights, and the promotion of good governance and democracy. In the face of so many achievements and gains, we cannot but pay tribute to the founding fathers of the institutional Francophonie - Presidents Diori Hamani of the Niger, Habib Bourguiba of Tunisia, Leopold Sedar Senghor of Senegal and Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia - thanks to whose vision and foresight we have inherited this tool of cooperation and solidarity among peoples.
