Mr. Oshima (Japan): First allow me to thank
you, Mr. President, for the kind words of sympathy and
condolences that you expressed at the start of the
meeting, and on behalf of Council members, in
connection with the tragic train accident that occurred
yesterday in western Japan. Your words and the words
of Council members will be conveyed to my
Government and to the families affected.

My delegation would like to express its
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting for a joint briefing, and I thank
Ambassador Mayoral, Ambassador Loj and
Ambassador Motoc for effectively guiding their
respective Committees. I also wish to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Denisov for the important
contribution he made as the Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) through March of this
year, as well as to his staff.

Today, the scourge of terrorism is a matter of
increasing concern to the entire international
community. The threat of terrorism continues to grow,
as does the awareness of the need to fight it effectively.
Hence the importance of a comprehensive counter-
terrorism strategy. In that connection, Japan welcomes
the strategy outlined in the Secretary-General's speech
in Madrid, described succinctly as the five "D"s. We
also welcome the General Assembly's 13 April
adoption of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (General Assembly resolution 59/260). We expect that Member
States will join and implement all the related
international conventions and protocols, which now
total 13, as soon as possible.

Recalling the numerous tragedies caused to date
by Al-Qaida and the Taliban, we fully support the work
of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee. My
Government appreciates the various activities
undertaken by the Monitoring Team led by Mr. Richard
Barrett, including the submission of its reports. We
have actively participated in the work of the
Committee to find ways and means of establishing
more effective sanctions measures, and we intend to
continue our active involvement. In particular, it is
important that the contents of the consolidated list
prepared by the Committee be expanded and improved
so that the list can be of greater practical use to
Member States in implementing sanctions measures.

One year after the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) was established, my
delegation would like to express its hope that it will
become fully operational under its Executive Director,
Mr. Javier Ruperez, with the completion of the
selection of qualified experts as soon as possible. We
wish to take this opportunity to extend our appreciation
to all those experts who have contributed a great deal
to the work of the CTC to date and who have recently
departed from the Committee.

Visits to Member States by the CTC - the first
was to Morocco in March - represent progress in the
work of the Committee, and we welcome that. Such
visits are useful in strengthening the dialogue between
the international community and the visited States,
particularly for counter-terrorism capacity-building.
We hope that more States will agree to receive visits by
CTC missions in the future.

The role of the CTED as a clearing house for the
provision of technical assistance should be
strengthened. We hope to see, for example, the further
development of cooperation between the CTED and the
Counter-Terrorism Action Group of the Group of
Eight.

Preventing terrorists from gaining access to
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery is a matter to be tackled with urgency, and

Member States need to put in place or strengthen the
appropriate domestic legislation and law enforcement
systems in implementation of Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004).

National reports submitted to the Committee
provide important materials to gauge the state of
implementation in each State, and we welcome the fact
that the Committee has begun its work in a substantive
way by examining the national reports. Those Member
States which have not yet submitted their national
reports are called upon to do so as soon as possible.
Technical assistance should be extended to those
Member States, as required, in order to implement the
resolution. My Government is engaged in focused
efforts to strengthen the non-proliferation system in the
Asian region through various cooperation and dialogue
initiatives, such as export controls seminars and the
Asian Senior-Level Talks on Non-Proliferation. We
intend to continue to strengthen such efforts.

It is important to ensure that there is good
coordination among the three counter-terrorism
Committees in their respective activities, such as visits
to Member States and needs assessments for technical
assistance. This joint briefing today is therefore a
welcome step.

My Government also attaches importance to
cooperation with the working group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) under the
chairmanship of Ambassador Baja. Japan is determined
to continue to extend full cooperation in this critically
important area.

