I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/944) on United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), and his Special Representative, Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her insightful briefing and her work on the ground at this very challenging time. I would also like to welcome the presence and statement of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic at our meeting today. We are concerned that Haiti continues to face extreme political, economic and social uncertainty, which has been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The continued violence, especially the gang-related criminality, over parts of the country has contributed to the existing instability. The political impasse and unscheduled electoral framework agenda remain the biggest challenges hindering the constitutional reforms. On the matters under discussion today, I would like to stress the following three points. First, on political progress, we share the concerns about the difficulties noted in the report of the Secretary-General, especially the adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The political uncertainty and impasse are the main causes of the multifaceted difficulties and instability in Haiti, which harm the livelihoods of the Haitian people and their enjoyment of their human rights. In this context, we call on the Government, political parties and other stakeholders in Haiti to set aside their differences and engage in constructive dialogue. It is high time for a compromise and political consensus to be struck on constitutional and broader reforms. There is no other way to address the root causes of the country's problems for the sake of its sustained stability and development. Secondly, on the electoral process, we are concerned about the absence of consensus on key aspects of election preparations, including an electoral framework, calendar and a fully functional Provisional Electoral Council. In this regard, we call for timely and credible elections acceptable to all Haitian stakeholders in 2021. We also urge all related parties to make further efforts to engage in inclusive dialogue to reach a political agreement on the new composition of the Provisional Electoral Council and the modalities and timing of the elections, including the political representation of women and youth. We call on the United Nations and the international community to increase technical assistance and measures needed to protect Haitian citizens and political parties on the road ahead. Thirdly, regarding threats of violence, Haiti continues to face a number of long-standing threats and challenges. Gang violence has increasingly challenged State authority over parts of Haiti. The fighting among gang groups targeting local communities has had adverse impacts on the livelihoods of Haitians. Women, children and other vulnerable groups remain risk of violence and continue to be marginalized in the political life of the country. We condemn such violence and attacks. We urge the Haitian Government and local authorities to uphold their responsibilities, take more decisive actions in improving the country's legal framework as well as undertake all security measures needed to stop violence and to protect civilians, especially women and children. To conclude, we commend the unceasing work and tireless efforts of BINUH. We reiterate our support for the extension of its mandate. We would like to reaffirm our support for the Secretary-General's call for long-term and structural changes in Haiti geared towards putting the country on the path to sustainable development.
