Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): I associate
myself with the sincere condolences conveyed by
the President in the light of the loss of life of three
Chadian soldiers deployed to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) who died, which is a reminder
of the difficulties faced by peacekeeping operations
throughout the world.

During its visit to the Sahel, the Security Council
visited Mauritania on 20 October. Upon arriving in
Nouakchott, the members of the Security Council
were received by the President of the Islamic Republic
of Mauritania, Mr. Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz. He
was joined by a large delegation comprised of, among
others, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister
of Defence, the Minister for the Economy, the Chief of
Staff of the Army, the Chief of Staff of the President
of Republic and the Permanent Representative of
Mauritania to the United Nations. The Security
Council then visited the permanent headquarters of the
Group of Five of the Sahel (G-S Sahel) to meet with
Mr. Najim Elhadj Mohamed, Permanent Secretary of
the G-5 Sahel. Our discussions with the Mauritanian
authorities allowed Council members to acquire critical
analytical information, which allowed us to to pursue
our reflections on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and to
expand our understanding of the security environment
in the Sahel.

Mauritania, a key player within the G-5 Sahel
and in the broader Sahel region, has long been fully
involved in efforts of the G-5 Sahel's joint activities to
combat terrorism and instability in the region. During
our discussions with President Ould Abdel Aziz, the
Security Council heard confirmation of the Mauritanian
authorities' resolve to defeat and stamp out terrorism.
Given the country's history on the front lines of the
battle against this scourge, the Mauritanian authorities
are well placed to assess the terrorist phenomenon, its
expansion across the region over the years, its close links
with illegal trafficking, its influence on the political
agendas of the countries in the Sahel, and the need
to combat this phenomenon not only with a security
response, but also by using counter-narrative tools to
deter radicalization. All of this was very enlightening
for Council members.

Throughout our open dialogue, our interlocutors
openly expressed their hopes of seeing the Security
Council ensure robust support for the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force. According to Mauritanian authorities, that
initiative, owing to its proactive stance against the
terrorist threat and its mission to entrench its security
capabilities in the Sahelian region, meets the priority
and strategic demands for the countries of the region
and deserves the full support of the United Nations and
international community.
The motto appearing on the banner of the G-5
Sahel is "Security and Development". Accordingly,
discussions with the Permanent Secretary of the G-5
Sahel, Mr. Najim Elhadj Mohamed were focused on
those two dimensions. During a meeting in which the
security vision was aligned with the goals of growth
and development - which is the other pillar of the G-5
Sahel architecture - Mr. Mohamed told members of
the Security Council that, in line with those ambitions,
development must "immediately precede, follow and
consolidate security activities in the region".

That premise is embodied in a development and
security strategy whose principal components were
illustrated to the members of the Council and that
encompasses the priority investment plan, which the
G-5 Sahel considers key to promoting growth in the
Sahel and which will, of course, require significant
international resources. Moreover, the meeting with the
Permanent Secretary focused on the need to coordinate
the work of various platforms focused on the Sahel,
such as the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel, with the specific demands and priorities of the
countries of the region.

The messages we heard during our visit to
Mauritania confirmed the shared aspirations of that
country to build around the G-5 Sahel a security and
development architecture for the region, with the Joint
Force at its core. That observation was corroborated
by the convergent messages addressed to the Security
Council by its interlocutors, through which the various
countries underscored the increasing insecurity in
a region shaken by terrorism, illegal trafficking in
persons, arms and drugs, and anaemic development.
I believe that henceforth we should find common
ground so as to strengthen support for the Force, which
we hope - and I am speaking here in my national
capacity - to be able to meet the ambitious goals of the
countries of the region.

As a co-leader of the mission, I would like to
conclude by sincerely thanking you, Sir, for having
taken the initiative of organizing this visit under your
presidency, which confers very significant added
value to the discussions on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
and the Sahel region that have been held over the past
several months. I should also like to add that we highly
appreciated the work ofthe presidency, as main co-lead,
in assuring the visibility of other colleagues and
sharing the responsibilities associated with the mission.
I also thank the host countries - Mali, Mauritania and
Burkino Faso - which gave the Council in a warm
and friendly welcome. I also thank the United Nations
personnel based in New York who travelled with us,
in particular the staff of MINUSMA and Special
Representative Annadif, for their outstanding efforts to
ensure the complete success of the visit.

