Mr. Denktas (Turkey): There was a moment in
history when we were hopeful for peace in Israel and
Palestine. That is hardly the case anymore, frankly, and
the hopes for a lasting solution are dim. But this gloomy
picture could have been avoided; it was not inevitable.

Today, despite continuous international calls, the
expansion of illegal settlements continues throughout
occupied Palestinian territory. The dramatic escalation
of settlement activities that are designed to create
new realities on the ground continue to be a cause for
concern, as it is an attempt to undermine the two-State
vision and the possibility of coexistence.

Parallel to settlement expansion and excavation
work, there is also an effort to destroy the demographic
character and history of the old city of Al-Quds/
Jerusalem. The ongoing destructive excavation tunnel
work to open the so-called Pilgrims Road is the latest
example of such efforts. In Al-Quds, Palestinians are
also facing eviction orders and daily incursions into
their neighbourhoods. Their residency statuses are
terminated in violation of international norms. Only
yesterday, Palestinian residential buildings, including
inhabited homes, were destructed in Sur Baher. I draw
the Council's attention to the fact that these demolitions
are occurring for the first time in areas under the
authority of the Palestinian Authority under the Oslo
Accords. This is a breach of international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions.

The situation in Al-Haram Al-Sharif is also a
cause for concern. For the first time in years, hundreds
of settlers entered Al-Haram Al-Sharif during the
Ramadan. We saw attacks against Muslims worshipping
at Al-Aqsa Mosque. Instead, with its blessed place in
all of our hearts, Al-Quds should be a city of peace and
harmony, not a place of violence and provocation.

All the foregoing illegal steps must stop
immediately. Peace requires Israel to show political will
and refrain from provocative and detrimental actions.
The international community, in particular the Security
Council, cannot turn a blind eye to the blatant disregard
for international law. The Council needs to take action,
the basis of which should be the only viable solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict: the two-State solution
based on 1967 borders, with Palestine and Israel living
side by side.

The rights of the Palestinian people, including
to self-determination, are not up for negotiation. For
decades, the basis for peace negotiations have been the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms
of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, as was explicitly reaffirmed in resolution
2334 (2016). These modalities cannot be changed.
Economic projects and plans cannot replace the need
for dignity, justice and freedom, and no project can
succeed without a just peace.

Unfortunately, the plight of Palestinian refugees is
compounded by the financial crisis of United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). Until a just and lasting solution
to the Israeli-Palestine conflict is achieved, the work
of UNRWA remains vital. It is our collective and
moral duty to support the Agency. As the Chair of the
UNRWA Advisory Commission and the Working Group
on the Financing of UNRWA, Turkey will continue to
contribute to Agency's work. We call upon all actors to
do the same. It is high time that States Members of the
United Nations stand up forjustice and protection ofthe
established parameters for a lasting peace in Palestine.

