Ms. Yanez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank the People's Republic of China,
in its capacity as President of the Security Council for
the month of November, for convening this important
open debate on the theme "Maintenance of international
peace and security: Strengthening multilateralism and
the role of the United Nations".

Ecuador attaches great importance to the role
of the United Nations in maintaining a world order
based on respect for international law and the norms
and principles established in the founding Charter of
the United Nations, which is unquestionably a moral
reference point for advancing international peace and
security, promoting human dignity and prosperity
and defending human rights and the rule of law. We
agree with Secretary-General Antonio Guterres that
the problems of our time are increasingly global in
scope, and that multilateralism is more important and
necessary today than ever before.

No State is immune to the threats facing humankind
today, but neither will a response come about on its own.
For that reason, Ecuador reaffirms its commitment
to a multipolar system with the active and collective
participation of every country in the world and other
relevant actors. Effective governance and the rule of law
at the national and international levels are fundamental
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
International law is the backbone of multilateralism,
since it enables us to create conditions conducive to
maintaining justice and respect for the obligations that
States have agreed to on fundamental issues such as
sustainable peace, access to justice, gender equality,
economic development, judicial independence and the
promotion of democracy. There can be no lasting peace
without justice and accountability.

In that context, reform of the United Nations
represents an opportunity to achieve a strengthened,
more united and less fragmented multilateral system.
That effort must be accompanied by a political
commitment on the part of all of us to achieve
consensus, whether on the simplest areas under debate,
such as working methods, or on those that require joint
decisions by every part of the system, along with the
long-awaited reform of the Security Council. The full
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is an example of that, since it was adopted
as a common objective of the Member States and the
greatest possible effort is needed to achieve it, based on
cooperation and above all on an international order that
has human beings at its heart and that can enable us to
respond effectively to our ever-growing and evolving
challenges.

In this context, Ecuador, together with Bolivia
and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, sponsored a
high-level event held on 31 October under the theme
of "Renewing the commitment to multilateralism",
attended by the Presidents of the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council and by Bolivia,
the President of the Security Council for the month of
October. That meeting was an opportunity for us to
consider the fundamental role of multilateralism in
enabling us to deal with especially urgent challenges.
The large number of speakers in the meeting testified to
the membership's level of concern about the issue and
the importance that it attaches to it.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Ecuador's
commitment to multilateralism and how valuable we
believe regional and subregional organizations are.

