Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I want to join others in
acknowledging the presence of Deputy Foreign
Minister Ludin and to thank him very much for his
inspiring statement. I would also like to thank former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Staffan de Mistura, not only for his remarkable success
but especially for the confidence that he demonstrates
for the future of Afghanistan. I also want to thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his
comprehensive briefing.

This morning my intervention will focus on three
areas - security, political development and economic
and regional development. We are gratified to hear
about the concerted and strenuous efforts to sustain
peace and stability in Afghanistan. However, the
continuing security situation remains a cause for
concern. Recent reports of insurgencies across the
Afghan borders, incidents of civilian casualties and
targeted high-profile assassinations, especially the
assassination of Professor Rabbani, former Afghan
President and Chair of the High Peace Council,
threaten to decimate the fragile peace and stability
achieved over the years.

The wave of bombings across three cities, which
killed 52 people, as the country shared celebrations of
Ashura, signals the disturbing sectarian undertone of
the continuing violence. Against that backdrop, the
November 2011 World Bank Report draws a direct
correlation between the planned 2014 withdrawal of
foreign troops and a potential economic recession or
collapse in Afghanistan. The report predicts that
Afghanistan would suffer a recession in 2014, after
foreign troops leave and aid dwindles and that if the
security situation gets worse the country could face
complete economic collapse.

Given the formidable security challenges still
confronting the country, we face the critical task of
finding a compromise between the planned withdrawal
of troops and President Karzai's request for security
support well into 2024. The need to proceed in a
manner that assures the strengthening of the Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF) and preserves the
fragile peace cannot be overemphasized. The military
plan for the interim period should therefore focus on
sustained training of the ANSF. We identify with the
plan to increase the size of the Forces. The

Government of Afghanistan must ensure, however, that
the necessary safeguards are in place within the
transition period to guarantee the ability of the ANSF
to assume full control over Afghan security. The
international community, for its part, must throw its
weight behind the Afghan Government, if the crucial
fight against terrorism is to be won.

In the political arena, Nigeria welcomes the
continuing progress in the reconciliation and
reintegration efforts in Afghanistan, despite the
cyclical violence, especially in the south and the east
of the country. In order to forge the national unity
envisaged within the larger political framework, the
peace process must continue to be Afghan-driven. In
that connection, we welcome the resumption of
parliamentary activities and the recent confirmation by
the National Assembly of key appointments, including
that of a member of the Independent Commission for
the Supervision of the Implementation of the
Constitution.

The resolution of the impasse in the National
Assembly is a clear indication that Afghanistan's
nascent democracy is gradually taking root. The search
for a comprehensive peace in Afghanistan within a
reasonable time frame also requires progress in efforts
to resume peace talks with moderate elements of the
Taliban. Notwithstanding the inclusiveness of its
discussions at the November meeting, the Loya Jirga
must work harder to find a way forward on the issue.

On the economic and regional development
fronts, we would like to encourage the implementation
of a well-articulated economic policy that will sustain
economic growth and the development of Afghan
society. As we invest substantially in the security
sector, we must also increase our financial
contributions to strengthen the country's economic
base, so as to avoid its collapse. Emphasis should be
placed on the strengthening of institutions, particularly
at the subnational level, the creation of jobs and
economic opportunities and the delivery of basic
amenities.

Long-term international support and private-
sector investment will enhance revenue generation and
propel economic activities. For greater coherence and
efficiency, we underline the need to continue
channelling funds and other forms of assistance
through the Afghan budget system. The commitment
demonstrated by international partners in the Istanbul
and Bonn Conferences to long-term support for
Afghanistan beyond 2014 is very encouraging.
However, concrete measures must be taken to follow
up on those commitments.

We commend the Government of Afghanistan for
the enormous strides it has made towards regional
cooperation. The improved dialogue and cooperation
among its neighbours has led to the implementation of
several joint commissions related to bilateral trade and
the exchange of information that could improve
synergy in efforts to fight illicit trafficking in drugs,
arms and human beings, as well as organized crime. In
that regard, we welcome the formation of the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Joint Commission on
Reconciliation and Peace. We also endorse the
tripartite meetings of Afghanistan, Pakistan and the
United States. We hope that those forums will provide
the necessary springboard for addressing both the
internal and the external dimensions of the conflict.

In conclusion, we wish to extend our deep
appreciation to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General de Mistura for his characteristic
exceptional leadership. We owe a great debt to the staff
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and all United Nations personnel for their
remarkable commitment to building a sustainable and
democratic Afghanistan. We look forward to a
productive working relationship with the Secretary-
General's incoming Special Representative, Mr. Jan
Kubis.

In its transition towards assuming full
responsibility for its political and economic future, we
assure the Government of Afghanistan of Nigeria's
support for, and commitment to, the legitimate causes
of both the Government and the people of Afghanistan.

