Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): Allow me to join others
in welcoming you, Sir, to the presidency and assuring
you of my delegation's full support and cooperation
throughout the month of October. I would also like to
congratulate the delegation of the United States for its
excellent stewardship of the Council during the month
of September.

I thank you very much, Mr. President, for your
briefing today, as well as for your important work
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). Let me also thank the Permanent
Representatives of Kazakhstan and of Peru for their
presentations and for their leadership in chairing their
respective Committees.

Since we met in this format in May last year (see S/PV.7936), there have been numerous encouraging
developments in global efforts to counter terrorism,
both inside and outside the Council. We have seen
that, through concerted efforts, our ability to fight this
scourge has improved. However, we are far from done;
acts of terrorism remain a serious threat to international
peace and security, and we must continue to develop
our tools to counter and prevent further terrorist acts.

One of the most notable developments within the
United Nations during the last year is of course the
establishment of the United Nations Office of Counter
Terrorism (UNOCT). We recognize and appreciate
that the Council Committees and the UNOCT are
now working together to strengthen their coordination
on a number of important aspects. The adoption of
several resolutions related to counter-terrorism, such
as resolution 2396 (2017), on returning foreign terrorist
fighters, is another significant development. The
effective implementation of those resolutions must now
be ensured.

The continued cooperation and unity of the
Council is a prerequisite for the further development of
our ability to combat terrorism. Sweden welcomes the
well-functioning cooperation and information-sharing
among the three Committees as well as their respective
Groups of Experts. The sanctions regime ofthe Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities remains a vital tool in our counter-terrorism
efforts. It is true that Da'esh has lost territory over the
past year. However, as many colleagues have observed
today, that network clearly remains a serious threat,
and there is also a surge in the threat from Al-Qaida.
Continued efforts to improve the functioning of the
regime is therefore key.

We welcome the appointment of the Ombudsperson,
Mr. Daniel Kipfer Fasciati. The Office of the
Ombudsperson is of crucial importance for due process
and therefore for the efficiency of and compliance with
the sanctions regime. In future, we should look at some
kind of procedure to ensure that longer vacancies in
that key post are avoided. Currently only individuals
and entities listed under the 1267 sanctions regime
have access to the Ombudsperson, while there are also
concerns over due process in other sanctions regimes.
We should consider the possibility of gradually
extending the mandate of the Ombudsperson to other
sanctions regimes, as appropriate.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism is a vital
venue for dialogue on counter-terrorism-related
challenges within the framework of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). Continued engagement
remains essential among the Committee, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and other relevant actors such as civil society, the
CTED Global Counter-Terrorism Research Network
and the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism. We recall the important
discussion held last week in the CTC on the impact of
counter-terrorism on human rights, and we welcome
the efforts made to streamline human rights and gender
issues throughout all the activities ofthe Committee and
CTED, including during assessment visits and thematic
briefings, as outlined by Ambassador Meza-Cuadra in
his earlier briefing. Both of those perspectives are key,
not least from the point of view ofpreventing terrorism.

Sweden welcomes the increased attention to issues
relating to the impact on children of terrorism and
counter-terrorism, which was made possible through
last year's adoption of resolution 2395 (2017). We
thank the CTC Chair for highlighting the role of the
United Nations University (UNU) in that important
discussion. The UNU's research briefs on children and
extreme violence fill an important void, and Sweden
is considering ways of deepening its cooperation with
the UNU, in particular on how to improve reintegration
interventions for individuals associated with groups
deemed as terrorists or violent extremists.

Resolution 1540 (2004) and the 1540 Committee
remain an important complement to the multilateral
disarmament and non-proliferation regime. The
threat from non-State actors is real. The fact that
181 States have submitted their initial reports on
national implementation is testimony to an increasing
commitment to address that urgent threat. This urgency
has become even more evident as the international
norm prohibiting the use of chemical weapons has been
repeatedly violated over the past few years. The evolving
nature of threats from non-State actors requires us to
stay one step ahead. We must take into account the
rapid advances in science and technology in order to
foresee potential risks. Sweden, together with Bolivia
and the 1540 Group of Experts, will co-host an event
later this month on emerging technologies in order to
share experiences on that topic among Member States
and national and international scientific societies.

The Council has repeatedly underscored in its
various resolutions that all counter-terrorism measures
undertaken by Member States must comply with their
obligations under international law and has made it clear
that failure to comply with international obligations is
one of the factors contributing to radicalization and
violence. There is no doubt that terrorists must be held
to account and that there cannot be impunity for the
atrocities they commit. Meanwhile, we must remember
that counter-terrorism efforts cannot come at the
expense of human rights.

If we are to succeed in eliminating terrorism,
we must also uphold respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, both online and offline, as that
is the basis for an open society, critical thinking and
fostering resilience to terrorist propaganda. Let me
therefore conclude by reiterating the importance of
ensuring that all counter-terrorism measures are carried
out in accordance with international law, including
human rights law, humanitarian law and refugee law.

