Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands wishes to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for her briefing.

Seven years after the start of the conflict in Syria,
the humanitarian situation in the country continues
to be a truly heartbreaking drama. While several
parties to the conflict are responsible for a wide array
of violations of international humanitarian law, it is
especially painful to see the horrifying effects of the
military actions taken by the Syrian authorities.
Instead of protecting their own citizens, the Syrian
authorities are bombing them. Instead ofproviding basic
services to their people, the authorities are destroying
hospitals and schools. Instead of allowing humanitarian
aid into the most affected areas, the authorities are
starving some of their own people.

The outlook for 2018 remains grim, with a
worsening humanitarian situation and a continuation
of the battle for influence by regional Powers. Allow
me to focus on three important aspects: the current
situation on the ground, cross-border aid delivery and
the implementation of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs' (OCHA) five asks.

On the situation on the ground, the international
community has been providing funding for a
principled humanitarian response. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands has provided amply to the United Nations
and to international non-governmental organizations in
order to provide relief for the suffering of the Syrian
people. But this reliefis hardly reaching those in need.

In besieged eastern Ghouta, we are witnessing the
use of starvation as a method of warfare. Not a single aid
convoy has reached the 400,000 people trapped there in
the last three months. Where have we seen this before?
In Idlib, because of the continuous intensified aerial
bombardments, aid to more than 250,000 internally
displaced persons is extremely difficult to deliver.

Improvised explosive devices in Raqqa and
elsewhere in Syria have caused large numbers of
casualties. The Netherlands urges all Council members
to continue their contributions to make all of Syria free
of mines and explosive devices.

Concerning cross-border aid delivery, it is equally
disturbing that today, one month after the Council
renewed the authorization of cross-border aid, some
of these very aid convoys cannot cross the border
because of the security situation. The consequences of
this lack of cross-border aid for the large number of
displaced people in north-west Syria are tremendous.
There is an urgent need to ensure that all convoys can
have safe passage to reach those in need, both in Afrin
and beyond.

In Afrin, the intensification of the military
operation there last Sunday has led to more displaced
families that have nowhere to go. We call upon all
parties to protect civilians, to facilitate humanitarian
access and to allow for the safe passage of all people
who wish to leave areas under attack.
Turning to the implementation of OCHA's five
asks, the recent visit by Mark Lowcock to Syria was
in itself a positive step, but it is imperative that the
dialogue on aid delivery yield effective results as
soon as possible. In effect, the requests made by the
Emergency Relief Coordinator do not differ much from
those of his predecessors, effectively highlighting
the lack of progress in terms of sustained, principled
humanitarian access to those most in need.

The message of the humanitarian and international
community has been consistent: respect your obligations
under international humanitarian law, protect your own
citizens - including health workers and humanitarian
aid workers - and allow for rapid, safe and sustained
humanitarian access.

In conclusion, it is crucial that the Security Council
unequivocally unite itself behind the concrete and
attainable five asks of OCHA. It remains essential
to see progress on the rapid, effective and principled
implementation in the coming weeks of all five asks
of OCHA. We call on Council members to consider
steps to be taken collectively in case no progress takes
place and on those who have influence on the Syrian
authorities to make sure that humanitarian aid reaches
those most in need. Let us not forget that lives are
at stake.

