Mr. Cheok (Singapore): I too would like to
express appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the
convening of this open debate in the Security Council.
There is always some sensitivity when it comes to
discussing the Council's working methods, so we are
especially grateful to you for this opportunity.
Obviously, my delegation also aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Switzerland on
behalf of the group of five small countries - the 8-5
group. That said, I would like to make some additional
comments that focus primarily on the question of
access.

Let me begin by stressing that the 8-5 should not
be seen as an adversary. The group's aim is not to
grandstand or to undermine the Council; it is the
opposite. It is about trying to make the Security
Council more consultative and consistent, so as to get
more buy-in from non-members. We recognize the
Council's crucial role and its grave responsibilities. We
also see that the Council has made many positive
changes in its working methods, and we are very
grateful for that. We can only commend the successive
Chairs of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions -
Japan, Slovakia and Panama - for their tireless efforts
in that regard. The note by the President of the Security
Council (S/2006/507) is another example of the
Council's engagement on the issue of working
methods. But the question is whether the reforms are
sufficient and whether they are institutionalized to the
point where there can be no backsliding. Naturally, we
in the 8-5 group feel that the Security Council could go
further.

There remain questions of access, many of which
have been referred to by previous speakers this
morning and this afternoon. States that are primary
protagonists on various issues addressed by the
Security Council do not always have the opportunity to
speak and express their points of View in Council
meetings. And even when it is decided that meetings
will be open, those decisions often come so late that
States are unable to prepare properly to make
substantive contributions to the debate. Perhaps one
suggestion would be to establish an agreed time frame
for concluding negotiations on the format - ideally,
48 hours before the debate - in order to give involved
States the opportunity to prepare.

Questions about access also extend to informal
consultations, to which you yourself, Mr. President,
previously alluded. I realize that there is sometimes a
trade-off between access and efficiency in decision-
making, but making informal consultations off limits to
all but Council members seems a bit rigid. For
example, would Council members not benefit from
having the main protagonists on any issue provide their
views and even answer questions in informal
consultations from time to time? This need not
interfere with Council decision-making, because
invited countries could be asked to leave before the
Council begins its deliberations.

Finally, we have asked repeatedly for a more
analytical annual report. But, that is seldom achieved,
because, understandably, it is difficult to square the
viewpoints of 15 Council members. If an analytical
report is not possible, perhaps we could consider a
more free-flowing debate on the Council's role over
the preceding year. An open debate could be organized
in the Security Council to take stock and receive
feedback. Member States could make statements on
what they considered to have been triumphs and
shortcomings. Council members could also give their
views. That might expose the Security Council to some
criticism, but I think it would also lead to some praise.
Ultimately, that is what feedback is about. And if we
all behave constructively, this can only increase the
sense of buy-in on the part of States that are
non-members of the Council, because they will have
had a chance to express their views.

Ultimately, we all need to work together to
improve the Security Council's working methods.
Singapore stands ready to work with and support
members of the Council in that regard.

