Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): I thank the
Secretary-General for his very informative briefing.

May I, on behalf of Timor-Leste, thank you, Sir,
and your country for holding this important thematic
debate and for your kind invitation to us to join the
Council on this very important occasion. My colleague,
Minister of Finance Emilia Pires, Chair of the Group of
Seven Plus (g7+), could not be with us as she is with
the Prime Minister at our nation's Parliament,
discussing the 2011 budget.

This year's budget is focused on developing our
country's infrastructure and human capital. The budget
process is a key enabling tool in support of our
Nation's State-building agenda. Such is the level of
public interest in this process that it is broadcast live
on television and radio networks for 13 days to the
entire country.

Today, the situation in East Timor speaks for
itself. We all went through the global financial crisis,
yet for three years running Timor-Leste has
experienced an average of double-digit economic
growth. This places us among the ranks of the top 10
fastest-growing economies in the world. Such growth
has seen a 9 per cent decrease in poverty, reversing
rising poverty levels that peaked at 50 per cent during
the crisis. This decrease saw some 96,000 people lifted
out of extreme poverty. The 2010 United Nations
Human Development Index recently recorded a rise in
rank of 14 places for Timor-Leste.

Unemployment has plummeted, with 96 per cent
of men aged between 30 and 49 years currently
employed and two in five women now working year-
round. In 2007, 85 per cent of all Timorese were
employed in the agriculture sector; today, that figure
stands at 67 per cent of men and 61 per cent of women.
Much of this achievement has been underpinned by the
strengthening of institutions.

From the professionalization of the public service
to reform of the security sector and the nation's taxation
system; and from promoting transparency through the
establishment of civil service and anti-corruption
commissions to reforming public financial
management, institutions have all helped in sustaining
peace through the better delivery of public services.

Very soon, data on Government expenditure will
be available in real time to the people Via an on-line
portal, thus ensuring greater transparency and making
public spending more efficient. Timor-Leste's national
priorities process embodies this national home-grown
strategic response to the challenges of post-conflict
State-building. The identification of specific national
priorities in a sequenced manner has allowed us to
identify and then resolve specific issues. From
establishing stability to ensuring food security, these
issues have required immediate, coordinated and
strategic solutions while not distracting us from the
larger task of reform.

Emerging from crisis in 2006, our immediate
challenge was to establish security and stability so that
out people could begin to rebuild. At that crucial
moment, Timor-Leste was faced with a defining
decision. To whose voice, amidst the offers of
international support, should we listen for direction? At
this time, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
and the Security Council for responding to our request
for assistance in a timely manner.

The crisis of 2006 profoundly affected East
Timor. During his visit to Timor-Leste, the Secretary-
General visited tent camps in Dili, our capital. Around
150,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) lived in
tents in East Timor at that time. This is a problem that,

ll-21268
in many places, takes decades to solve. In East Timor,
we did our best, with the help of the international
community and the representatives of the IDPs
themselves, and by discussing ways to find solutions
we were able to solve the problem in two years. We
therefore thank the Secretary-General and all the
countries and experts that helped us in that process.

At the time of the crisis, we enjoyed the support
of many countries, 36 of which contributed to the
United Nations police mission, reflecting a wide
variety of policies and philosophies. Also at that time,
we faced the daunting task of establishing public trust
in our defence and security forces, as well as trust in
our institutions in general. We therefore had to take
ownership of the process. With the help of the United
Nations, we began security sector reform. Existing
divisions in the defence and security forces slowly
began to be eliminated through professionalization and
better oversight and management. There were also
improvements in the security infrastructure and salaries
and reforms to the promotions regime, ensuring that
merit and ability were restored as key criteria for
career advancement. Those reforms also helped to
secure peace and stability and to ensure that the nation
would not have another crisis.

A second key social programme that has served to
support stability involves recognizing our veterans
through the provision of pensions. We have allocated
$58 million in this year's budget for that purpose. All
of us who have experience in conflict situations know
how important it is to tackle veterans' issues. Those
pensions formed part of a wider integrated social
welfare package that now includes the elderly and
female-headed households.

Those reforms heralded the beginning of a new
compact between citizens and the State. Those
successes now allow us to say goodbye to conflict with
hope and determination, and welcome to development.
That is our nation's motto today.

We find ourselves in a unique position. Having
reflected upon our past failures and successes, we feel
that we are better placed to communicate the lessons
learned and to draw attention to what we consider to
have been ineffective when it comes to how aid has
been used to support institution-building in post-
conflict States.
For Timor-Leste, the International Dialogue on
Peacebuilding and Statebuilding, which we co-chair

11-2l268

with the United Kingdom, is a very important channel
that we use to engage in open and frank exchanges
with fellow member States, as well as with regions and
our development partners. At the Dialogue's first
meeting, which was hosted by Timor-Leste in April
2010, members indicated that they could not hear their
voices echoed within the vast body of work dedicated
to addressing conflict in our countries. We could not
see ourselves in the road maps, strategies and policy
notes put forward.

In response, members agreed to convene four
working groups dedicated to combining the breadth of
experience that conflict-affected States and
international partners had to offer, in order to present a
credible and legitimate plan of action for the
international community to refer to. The working
groups focus on capacity development, under the
co-chairmanship of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Japan; aid instruments, under the
co-chairmanship of Afghanistan and Sweden; planning
processes, under the co-chairmanship of Sierra Leone
and the United Kingdom; and political dialogue, under
the co-chairmanship of Liberia and the United Nations.

Over time, a bond has been established between
countries with direct experience of conflict. In fact,
that shared experience provides the bridge necessary to
identify and connect with a diverse range of countries,
all of which are united in the search for peace. A forum
of post-conflict affected countries was thus built, with
a foundation grounded in the same basic human
challenges we all face and spanning a diversity of
cultures, histories and languages. The forum, known as
the Group of Seven Plus (g7+), is a new and
independent forum of conflict-affected countries and
regions that have come together to form a single
collective voice to present to the international
community.

At the forum's inaugural meeting, held in Dili
last year, 13 countries and regions came together to
recognize the strong spirit of solidarity between our
countries and regions, reflecting a strong desire to
work together in the g7+ to share experiences,
challenges, failures and successes in order to make a
rapid transition to sustainable peace and development.
My colleague the Minister of Finance was honoured to
have been nominated as Chair.
The g7+ now accounts for almost 350 million
people. It is the intention of the Group to own our
nation-building agendas, drawing upon the combined
wisdom of those 350 million people to provide the
international community with the tools necessary to
bring about real change.

Given the experiences of Timor-Leste, and
considering the experiences that our fellow States have
expressed to us, it is clear that institutions play a
critical role in sustaining the shift away from conflict
towards the building of more stable, responsive and
accountable State. We are therefore concerned when
we repeatedly hear of situations where the actions of
the international community in that regard fall short of
its promises.

As we said at the Millennium Development Goals
summit last year, aid delivery and programmes
supported by international actors are often
inapplicable, unsuitable and incompatible with our
agendas and priorities, including with regard to
institution-building. On that same occasion, the g7+
challenged the global community to commit to a new
paradigm of international engagement in conflict-
affected countries and regions.

Other friends tell us of delays in the setting up of
trust funds that are not delivering rapidly and flexibly,
and thus causing disruptions in aid flows that then
impact negatively upon the abilities of emerging
institutions to deliver visible results to people.

In my country as well as in other countries, the
responsibility for coordinating our development
partners' various conflicting policies and practices
gives an additional responsibility to our institutions. In
order to ensure that we can rely on our partners, we
feel that urgent reform and support must be directed
towards at least four key areas.

First, international partners must help us build
our institutions by working within them. That includes
a complete review of the way technical assistance is
provided to our countries. This is critical if we seek to
strengthen State legitimacy and to build people's trust
in emerging institutions, particularly during delicate
transitions.

Secondly, one cannot build a nation upon the
principles of another. There is no overarching model
that can be applied to solve the unique challenges
facing our nations. International actors must appreciate
the importance of historical context, culture, regional
diversity, linguistic complexities, social differences,

ongoing political dissonance and the national
mentality. All of those are crucial elements in State-
building in post-conflict nations.

Thirdly, we must be absolutely clear as to the
purpose that institutions are intended to serve, and then
be relentless in that pursuit. Function over form must
take priority. It is only when the tangible benefits of
institutions are seen and felt that citizens' confidence,
trust and engagement with State institutions will
emerge.

Fourthly, sustained political dialogue within
States - between the men and women who make up
our communities and Government - is crucial to
strengthening democracy and encouraging buy-in,
thereby turning State-building into a nation-wide
endeavour involving all peoples. In that regard, on
behalf of the g7+, I would like to that advantage of the
timely opportunity afforded by this debate to suggest
the idea of a report of the Secretary-General devoted to
the topic of institution-building in conflict-affected
States.

In conclusion, all that we seek to achieve is
difficult and requires time. However, what the g7+ has
prioritized, and what I have presented to the Council
today, are specific and, more important, actionable
reforms to which the international community must
now commit. We will work with our development
partners through the International Dialogue to
elaborate concrete actions that can improve
international engagement in conflict-affected States.
An action plan will be ready by the end of the year, and
we would be happy to share the results.

As member States made clear in the g7+
statement, our countries understand that urgent action
with international partnerships is critical at this time.
As Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao recently said, this
is not the time to be pessimistic - this is the time for
hope and change. It is my sincere hope that the
international community and members of the Security
Council will take this message and work with us to
ensure that our States and nations are also able to make
a smooth transition towards peace and stability.

