Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): The peace process in Angola
has entered a new phase. As the Secretary-General
pointed out in his recent report, most of the tasks under
the Lusaka Protocol have now been carried out. Although
a full month behind schedule, UNITA's Radio Vorgan
closed down on 1 April, thus bringing to an end its anti-
Government transmissions. In another important move, a
number of senior UNITA members have arrived in
Luanda. The Angolan Government, for its part, has
appointed three governors and nominated six ambassadors
from the ranks of UNITA. Mr. Savimbi's special status
has also been promulgated and the issue of his 400 armed
bodyguards successfully resolved.

Progress on the road to peace in Angola is
undeniable. There are, however, still some obstacles that
are cause for concern. The source of our greatest worry
at this important and sensitive juncture is the discrepancy
between the positive political atmosphere and the situation
on the ground. We are especially disquieted by the acts of
violence and by the reports of remining operations,
particularly in Malange, Benguela and Huila Provinces.
The Secretary-General has referred to these and other
armed activities as "a low-level insurgency" [5/1998/333,
para. 12], in recognition of the fact that they are being
carried out in an organized fashion.

This situation obviously raises serious questions,
since incomplete demobilization was one of the most
important reasons for the previous breakdowns of the
peace process in Angola. We therefore fully subscribe to
the call on UNITA to see to it that such attacks are
brought to an end. We also expect UNITA to assist the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)
in the investigation of these incidents. They must be
resolved so that the remaining steps of the Lusaka
Protocol can be completed in good faith.

These outstanding steps include the disarmament of
civilians and the extension of State administration to the
remaining UNITA-held areas. Although UNITA's area of
control has shrunk considerably, it still wields power over
some 60 districts in the central and southern Ovimbundu
heartland of Angola. We are therefore disappointed by the
fact that, at a meeting on 17 April, UNITA failed to reach
an agreement on handing back this territory, particularly
its headquarters at Bailundo and its main air supply base
at Andulo.

 

We would also like to note that, even though
Mr. Savimbi's return to Luanda is not addressed in the
Lusaka Protocol, we believe that such a move by the leader
of what is now officially the largest opposition party on the
Angolan political scene would represent a powerful
symbolic boost to the peace process.

The peace process in Angola has been a protracted one
and characterized by continuing procrastination. We believe
that this regrettable development is due to a large extent to
UNITA's tactics of persistent postponements and last-
minute conditions. However, the delays in the
implementation of key provisions of the Lusaka Protocol
are also the result of the general political climate in Angola.
And, as the Secretary-General has pointed out, this climate
is still characterized by lingering mistrust and insecurity.

We therefore endorse the call on the Angolan
Government to give priority to peaceful actions in its
efforts to consolidate its authority in the country. Tension
between local populations and members of the Angolan
National Police can only complicate the process of
administrative normalization and unnecessarily undermine
the modicum of mutual trust between the two parties to the
peace process.

We would also like to emphasize our support for the
Secretary-General's recommendation to strengthen the
civilian police component of MONUA. We believe that the
deployment of 83 additional civilian police observers and
an increase in the current police sites from 46 to 51
represent an important ingredient of the transition to post-
conflict peace-building.

After four years of promises and missed deadlines, it
seems that peace in Angola is finally in sight. Successful
completion of the peace process should allow the Angolan
leadership and the people of Angola to focus all of their
energies on rebuilding their shattered country.

In this crucial period, sustained international efforts to
maintain a productive dialogue between the Government
and UNITA, to foster national reconciliation and to promote
confidence-building measures are essential. We therefore
support the extension of MONUA's mandate for another
two months and endorse the planned formation of a small
specialized unit, as envisaged in paragraph 9 of the draft
resolution. The planned withdrawal of the military
component of MONUA should not leave the observers on
the ground without the option of relying on emergency
United Nations military protection. We also look forward
to the Secretary-General' s recommendations regarding the
future role of the human rights component of MONUA.

Before concluding, I wish to emphasize that Slovenia
is aware of the fact that progress in the peace process
thus far has been to a large extent the result of spirited
leadership on the part of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative. We would therefore like to express our
deep appreciation to Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye for his
untiring efforts to ensure a lasting peace in Angola. We
would also like to pay tribute to Ambassador Mahugu for
his recent successful mission to the region.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Slovenia supports the draft resolution before us today and
will vote in favour of it.

