Mr. Nyago (Uganda): Uganda appreciates the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad,
presiding over this relevant and important debate, as well
as the statements of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and President Buyoya, who is currently African Union
High Representative for Mali and the Sahel.

Uganda hereby presents its profound condolences
to the people of Pakistan for the barbaric murder of
its school children by the Taliban. In the same vein,
we further extend our condolences to other countries
that have experienced similar killings in the month,
including Nigeria, Australia and Kenya. That event
serves to highlight the relevance of this open debate.

Allow me also to express our sincere appreciation
for the President's able stewardship of the business of
the Security Council during the month of December.

Uganda expresses its appreciation for the
President's selection ofthis relevant topic for discussion
at this open debate. This is indeed a good way to place
Africa - our marginal continent in global political
and economic terms - at the centre of the Security
Council's agenda, especially as about 70 per cent of the
Council's work focuses on Africa.

At the cornerstone of Uganda's foreign policy is the
idea that subregional and regional organizations have
to play the primary role in addressing the concerns of
their particular geopolitical areas, with the Security
Council and the international community performing a
complementary supportive role guided by international
law. With that fruition of that particular thinking being
well exemplified through the conclusion, for example,
ofthe Burundi peace process and the 1999 Lusaka Peace
Accord, subregional and regional organizations, as a
norm, tend to be well versed on the issues behind local
or regional conflicts - and hence their appropriateness
in getting them resolved.

We are of the view that the Security Council should
normally intervene in resolving local conflicts in a
framework that is supportive of the subregional and
regional efforts I have mentioned.

It is with that thinking and spirit that, through initial
African Union sanctioning, Uganda contributed troops
to the effort to bring about peace in Somalia in 2007. It
is critical to add that this took place with the Security
Council's concurrent sanction for the intervention.

Burundi, Kenya, Djibouti, Ethiopia and Sierra Leone
are the other troop contributors to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), while Uganda, Ghana,
Kenya, Nigeria and Sierra Leone have also contributed
police officers to Somalia.

When Uganda joined the Security Council for
the period for 2009-2010, we joined hands with other
non-permanent members and permanent members
of this critical United Nations organ to ensure that
it accepted to offer logistical support to AMISOM.
Among other things, that included the provision by the
United Nations of hospitals, vehicles, troops, armour
and rations for the Mission's troops. The symbiotic
AMISOM. relationship between the African Union (AU)
and the United Nations requires further consolidation,
for peace in Somalia translates into peace in the region,
the western Indian Ocean and the Arabian Sea.

As a way forward, the conditions that cause
conflict - for instance, the burden of being
landlocked - need to be meaningfully addressed by
the Security Council and the global community. On
the infamous Berlin partition of Africa, as a continent
Africa has a disproportionate number of landlocked
countries, many of which - the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Central African Republic, Mali and
South Sudan - are extremely underdeveloped and
conflict-prone. Conflict in such a setting does not occur
by mere bad luck.

During next year's joint review of AMISOM
there will be a need to factor in the capacity-building
of the forces for peace, in addition to obtaining the
Security Council's commitment to build Somalia's
State structures and economy. A similar framework
will also need to be provided for South Sudan, the
Central African Republic and the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The creation of
State structures is important to ensuring that there is
stability and that terrorist groups cannot take refuge in
that kind of setting.

