Mr. Danon (Israel): Before we begin, I want to
convey my heartfelt condolences to the people of
cote d'Ivoire on the sudden passing of our colleague,
Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue.

Last week, Israel marked the 70th anniversary of
our independence. It was a joyous occasion celebrating
the return to our historic homeland and all we have
accomplished in seven short decades. But it was also
a time to recall how fragile our independence was for
many years. The day Israel was established, we were
attacked on all sides. At least once in every decade
following 1948, our survival came into immediate
question.

Today, Israel is stronger than ever. We have built
a robust, flourishing democracy, an open society
dedicated to freedom. And even though our survival
may not be in question as it once was, our country faces
very real threats. We have learned the hard way that
Iran spreads its tentacles all over the globe. It promotes
terrorism on our borders and instability worldwide.

To our north, we face two of these Iranian
proxies - the terrorists of Hizbullah, who have
amassed over 100,000 rockets and missiles aimed at our
cities and towns, and the dangerous Al-Assad regime in
Syria, the Iranian puppet that poisons its own people.

To our south, we have the Hamas-controlled
Gaza. Hamas is an internationally designated terrorist
organization. It is amassing its own stockpile of rockets
to fire at our citizens while continuing to dig terror
tunnels underground. It is that same barbaric entity that
holds Israeli citizens hostage and denies the families of
two of our soldiers the basic dignity of burying their
loved ones.
For the past few weeks, Hamas has orchestrated
a series of provocations and confrontations along the
security fence between Israel and Gaza. Hamas and
the Palestinian Authority continue to claim that those
protests are peaceful demonstrations of solidarity.
They are not. There is nothing peaceful about placing
explosives on the fence separating Israel from Gaza.
There is nothing peaceful about terrorists firing over
the fence at our positions. And there is nothing peaceful
about setting off firebombs, burning tires and throwing
Molotov cocktails. Throughout the riots of the past
month, Hamas has used innocent Palestinian women
and children as human shields, while they cowered
behind in safety. The terrorists are hiding while
allowing - even hoping - for their people to die. This
is evil in its purest form.

Israel has an obligation to protect its citizens and
we will do so while minimizing civilian casualties to
the other side. The fact is that despite these impossible
conditions, the vast majority of those killed were
confirmed members of terrorist organizations. As
our former Prime Minister, Golda Meir, said, peace
between our peoples will come only when you love your
own children more than you hate us. Unfortunately,
that quote still correctly describes the Palestinian
leadership today. Like any law-abiding country, Israel
always ensures that, when necessary, incidents are
investigated by the proper authorities.

But let me be clear: Israel will never apologize for
defending our country. It is Israel that cares so deeply
about innocent lives. It is the Palestinian leaders who
exploit every innocent death for its shameless public
relations campaign. And it is Hamas that is fully
responsible for every Palestinian injury and death that
has resulted from these incidents.

Just two weeks ago, while too many in the world
were distracted by Palestinian propaganda, Israel's
security forces uncovered the longest and deepest
Hamas terror tunnel discovered to date. If we had not
detected and neutralized this terror tunnel, Hamas
terrorists would have used it to infiltrate Israel and
attack our communities.

Some members of the Council have criticized
our response. But they must ask themselves a simple
question: how would Kuwait, for instance, react if
armed terrorists were marching on its border? What
would Sweden or Bolivia do to protect their people ifa
violent mob threatened to infiltrate their countries? The
answer is simple. They would defend themselves. We
will do the same. Our citizens live just a few hundred
metres from the security fence; we will protect them.

Make no mistake: these are not peaceful protests.
They are not grass-roots efforts, and they will only
become deadlier. These riots are fully orchestrated
by Hamas, and, according to Hamas leadership, the
protests will continue until at least 15 May. As Hamas
leader Ismail Haniyeh said:

"On Friday we stopped at the border. Next time, we
do not know where the border will be".

Hamas's goal is clear: to infiltrate Israeli territory,
either above or below ground, and to harm as many
innocents as possible.

If the Council wishes to put an end to these riots,
if it does not want to see more violence, then it must
condemn Hamas. It must hold the Palestinian leadership
accountable and demand that it end this Charade, once
and for all.

We speak often of the threats posed by Hamas,
Hizbullah and the Al-Assad regime in Syria. But
we cannot forget that these threats lead back to one
source - one common thread. The Iranian regime is
the dangerous thread that ties these threats together.

We are presenting this image to the world so it can
understand the depth of Iran's involvement in Syria.
What can be seen here is Iran's central induction and
recruitment centre in Syria. There are more than 80,000
Shia militants in Syria under Iranian control. It is at
this base, just over 5 miles from Damascus, where they
are trained to commit acts of terror in Syria and across
the region.

This is yet another example of Iran's presence
in Syria, about which we have warned the Council
time and again, a presence that includes the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard Corps, airfields, weapons factories
and key elements of Syria's economy. In February, Iran
launched an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) from
Syria into Israel. Luckily, the Israeli air force was able
to shoot it down. Our thorough investigation has left
no doubt that this drone was an Iranian UAV. It shares
key indicators and markers of the Iranian Shahed-129s
that have fallen over Syria and Pakistan in recent years.
When we investigated the remains of the downed UAV,
we discovered that it contained explosive materials.
Those materials were different from those used in the
missiles that intercepted it.
The conclusion is clear: that UAV not only violated
our sovereignty, but was intended to be used as an
offensive weapon against targets in Israel.

These threats can be stopped, but only if the
international community acts together. In just two and
half weeks, the United States will announce its decision
regarding the fate of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA). Iran claims that its nuclear pursuits
are peaceful and purely for self-defence, though nothing
could be further from the truth. The regime proudly
parades its missiles in city centres. Written on the
sides of these missiles are calls to destroy Israel. Iran's
leaders make no effort to hide their hope of wiping
Israel off the map.

President Trump is focused on important changes
to the current situation, because he knows it will make
the world safer. He knows that we must change course,
and we must do it now. International inspectors must
be granted full access to all suspicious nuclear sites
in Iran, including military facilities. Iran must end
the development and testing of its advanced ballistic-
missile programme. And the agreement's expiration
date must be extended or eliminated.

We must increase monitoring and oversight of
Iran's finances, which have grown significantly since
the JCPOA lifted the sanctions. Iran has sent this new
money directly to Hizbullah, which has used it to
build weapons factories and terror bases in Syria and
Lebanon. It has spent it on the Houthis, who continue
to attack the Gulf region with sophisticated arms and
ballistic missiles. It has reinforced Iran's role as the
largest State sponsor of terrorism in the world.

All the signatories to the agreement must now make
a choice. Will they support the necessary changes, or
will they choose to enable the Iranian regime, which
supports terror and seeks to take over the Middle East?
They have one final opportunity to right the wrongs of
this deal. The world's moral majority has an obligation
to end this Iranian threat. They cannot afford to put
their economic desires over the safety and security of
our world.

The choice has come to this: countries, individuals
and corporations must choose between doing business
with Iran or ensuring a stable world. They cannot have
it both ways.

Israel has had a very clear policy since the
Administration of Prime Minister Menachem Begin.
We will not allow regimes that seek our destruction to
acquire nuclear weapons. Period. Ifthere is the necessary
will on the part of the international community, Iran
can be stopped from financing, training and arming
terrorists. Iran can be stopped from enabling puppet
regimes and exploiting their countries as bases for
aggression. And most importantly, Iran can be stopped
from becoming a nuclear super-Power and a grave
threat to the world.

