Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): Let me first
express our appreciation of Croatia's initiative in
organizing this thematic debate. We welcome in
particular your presence in New York, Mr. President, to
preside over this meeting. It demonstrates your
country's strong dedication to the work of the Security
Council, as well as to the common efforts of the United
Nations to combat the scourge of international
terrorism.

In view of the fact that terrorist attacks continue
to inflict death and injury on innocent people around
the world, this open debate provides another chance for
the Member States of the United Nations to manifest
their determination and solidarity in the fight against
international terrorism and, more importantly, to
contribute their views on what could be improved in
terms of concrete actions.

International terrorism continues to be one of the
serious threats to international peace and security. It
constitutes a flagrant violation of international law,
including international humanitarian and human rights
law, endangers the territorial integrity and stability of
States, has adverse consequences for economic and
social development and destroys the infrastructure of
States. Viet Nam joins the international community in
condemning terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, the most recent of which were the
tragic attacks in Mumbai, India, just a week ago. We
wish to express once again our most profound
condolences and sympathy to the Indian people and
Government and the families of the victims of those
heinous crimes.

It goes without saying that the primary
responsibility falls on every State to formulate and to
implement appropriate policies and measures to protect
its people from the terrorist scourge. Counter-terrorism
efforts, however, can not be successful unless States
cooperate and coordinate with each other, for terrorism
is a global phenomenon and no country can feel
immune from it. Viet Nam supports the United Nations
playing a leading role in the international fight against
terrorism, in which all measures taken must be in
compliance with international law, particularly the
principles of national sovereignty, territorial integrity
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
We once again reaffirm our support for the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and call for
its full implementation.

The Security Council, undertaking its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, has adopted a number of
resolutions and established several subsidiary
mechanisms aimed at strengthening the international
fight against terrorism. My delegation recognizes the

significance of the Council's counter-terrorism
resolutions and the importance of the work being
carried out by the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004).
Viet Nam attaches great importance to the
implementation of those resolutions and the
improvement of the three Committees' working
methods and procedures.

Much attention and many efforts and resources
have been dedicated to the fight against terrorism, and
yet terrorism persists and manifests itself in worrying
developments. The Security Council has consistently
condemned terrorist acts and called for international
cooperation in fighting terrorism, including through
bringing perpetrators of terrorist acts to justice and
providing technical assistance to States that request it.

While recognizing the importance of those
measures, my country is fully convinced that it is
equally important for each State and the international
community as a whole to address the root causes of
international terrorism. Political, economic and social
inequalities, double standards, selectivity and the use
of force in international affairs all create conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism. In this context,
my delegation deems it very pertinent to recall the
agreement reached by Member States in General
Assembly resolution 60/288, in launching the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy:

"to do all they can to resolve conflict, end foreign
occupation, confront oppression, eradicate
poverty, promote sustained economic growth,
sustainable development, global prosperity, good
governance, human rights for all and rule of law,
improve intercultural understanding and ensure
respect for all religions, religious values, beliefs
and cultures". (General Assembly resolution 60/288, lastpreambular paragraph)

In Viet Nam, terrorism is a crime punishable
under the criminal code. Combating criminal offences,
including terrorism and related crimes, is among the
priorities of the Government of Viet Nam. Efforts have
been made to strengthen our counter-terrorism legal
framework and enforcement capacities, raise the
awareness of the people and coordinate policies and
activities with countries in the region, in particular in
the framework of the Regional Forum of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and
within ASEAN cooperative programmes.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to take this
opportunity to renew our commitment to the common
cause against international terrorism and expresses our
full support for the statement that the President of the
Council will pronounce on behalf of the Council later
today.

