Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation supported resolution
2327 (2016), based on the need to pursue active
international efforts for a peace settlement of the armed
conflict in South Sudan, and the important role played
in that process by the United Nations Mission in that
country. However, we are compelled to note that the
sponsors, as they have done with certain other Council
resolutions on South Sudan, again failed to take on
board a whole string of serious concerns of the Russian
delegation and several others. In the text of resolutions
they pushed through their own national priorities,
neglecting the red lines of other delegations.

That even further undermines the unity and
effectiveness of the Council's work, including on the
subject of South Sudan. In particular, the pen-holders
rejected the proposal to modify the Mission's mandate,
singling out as a priority the task of supporting the
peace process. They also refused to give Blue Helmets
powers to provide assistance to the South Sudanese
police. That is precisely what the Secretary-General
recommended pursuant to the autumn review of the
activities of the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan. Juba, too, has long been asking for
this. It turns out that for South Sudan, some of our
colleagues only seek to wish to use the stick, including
new sanctions; there is never any talk of carrots.

As before, we think that inappropriate to include
Security Council sanctions against South Sudan in the
resolution, the main intention of which seems to be to
extend the mandate of the peacekeeping mission. Such
ultimatums and wording look all the stranger given
the progress in implementing the 2015 Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. For example, we have a successfully working
Transitional Government of National Unity and
Parliament, with the participation of representatives of
the armed opposition. President Salva Kiir has initiated
a nation-wide dialogue and an amnesty for supporters
of Rick Machar. Juba has stated its categorical consent
for the deployment of the Regional Protection Force.

Despite all that positive momentum, the sponsors of
the draft resolution sought at any cost to push through
wording on sanctions. The delegation of the United
States of America does not seem bothered that its draft
resolution submitted in November on expanding the
Security Council sanctions regime against South Sudan
was supported by fewer than half of Council members.
The sponsors also ignored the latest Intergovernmental
Authority on Development summit decision that new
sanctions were counterproductive to the settlement
process. Our colleagues directly stated that they were
only interested in those African documents that were
consistent with their own interests and approaches.

As before, we cannot agree to wording on the
future hybrid court in South Sudan. It runs counter to
the provisions of the 2015 Peace Agreement, according
to which the institution and activities of that judicial
body are the exclusive prerogative of the African Union
Commission. We have warned many times of how
unacceptable it is to attempt to deploy unmanned aerial
vehicles against the will of the Government of South
Sudan. The wording in favour oftheir use by the United
Nations Mission effectively flouts the State sovereignty
of that country.
