Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegations joins all those that have already
participated in this debate in congratulating and welcoming
His Excellency the Foreign Minister of Mozambique,
Mr. Leonardo Santos Simao, who is with us here today. We
are most grateful for his statement.

My delegation welcomes the information that has been
provided to us today by the Foreign Minister of
Mozambique, which confirms what is stated in the latest -
indeed, the final - report of the Secretary-General of
23 December 1994; namely, that the situation in
Mozambique today is one of consolidated peace and that
four elements of the mandate of the United Nations
Operation in Mozambique (ON UMOZ) have been complied
with, in conformity with the General Peace Agreement of
1992 - that is, the political, the military, the electoral
and the humanitarian aspects. The operational design of
ONUMOZ was based on those four components, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Aldo
Ajello, was a very able coordinator.

Mozambique had to overcome many difficulties
before it was at last able, with the resolute support of its
people and the cooperation of our Organization, to reap
the fruits of peace and internal stability.

The progress achieved in the implementation of the
General Peace Agreement shows that the peace process in
Mozambique is now real and irreversible. This is largely
due to the strong commitment demonstrated by the
Government of Mozambique to work together with the
United Nations in the peace process. My delegation
therefore expresses its gratitude to and solidarity with the
people and Government of Mozambique. We congratulate
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative, the
United Nations Office for Humanitarian Assistance
Coordination and the leadership of the forces on this
success. We urge the international community to
participate actively in Mozambique's reconstruction,
rehabilitation and development, so that peace in that
country can be consolidated and become permanent. As
the Permanent Representative of Italy said:

"peace and development are the two sides of the
same coin: there can be no peace without
development, and no development without peace."

(supra, p. 9)

