Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting today.
We are very grateful to Mr. Kenzo Oshima for his
briefing on the humanitarian situation in Angola. We
would also like very warmly to welcome to this
Chamber the Vice-Minister for External Relations of
Angola and to thank him for his important and
comprehensive statement. We are also very pleased to
see here among us Ambassador Ibrahim Gambari,
whose presence we salute and whose contribution to
the search for a solution in Angola can never be
overemphasized.

My delegation remains very concerned about the
very precarious humanitarian situation in Angola
today - a situation that is continuing to worsen day by
day and is being further exacerbated by the atrocities
committed by those who continue to reject peace and
every effort at reconciliation. We had the opportunity
to witness the gravity of the situation from the video
projection that we watched this morning, as well as the
one we watched in the Chamber last September. Those
video projections showed the extent of the Violence and
suffering being inflicted upon innocent Angolan
civilians.

Nobody could remain insensitive to the scale of
impunity in Angola. There is little doubt that the
primary responsibility for the situation lies with
Mr. Jonas Savimbi and his UNITA group. The terrorist
activities of UNITA and its leader remain the major
cause of the large number of refugees and internally
displaced persons there. Given what we saw in the
videotape this morning, I think it is very appropriate
that we place the activities of Jonas Savimbi in the
same context as the attack on the World Trade Center
and the tremendous international coalition to fight
terrorism. I think that that is where we need to take the
question of Savimbi.

The innocent people of Angola have been held
hostage by UNITA for too long. It is important that
every effort be deployed to spare them further suffering
and to prevent UNITA from carrying out any further
attacks on civilians. We believe that one way of doing
that would be to tighten still further the sanctions
against UNITA.

The statistics on the humanitarian situation in
Angola are alarming. Last year, the Government and
the United Nations estimated the total number of
internally displaced persons to be approximately
3.8 million, of which 1.9 million were receiving
assistance. With the recent fighting reported in the
province of Moxico and elsewhere in Angola, the
number of displaced people continues to grow. The
United Nations Children's Fund has reported that a
quarter of Angola's population is internally displaced
and that most such people are living in camps. This has
led to a plethora of problems. The food security
situation remains fragile, and malnutrition is a
significant underlying factor in the deaths of thousands
of children and women in Angola.

We recognize the tremendous efforts being made
by the Government of Angola in improving the
humanitarian situation through its resettlement plans
and by making available additional funds to tackle the
increasing influx to urban areas of internally displaced
persons. We also congratulate the Government for
incorporating the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement into its national legal framework. We
also commend the local non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and the churches, which are
playing an important role in providing humanitarian
assistance to people in need. We encourage the
Government, local NGOs and the churches to continue
providing such assistance to the needy people.

We also greatly value the contribution of the
United Nations agencies and other international
organizations in relieving the dire humanitarian
situation of millions of Angolans. We call on them to
continue the delivery of much-needed emergency relief
assistance. We also call on the international community
to render the necessary financial support.

In this regard, I refer to Vice-Minister Chikoti's
statement that the response of international donors to
the 2001 Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal
represented only 46.8 per cent of the expected amount.
This indeed constitutes an important setback for the
expectations of the Angolan Government. We call on
the international community to contribute generously
to this appeal fund.

The frequent acts of violence by UNITA and the
problem of access are major obstacles for the agencies
as they continue to deliver assistance to those in need.
The international community should make it clear that
those responsible for hindering the access of
humanitarian personnel to the needy will be held
responsible for their actions. We also wish to stress the
importance of guaranteeing the security and safety, as
well as the freedom of movement, of humanitarian
personnel.

We would like to express our gratitude for the
courage and determination of those who are working to
relieve the human suffering in Angola, including the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), the World Food Programme, the United
Nations Children's Fund and other agencies. It is vital
that all these humanitarian agencies work in close
cooperation and in coordination with the Government
of Angola, as well as with the civil society, to
effectively alleviate the suffering of the population.

Finally, I would like to ask OCHA whether it
thinks the Security Council can do more to improve the
humanitarian situation on the ground in Angola.

