The President: I thank Mr. Heinonen for
his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.

I would like to thank today's briefers for their inputs
into our discussion. Once again, they reconfirmed the
complexity and importance of the problem in question.

The protection of critical infrastructure is vital
to national security, public safety and the economic
development of all States. Terrorist attacks on such
facilities and services can significantly disrupt the
functioning of societies and bring about massive
human suffering.

I would also like to express my appreciation to all
Security Council members for their support during the
process of preparing the text of resolution 2341 (2017),
which was adopted today. The resolution sends a strong
message from the Security Council to the international
community to give serious consideration to the issue.
It also outlines a specific framework of objectives
and actions aimed at raising awareness of possible
terrorist threats to critical infrastructure. It does so by
identifying the threats and preventing them, as well as
by seeking to alleviate their possible consequences.

As part of their essential counter-terrorism
efforts, it is crucial for States to develop and put in
place a strategy that assigns the relevant tasks and
responsibilities regarding the protection of critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks. The primary
goals should be to counter such attacks and prevent
their repetition by identifying the perpetrators and their
supporters, as well as to provide support to victims
of terrorism.

In view of the existing challenges to international
peace and security, especially the evolution of terrorist
threats, Ukraine has been working to develop a
national legal framework for the protection of critical
infrastructure against such threats. Taking into
account a series of terrorist attacks in recent years
against facilities in Ukraine, that work has become
particularly important.

Since 2015, several Ukrainian governmental

agencies, as well as critical national infrastructure, such
as regional power grids and financial institutions, have
become the targets of attacks by malicious software.
Hacker groups have also attacked the Kyiv airport and
the Ministry of Defence's electronic resources. On
6 December 2016, on the eve of the end of the financial
year, the websites of the State Treasury, the Ministry of
Finance and the State Pension Fund were temporarily
paralysed . Of course, we know that the objective of
such attacks is to damage Ukraine's financial system,
weaken our defence capabilities and eventually
destabilize Ukrainian society. It is quite obvious that
Ukraine has been deliberately selected as a target by
organized external cyberterrorists. Their attacks can be
as devastating as more conventional warfare. We have
been hurt, but we have grown more resilient as a result
of the attacks.

In today's dynamic and globalized world, we are
of the view that the following elements should be
incorporated into national policies in order to maintain
an adequate level of safety and resilience for critical
infrastructure. The first element is cooperation
among all stakeholders, both public and private,
involved in the process of operating and protecting
critical infrastructure. The second element is the open
exchange of information about threats and risks to
critical infrastructure among public authorities, the
private sector, communities and individual citizens.
The third element is to increase the level of self-
protection, mutual assistance and self-empowerment
of individuals and organizations that can be adversely
impacted by the termination or impairment of critical
infrastructure services.

Apart from the factors I just listed, a coherent
system aimed at averting the terrorist threat to critical
infrastructure should prioritize active international
cooperation, which would include, inter alia, an
exchange of best practices and the holding of joint
training sessions and investigations. Such international
cooperation has gained paramount importance given
the development of global cross-border infrastructure
projects. Terrorist attacks against those projects may
affect the interests ofseveral States and cause significant
damage, both economic and environmental. In that
context, our goal must be to intensify cooperation at
the national, regional and international levels, and to
establish early-warning and rapid-response mechanisms
in order to react better to possible terrorist attacks.

However, while seeking to safeguard the most
vulnerable parts of our critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks, we should never forget that it is the
lives of our citizens that are at stake, which we, as
States, are obliged to protect. Therefore, it is our duty
to do everything possible to prevent terrorist attacks on
critical infrastructure. The well-being of our peoples
depends on it. That is the main objective of resolution
2341 (2017), adopted today. Forearmed is forewarned. I
count on members' further cooperation on this matter.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I shall now give the floor to other members of the
Security Council.

