Mr. Trautwein (Germany): Germany welcomes
the initiative by the Angolan presidency to organize
this follow-up to Security Council resolution 1308
(2000). We thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Guehenno, and Mr. Peter Piot of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) for their
comprehensive reports on the implementation of that
resolution, and we welcome the Secretary-General and
thank him for participating in this meeting and thus
underlining the universal importance of this topic.

We would also like to recall Ambassador
Holbrooke's personal involvement and advocacy role
in highlighting HIV/AIDS as a global security threat,
which was instrumental in putting HIV/AIDS on the
agenda of the Security Council, as well as in drafting
and implementing resolution 1308 (2000).

A lot has been achieved. Worldwide efforts to
combat the epidemic have been stepped up
significantly, but we also have to acknowledge that,
despite these increased efforts, the number of HIV-
infected people and those who suffer from AIDS is still
growing, and there are worrying indications that
regions that had been spared the scourge are
increasingly being hit.

The special session of the General Assembly on
HIV/AIDS in June 2001 was a further major step in
fostering support for the global fight against
HIV/AIDS. Its outcome Declaration of Commitment
sets a comprehensive framework for an effective
response, including time targets for reaching certain
goals and also with regard to the interrelationship
between armed conflict and the spread of HIV/AIDS.
This process must be closely followed up in the
General Assembly and the Security Council. We
therefore welcome the high-level meetings in the
General Assembly on 22 September with many heads
of State and Government participating. Other important
initiatives such as the establishment of the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and the
efforts of the World Health Organization must also be
mentioned.

The Global Fund has developed into a very
effective additional tool to mobilize desperately needed
financial resources that could also be used for specific
programmes called for by resolution 1308 (2000). In
support, Germany has pledged €300 million to the
Fund up to 2007.

We are encouraged to learn from the
presentations of Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Piot that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
UNAIDS have already implemented a number of
concrete steps. They will allow, at the same time, the
threat of HIV/AIDS spreading in conflict zones to be
minimized and the local populations and deployed
peacekeeping troops to be protected from infection. We
strongly believe that mainstreaming HIV/AIDS
training should be an integral part of every mission. We
view resolution 1308 (2000) in combination with
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security and resolution 1460 (2003) on children and
armed conflict. All three resolutions are key
components in setting up future peacekeeping
missions.

In that respect, the recent negotiations on the
creation of the United Nations Mission in Liberia were
very encouraging. There is clearly an increased
awareness in the United Nations system, as well as in
the Council, that these three issues are closely
interrelated and need to be prominently addressed in
order to achieve long-term sustainable success for a
peacekeeping mission. We also strongly encourage
DPKO to continue its collaboration with the United
Nations Development Fund for Women on deploying
gender advisers for conflict and post-conflict
situations.

We fully agree with the key message of
Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Piot that even more has to be
done to reduce the risk of peacekeepers contracting or
spreading HIV/AIDS. In that regard, and using the
language of the Declaration of Commitment, my
delegation would like to reiterate that prevention must
be the mainstay of our response. We fully subscribe to
the idea that peacekeepers and uniformed personnel
can and must be leaders in the fight against the spread
of HIV/AIDS. We therefore encourage DPKO and
UNAIDS to continue to emphasize pre-deployment
training, as well as continuous awareness and
educational activities during deployment in high-
prevalence countries, including through HIV/AIDS
advisers.

We also wish to underline that the primary
responsibility for selecting adequately trained
personnel remains with the deploying countries. They
must ensure that only peacekeepers who are aware of
the risk of deployment in a high-prevalence country
and who know the key precautionary measures are
deployed. We all have to do more at the national level
to strengthen HIV/AIDS awareness in our armed
forces, particularly at a time when young people in
many Western countries, including Germany, are less
and less aware of the risk of HIV/AIDS infection. This,
of course, includes increased voluntary testing before
and during deployment.

We believe that, almost three years after the
adoption of resolution 1308 (2000), appropriate
facilities for voluntary testing should be an integral
part of all peacekeeping operations. However, that does
not always seem to be the case. In the summer, we
learned, from the report on the visit of the Security
Council mission to the Great Lakes region, that the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo did not have testing
facilities at the time. We are grateful for the
information given by Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno that that has since been addressed.

Finally, let me add my delegation's support for
the proposal by various speakers that this Council take
up the subject at a future meeting in 2004.

