Mr. De Santa Clara Gomes (Portugal): Let me
join other speakers in condemning the bombing in
Grozny and in presenting my condolences to the
families of the victims.

I thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
on the situation in Timor-Leste, as well as Special
Representative Kamalesh Sharma and his staff for the
excellent work they have done and for the results
achieved so far. I especially thank Kamalesh Sharma,
who has done an outstanding job in Dili in the past two
years. I would also like to welcome the presence of
Minister Ana Pessoa Pinto and her valuable
contribution to this debate.

Portugal subscribes to the interventions of
Ireland, on behalf of the European Union, and of Brazil
on behalf of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries.

Portugal welcomes the recommendation of the
Secretary-General on the extension of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), in a reduced size and with a modified
mandate, for a further 12-month consolidation phase in
order to allow key tasks to be performed and to sustain,
strengthen and build upon the gains made to date,
permitting Timor-Leste to attain self-sufficiency.

In this context, I welcome the proposals of the
Secretary-General on a programme of support for
public administration and justice; on support for the
development of law enforcement; and on support for
security and stability.

It is important to acknowledge the importance of
continuing bilateral assistance and to underline the
responsibility of the international community and of
the Security Council in relation to Timor-Leste. In this
context, I would just like to point out that Portugal,
from 1999 to 2003, invested about €300 million in
bilateral investment, development assistance
programmes and technical-military assistance to
Timor-Leste alone. We are ready to maintain this level
of support for Timor-Leste and we encourage other
countries to do the same.
We note with satisfaction the steady and
significant developments in the relationship of Timor-
Leste with its neighbours, regarding important issues
such as refugees and in the determination of land and
maritime borders. We can only encourage the
strengthening of these bilateral relations and the
settling of all outstanding problems with neighbouring
countries in a climate of friendship and trust.

Finally, I would like to reiterate that, as in the
past, Portugal will remain committed to the
consolidation and development of Timor-Leste and to
the United Nations efforts to that effect.

