Mr. Kickert (Austria): Allow me at the outset to
thank the Uruguayan presidency for convening this
open debate on the protection of civilians.

Austria fully aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
those still to be delivered on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Protection of Civilians and the Human
Security Network. In our national capacity, we would
like to highlight some additional points we deem
especially important.

Enhanced respect for international law, especially
international humanitarian law, is of paramount
importance, as highlighted by the Secretary-General
and the representative of the International Committee
of the Red Cross at the outset of the debate. Austria
therefore welcomes the attention the Secretary-General
gives in his report (S/2017/414) to the massive harm,
destruction and negative long-term consequences
of explosive weapons with wide-area impact when
used in populated areas. The available data shows
that 2016 was the worst year recorded within the past
six years for civilian deaths resulting from explosive
weapons. We therefore strongly support the clear and
unequivocal call of the Secretary-General on all State
and non-State parties to conflict to avoid the use of
explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated
areas and appreciate his encouragement regarding the
efforts led by Austria on the development of a political
declaration on that issue.

We also share the Secretary-General's concern
regarding the detrimental impact of conflict on
education and medical care. In too many conflict
situations, attacks on schools, teachers and students
or the use of schools and universities for military
purposes are not uncommon. Similarly, we note the
numerous incidences of direct and indiscriminate
attacks against humanitarian and medical personnel
and objects. Hence we wholeheartedly support the call
for the endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration
and the recommendations presented by the Secretary-
General on implementing resolution 2286 (2016) to
protect medical care in armed conflict.

On a different note, we need to further
operationalize the protection of civilians in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Against that
background, we continue to advocate for Member
States' endorsement of the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians. Austria, from this year on,
organizes two operational-level courses per year,
certified by the United Nations, on the protection of
civilians. Again this year, we will host and support
one training-of-trainers course on training materials
concerning protection of civilians and related areas,
developed by the Integrated Training Service together
with interested States, among them Austria. Only
adequately trained peacekeepers are able to effectively
implement their mandates and protect civilians.

Let me finish by thanking Secretary-General
Guterres for not only linking the protection of civilians
to the issue of forced displacement, but also for not
forgetting the plight of internally displaced persons
(IDPs). We fully share the view that IDPs have received
inadequate attention from their Governments and
global leaders, as stated in the report (see S/2017/414, para 61), and we certainly do agree that we need to use
the twentieth anniversary of the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement, in 2018, in order to advance this
important issue.

In conclusion, let me repeat that Austria shares
the Secretary-General's assessment that protection
is a whole-of-UN responsibility. We also call on all
States to continue in good faith the ongoing discussions
in Geneva about ways and means to enhance the
implementation of international humanitarian law.

