Mr. Fall: First of all, I would like to express my
full agreement with Ms. McAskie's comments that the
regional approach should not be a substitute for the
national approach. Rather, it should be a
complementary way to strengthen the national
approach.

Turning to the questions, I will be very brief. As
far as the issue of proposing the geographical extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone is concerned, the issue before the Mission was
not actually its composition. Its composition reflected
all the departments concerned, including the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations - the Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General was a
member of the Mission. Rather, the issue was about
giving fair treatment to concerns expressed in the
region by the leaders. It is just for that reason that we
thought it would be fair to express those concerns.

Secondly, how do we improve the dialogue
between the United Nations and Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS)? I think Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno has already responded
about the different levels of cooperation between the
United Nations and ECOWAS. I would like to add two
comments: the first is that we should perhaps continue
to make better use of those frameworks, and the second
is that the Council has already begun a fruitful dialogue
with ECOWAS. I think that that can also be improved.

Last but not least, the establishment of the United
Nations office for West Africa will certainly be critical
to improving that cooperation.

With regard to the role of countries that export
arms in West Africa, I recall that paragraph 102 of the
report deals with that. It is clearly mentioned that
"Concerted measures should be taken by the
appropriate United Nations organs, including the
Security Council, and international and national
partners to identify those engaged in the illicit
trade of arms to West Africa and to stem their
activities." (S/2001/434, para. 102)

How can we make sure that a regional strategy
can alleviate the double fatigue in humanitarian
assistance, both among the host countries and among
the international donors? I think that Ms. McAskie
might like to respond to this question, which was raised
by the representative of Colombia. What I can say is
just that it seems to me that, as far as the host countries
are concerned, the international humanitarian agencies
are already trying to help by including host
communities in their humanitarian assistance in order
to alleviate their fatigue in supporting the refugees.

The representative of Mauritius asked if
reflections are ongoing in the Secretariat on the
implementation plan. Yes, we have the interim inter-
agency mission task force, which is working every
week and devising ways and means of implementing
the recommendations, including in terms of human
resources; yes, because we have already developed a
matrix of the different recommendations; yes, because
the report has already been distributed on the ground
and to the different partners to request their
contribution to the implementation; and, last but not
least, yes, because the Secretary-General has already
designated the Deputy Secretary-General to coordinate
the efforts of all concerned towards the implementation
of the recommendations.

Last but not least, several interlocutors raised the
issue of cooperation and strengthening ECOWAS and
the issue of sanctions against Liberia. Members will
note that I did not develop those issues because, first,
with respect to the sanctions against Liberia, the
Council has already had a meeting that took our
recommendations into account; and because, secondly,
with respect to strengthening the capacity of ECOWAS,
this is really the underlying pattern of the entire report
and I did not think it was necessary to underline it
again.

