The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern over the statement of 3 October 2006 by
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) in which it
stated that the DPRK would conduct a nuclear
test in the future.

"The Security Council reaffirms that the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery constitutes a threat to
international peace and security. The Security
Council deplores the DPRK's announcement of
withdrawal from the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (the Treaty)
and its stated pursuit of nuclear weapons in spite
of its Treaty and International Atomic Energy
Agency safeguards obligations. The Security
Council deems that should the DPRK carry out its
threat of a nuclear weapon test, it would
jeopardize peace, stability and security in the
region and beyond.

"The Security Council underlines that such
a test would bring universal condemnation by the
international community and would not help the
DPRK to address the stated concerns particularly
the

with regard to strengthening its security. The
Security Council urges the DPRK not to
undertake such a test and to refrain from any
action that might aggravate tension, to work on
the resolution of non-proliferation concerns and
to facilitate a peaceful and comprehensive
solution through political and diplomatic efforts.
The Security Council reiterates the need for the
DPRK to comply fully with all the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1695 (2006).

"The Security Council supports the Six-
Party Talks and calls for their early resumption
with a View to achieving the verifiable
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula in a
peaceful manner and to maintaining peace and
stability on the Korean Peninsula and in North-
East Asia.

"The Security Council urges the DPRK to
return immediately to the Six-Party Talks without
precondition, and to work towards the
expeditious implementation of the 19 September
2005 Joint Statement, and in particular to
abandon all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear
programmes.

"The Security Council will be monitoring
this situation closely. The Security Council
stresses that a nuclear test, if carried out by the
DPRK, would represent a clear threat to
international peace and security and that, should
the DPRK ignore calls of the international
community, the Security Council will act
consistent with its responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/4l.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.
06-55808
