I thank Special Envoy for Syria Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings. My delegation also takes note of the most recent report of the Secretary-General on the humanitarian situation in Syria pursuant to relevant Security Council resolutions (S/2020/1031). I wish at the outset to reaffirm Tunisia's consistent position: in resolving the Syrian crisis and putting an end to the suffering of the Syrian people, there is no viable alternative to reaching a political settlement in line with resolution 2254 (2015). Until a political solution has been reached, efforts must continue to be scaled up to ensure the delivery of principled life-saving assistance using cross-line and cross-border modalities, with a view to addressing the growing needs and aggravated fragility and vulnerability resulting from the economic downturn and the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We are deeply troubled by the impact COVID-19 has had on various aspects of Syrians' livelihoods, including food, health care and education, as well as, clearly, the enjoyment of their basic rights. We are particularly disturbed by the dramatic levels of food insecurity, including water insecurity, in Syria, which are likely to drive hunger, poverty and conflict and hinder COVID-19 prevention measures. Tunisia praises the widening scope of the United Nations and its specialized agencies' operations in Syria, encompassing rehabilitation of hospitals, schools, roads and water, electricity and sanitation infrastructure, as part and parcel of the humanitarian response to the crisis. We emphasize the importance of strengthening early recovery efforts and building Syrians' resilience through the rehabilitation of basic-service infrastructure and the delivery of sustainable assistance for livelihoods, as appropriate. Such efforts require additional joint and coordinated humanitarian and development programmes by United Nations agencies and endowing them with sufficient funds. We further stress that delivery of life-saving aid and COVID-19-prevention and -response measures would be more efficient if they could rely on the cooperation of all parties and on respect for international humanitarian law, international human rights law and relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2532 (2020), thereby enabling safe, sustainable and unhindered access for humanitarian aid, including medical aid, and the protection of civilians and humanitarian and medical workers. In the light of growing tensions, violence and preliminary signs of relapse into conflict, particularly in north, north-east and south Syria, it remains paramount that calm be restored through the full and lasting implementation of a ceasefire in the country, pursuant to the appeal of the Secretary-General and Special Envoy Pedersen. Tunisia looks forward to the convening of the fourth round of the Constitutional Committee talks in the near term in Geneva. We hope that Special Envoy Pedersen's discussions with the Syrian parties will lay the common groundwork for enabling the desired progress in the work of the Constitutional Committee and the political process in the broadest sense. We urge the Syrian parties to put the interests of the Syrian people first, exercise flexibility and search for commonalities so that an agreement on the date and agenda of the fourth round of talks may be reached. We are deeply concerned about the growing menace in Syria of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), which has purportedly taken control of new swathes of territory in Syrian Al-Badiya. It has become increasingly evident that, a year after the death of ISIS leader Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi, this terror organization is regaining strength in a way that threatens the territorial integrity of Syria and the stability of the region. Tunisia reiterates the pressing need for coordinated and determined counter- terrorism efforts, in accordance with international law, in order to eradicate Security- Council-listed terrorist organizations, restore regional peace and stability and enable a solution to the Syrian crisis to take hold in the long run. We would also like to underline that the void in Syrian owing to protracted conflict, economic collapse and a highly consequential outbreak of COVID-19 disease is enabling wider forces of instability to stretch across the Middle East, North Africa and beyond. Finally, we reiterate that there is no military solution to the Syrian crisis. The only lasting way forward is a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned and United Nations- facilitated political settlement in line with resolution 2254 (2015) that meets Syrians' legitimate aspirations, safeguards Syria's sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity, ends terrorism and foreign intervention and restores peace and stability in the country and the region.
