Mr. de Brichambaut (spoke in French): This
summer, the United Nations celebrated its sixtieth
anniversary and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) celebrated the thirtieth
anniversary of the Helsinki Act 1975. The world
summit and the resulting outcome document have
indicated the road to follow for the future with regard
to relations between the United Nations and regional
organizations.
With 55 participating States spread over three
continents, the OSCE is prepared to contribute actively
to this work on the basis of the important achievements
we have made with regard to norms and commitments
shared by all of the participating States.

Jointly with the current presidency of OSCE -
held by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Slovenia,
Mr. Dimitrij Rupel - I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this very timely meeting. I shall try
to answer three questions that you have raised.

Along with the other regional organizations, the
OSCE is in a position to provide strong assistance to
the Security Council in its central role in preserving
international peace and security. The OSCE has the
Forum for Security Cooperation, which is the keeper of
disarmament treaties and confidence-building
measures. It has the Conflict Prevention Centre and has
deployed 18 missions in the field, which in agreement
with the host countries are trying to create long-term
stability. In this connection, it carries out broad
security responsibilities in its sphere of responsibility,
which could be considered to be subsidiary to those of
the Security Council. Sometimes OSCE activities are
directly set out in the Council's resolutions; this is the
case in Kosovo and Georgia. Its actions are carried out
essentially after a crisis in the work of consolidation
and stabilization, but they also follow closely so-called
frozen conflicts, and the texts governing them do not
exclude OSCE participation in peacekeeping
operations.

This practice and the instruments entrusted to the
Permanent Council under the responsibility of the
current presidency are available to the Security
Council, if the latter wishes to make use of them.
Through the transmission of data, evaluations and
analyses and by meeting requests, the OSCE and its
members can provide information to the Security
Council in the spirit of Article 52 of the Charter.
Guidance from the Council will be very much
appreciated. It can, of course, apply to one or another
of the crisis cycle phases in which the OECD is able to
intervene.

Similarly, the OSCE has the goal of assisting in
the implementation of Security Council resolutions, for
example in the area of terrorism and weapons of mass
destruction. Contacts with the Secretariat would be
facilitated if we had a framework agreement between
the United Nations and the OSCE, as just mentioned by
the Secretary-General. We would be prepared to have a
permanent liaison office in New York. Work is
constantly carried out by the State holding the OSCE
presidency.

Among the regional organizations, there is a
network of exchanges. It will be strengthened, and I
think it is relevant for the work of this Council. Within
each region, there is mutual and methodological
reinforcing among regional organizations. This is the
case in Europe, where exchanges between the OSCE,
the Council of Europe, the European Union, NATO,
and the Community of Independent States are close
and have led to active complementarity and joint
projects. The specialities of each of those organizations
and their varied composition allows us to deal better
with crises and to work towards the future. That is the
case in the Balkans and in the Caucasus.

Among regional organizations from different
continents, we can do even more. The Organization of
American States (OAS) has enabled the OSCE to take
its first steps in organizing the fight against terrorism.
With the League of Arab States, the OSCE is working
on the issue of small arms and light weapons and
election monitoring. The African Union is closely
following the development of institutions and policies
within the OSCE that are available to it. The 18 OSCE
missions are trying to strengthen civil society, a
requirement for stability and long-term development,
as we have just been reminded. It unites activities in
various areas to implement the commitments
undertaken by all member States. The missions also
provide an opportunity to gain experience that we can
share with other regional organizations. In the areas of
election monitoring, institution-building and support
for minorities, the experience of the OSCE has
something that everyone can benefit from.

Thirdly, the OSCE is based on the affirmation of
shared values. It is oriented towards the discussion of
ideas. It can make its contribution to the collective
effort of all international organizations following the
United Nations summit. The OSCE was one of the first
organizations to affirm that the security of States and
individuals depended on a holistic approach, with
activities that covered several dimensions - first and
foremost, the human dimension - and that those
activities should be conducted with a long-term
perspective in View. Today respect for the individual
and the search for good democratic governance are
values that are broadly shared by all international
organizations as concepts linked to human security.

The OSCE continues to forge ahead and to be a
conceptual laboratory for all its members. It is making
progress in areas such as tolerance, the fight against
human trafficking, freedom in the media, and
environmental security and safety. Those activities are,
obviously, open to other organizations. I believe it
would be particularly useful for the OSCE to take part
in two projects that concern all international
organizations: first, the preparations for the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
provides a new and original platform for regional
organizations; and, secondly, the dialogue among
civilizations, called for by the Secretary-General.

At the high-level meeting of the heads of regional
organizations, presided over by the Secretary-General
in July, we devised a collective framework to allow us
to pool our thinking and coordinate our efforts in this
area supported by everyone's goodwill. The framework
should enable us to make substantive contributions as a
follow-up to the 2005 world summit and, at the same
time, work out some details within its outlines. The
draft resolution before the Council is a new departure.
It will serve as a framework so that in the future
mutually beneficial exchanges will both be a
permanent working method and provide mutual
support. The decisive impetus will have come from
Council members, and we are grateful for that.

