Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me at the outset to express to you, Sir,
my congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month and to wish you every success.
I should also like to pay tribute to your predecessor,
Ambassador Kovanda of the Czech Republic, for the
exemplary manner in which he conducted the work of the
Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting again today to discuss
the dangers faced by occupied Jerusalem as a result of the
continued settlement policy and practices of Israel, in
particular the recent decision by the Israeli Cabinet to
expropriate Arab land. This is part of a far-reaching plan
aimed at determining in advance the fate of the occupied
Arab territories through a policy of imposing a geographic
and demographic fait accompli. This situation threatens the
destiny of the Arabs by isolating them in closed, unviable
concentrations of population that depend wholly on the
Israeli economy, a process aimed at uprooting the Arab
presence from - and usurping Arab rights in - Jerusalem.

The expropriation of Arab land has been one of the
mainstays of successive Israeli Governments. It takes
various forms through various projects, including the Allon
settler project - under which large parts of the West Bank
were expropriated - the Greater Jerusalem project, the
Galilee project and others that link settlement to security.
Israel has intensified its settlement campaigns in
occupied Arab territories using emergency laws, laws for
confiscating the property of absentees, laws for land
development and others. These are all aimed at
expropriating more and more land and expanding the
settlement cycle: expansion and settlement are at the core
of the Israeli policy.

Present Israeli measures, which include confiscation
and the building of settlements in Jerusalem and
elsewhere, are in fact a challenge to the international
community, to United Nations resolutions and to
international law. Since 1967 and in the wake of
individual Israeli settlement projects in the occupied Arab
territories, the United Nations has reaffirmed the need to
halt measures affecting the demographic and geographic
makeup of the occupied Arab territories. Many resolutions
have been adopted by the United Nations, notably
Security Council resolutions 465 (1980) and 476 (1980),
which declared all Israeli administrative measures,
including settlement, void and in contravention of
international law.

The expropriation of Arab land is another piece of
evidence that Israeli intentions are not directed towards
peace. In consequence, the Security Council must
shoulder it responsibility and move swiftly to stop these
acts by adopting a resolution that would invalidate
expropriations of Arab and Palestinian territory, both
inside and outside of Jerusalem, and any other measures
in contravention of international law, including violations
of the relevant Security Council resolutions or the Fourth
Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949.

We call upon the Council to condemn Israel for its
attempt to change the demographic structure and the
geographic make-up of Jerusalem. We call upon the
Council to demand that Israel stop its settlement
programmes and plans, rescind the closure of the city and
halt all excavations threatening the structure of the Al-
Aqsa mosque. We also call on it to stress the need to
adopt measures to protect the Arab population in the
occupied Arab territories, for the changes introduced
represent a grave threat to security and stability in the
area.
 

