Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by welcoming Mr. Dileita Mohamed
Dileita, Prime Minister of Djibouti, and his Minister
for Foreign Affairs, and by acknowledging the
presence of the Permanent Representatives of Djibouti
and Eritrea and the representatives of the League of
Arab States and the African Union.

The Horn of Africa cannot afford yet another
conflict. That region cannot afford to resort to violence
to settle yet another dispute. Brother nations must find
solutions around the table of dialogue rather than in the
trenches and with the use of weapons.

Although it is only natural that different countries
have different views regarding their respective
interests, particularly where colonial borders have not
been consolidated, we feel that it should be pointed out
that solutions that emanate from peace be based on
caution and common sense and allow for areas of
growth for brother countries. The conflict between
Djibouti and Eritrea has its roots in the issue of borders
that have never been defined and that are disputed.
Such questions should be settled, in our View, through
consultations and negotiations between the parties that
explore ways of reaching new agreements through
arbitration, mediation and the possibility of appealing
to higher courts, such as the International Court of
Justice. The use of specialized tribunals should also be
considered as an option.

Costa Rica believes that, with respect to this
situation, regional organizations can offer very
valuable support. We are therefore grateful for the
efforts of the African Union and the League of Arab
States, and urge them to continue to provide forums for
a peaceful and consensual settlement of the situation.
Of course, we also appeal to Djibouti and Eritrea to
resume dialogue and to seek a solution to their
differences through negotiation, making use of the
appropriate instruments and bodies, and promptly to
end the dispute between them.

We thank the delegation of France for the points
it circulated yesterday, which we can support for
inclusion in a statement.

