Mr. Mogae: I would like to thank you, Sir, for
your kind invitation to me to brief the Security Council
today. My briefing will build on the previous update
that I provided to the Security Council last month (see S/PV.8030) on the implementation of the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. I will therefore focus on a quick situation update,
including on the forthcoming evaluation report of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC)
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) high-level revitalization forum.

Last month, I reported an incident of heavy
fighting between the Sudan People's Liberation Army
in Opposition (SPLA-IO) and the Sudan People's
Liberation Army in Government (SPLA-IG) in some
areas of the country. The scale of the fighting has
changed this month, with the reports from the Cease Fire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism indicating that there has been a relatively
lower incidence of fighting between SPLA-IG and the
Machar faction of SPLA-IO.

However, fighting was reported between forces of
the Taban and Machar factions of SPLA-IO in Unity
and Upper Nile states, causing further displacement of
civilians. SPLA-IO has denied access to ajoint patrol of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and citizens along the Nile, so we are unable to provide
a full picture at this time. The situation concerning
the control of Pagak in Upper Nile state remains tense
as SPLA-IG and SPLA-IO Machar make claims and
counter claims.

The Monitoring Mechanism has reported the
displacement of 3,000 civilians into Ethiopia. It
also reports fighting in the Equatorias and armed
robberies in some parts of Eastern Equatoria.
Intercommunal tensions are reported in some parts
in the greater Bhar el-Ghazal region and the Maban
area, where Vice-President James Wani Igga has been
mediating between internally displaced persons and
host communities.

We in J MEC are acutely aware that the humanitarian
crisis persists mainly owing to the conflict, with
6 million people reporting severe food insecurity and
continued inconsistent humanitarian access. JMEC
remains fully focused on its mandate to monitor and
evaluate the implementation of the peace agreement
and is committed to supporting IGAD in its objective
to convene a high-level revitalization forum. To that
end, yesterday JMEC held an evaluation workshop
to review a comprehensive report on the status of the
implementation of the peace agreement. Once complete,
the report will be presented to IGAD as part of our
contribution to ensuring a successful revitalization
forum. Allow me to elaborate.

In March, we took the deliberate step of enhancing
our oversized role with the formation of six JMEC
working committees, in line with the six substantive
chapters of the agreement. Their tasks are to
continuously review and evaluate the progress in the
implementation of the peace agreement and to support
and recommend remedial actions to be undertaken.
The working committees have held a combined total
of 38 meetings to date. They have engaged bilaterally
with the Transitional Government of National Unity
and other stakeholders, and they have invited briefings
from key institutions and mechanisms charged with
implementing the agreement.

Consistent with the terms of reference for the
revitalization forum, agreed to by IGAD Council of
Ministers on 2 July, the JMEC working committees
have conducted a full evaluation of the status of the
implementation of the peace agreement and prepared a
report, which is under consideration. I expect the final
report to be published by the end of next week. As I
have said, once the report is finalized and adopted by
JMEC, it will be presented to IGAD and is intended
to mark the starting point for discussion in the
revitalization process.

I shall not pre-empt the final report, but overall
J MEC maintains the view that despite initial reasonable
progress in the formation of the various institutions
and bodies, the implementation of the peace agreement
was disrupted in July 2016 and, as things stand today,
little substantive progress has been made in the
implementation of the key provisions. I have previously
described the implementation as being modest at best,
and from the evaluation reports presented yesterday
nothing I have heard nothing to change my View.

Fundamental to the full report is the irrefutable fact
that the permanent ceasefire has been and continues
to be violated by all parties with impunity, and as
such, security has deteriorated to a critical level. Of
underlying importance is the fracturing of SPLA-IO
into two factions - one under the First Vice-President,
General Taban Deng Gai, and the other under the
former First Vice-President, Mr. Riek Machar, who
is now in exile in South Africa. The expansion of the
number of states from 10 to 32, in contravention of the
peace agreement, has also fundamentally and adversely
affected the intended power-sharing formula.

While some progress has been made, it is greatly
disappointing that after two years, there are several
transitional institutions and mechanisms that have
yet to be established, including the special fund for
reconstruction, the economic and financial management
authority, the compensation and reparations authority
and key transitional justice institutions. Most
importantly, there has been no progress whatsoever in
the permanent constitution-making process.

JMEC recommendations are that there must be an
immediate ceasefire and an end to all forms ofviolence.
There is a fundamental need for the demonstration
of political will by the parties to undertake their
responsibility to implement the provisions of the
agreement. All forms of obstruction to the delivery of
humanitarian aid must be removed. The Transitional
Government of National Unity must expedite and
conclude the constitutional and legislative amendments
and initiate without further delay the permanent
constitution-making process.

In preparation for the return of the displaced
persons, a joint framework should be developed by
the Transitional Government of National Unity, in
collaboration with humanitarian partners. The Security
Council, in collaboration with IGAD, the African
Union and international partners, should put in place
mechanisms to enforce compliance.

In the coming weeks, IGAD will convene a high-
level revitalization forum and I wish to take the
opportunity to reaffirm our complete commitment
to that process. Together with one voice, we can
challenge those who believe in the military solution to
the conflict. We urge the Government and all parties
concerned to engage in the inclusive political process.
The revitalization forum convened by IGAD is the best
opportunity to restore peace and rebuild governance in

South Sudan.

If implemented credibly and inclusively, national
dialogue can play a complementary role in delivering
long-term reconciliation. Given current conditions
around the country, mass displacement, severe food
insecurity and the total lack of institutional and
constitutional infrastructure, it is clear that elections
will not be feasible by the end of the current transitional
period. Therefore, the high-level revitalization forum is
the best hope for reigniting the political process.

We hope that the evaluation conducted by the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission will enable
parties, the region and all South Sudanese stakeholders
to pursue the revitalization process from an informed
point of view. We encourage them to take concrete steps
to revitalize the implementation of the peace agreement
without further delay.

