The Secretary-General: I thank Prime Minister Key
for organizing this very important meeting.

The Syrian tragedy shames us all. The collective
failure of the international community should
haunt every member of the Security Council. Well
over 300,000 Syrians have been killed, half of the
country's population has been uprooted and much of
its infrastructure lies in ruins. Many Syrians fear the
fragmentation of their State could follow, with Da'esh
and Al-Qaida affiliates poised to exploit further
chaos. Neighbouring countries are hosting millions
of Syrian refugees, while many lose their lives trying
to reach Europe. Forces unleashed by the conflict are
destabilizing the region. Terrorist attacks linked to
the crisis have struck around the world. Global norms
of humanitarian law have been flagrantly violated.
We have seen indiscriminate attacks on civilians and
civilian facilities, the medieval tactic of sieges and the
weaponization of hunger, the use of chemical weapons,
including attacks recently attributed to Da'esh and the
Syrian Government. Tens of thousands of men, women
and children remain in arbitrary detention, in appalling
conditions and systematically subjected to unspeakale
torture. Meanwhile, foreign fighters and arms flow
to all sides. All of that defies the resolutions of the
Council.

Tragically, the divisons inside Syria are too often
amplified by regional divisions, and then mirrored
in the Council. Those divisions condemn Syria to its
terrible fate. Yet we know that international unity can
make a difference. Council unity and resolve led to
the elimination of Syria's previously denied chemical
weapons and attribution of responsibility for their use.
Food and medicine have been delivered to millions of
Syrians, including across front lines and via air drops to
besieged and hard-to-reach areas. And the formation of
the International Syria Support Group (ISSG) provided
fresh momentum to the search for a settlement and
paved the way for resolution 2254 (2015).

A cessation of hostilities, albeit fragile, began in
late February, with positive results for a few months.
In that window, the United Nations intensified
humanitarian operations and brought the parties to
Geneva for talks. But that process was once again
overwhelmed by violence. The long-sought agreement
between the Russian Federation and the United
States concluded on 9 September represents a new
opportunity. The attack on a United Nations-Syrian
Arab Red Crescent humanitarian convoy two days ago
was an outrage that resulted in several casualties and
forced the United Nations to suspend aid operations.
I am looking at options for vigorously investigating
that and similar atrocities against civilians. I am also
concerned about the earlier attack in Deir ez-Zor, in
which dozens of lives were lost. I take note of the rapid
acknowledgement by the United States of that strike
and look forward to more information.

We must remain determined that the ceasefire
will be revived. I urge everyone to use their influence
now - today - to ensure that it does. This is a
chance to reinstate the cessation of hostilities, faciliate
humanitarian aid to Aleppo and throughout the country,
ground the Syrian air force and see joint military
action against terrorist groups, such as Da'esh and the
Al-Nusra Front. If we can do that, it would open the
road to political talks.

As soon as a new round of intra-Syrian negotiations
begins, they must focus on the fundamental issues for
a viable transition, in particular - and I use the exact
words of the mediators' summary of the last round of
talks -
"how power is to be exercised in practice by the
transitional governance, including in relation to
the presidency, executive powers and the control of
Government and security institutions".

The ISSG has already signalled its support for that
approach. It urged the parties,

"to reach agreement on a framework for a genuine
political transition, which would include a broad,
inclusive transitional body with full executive
power".

And the ISSG co-Chairs formally requested that the
United Nations develop proposals as a starting point for
future tasks. With my strong backing, Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura will be ready to present to the parties
a draft framework of proposals as a starting point
for negotiations for a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
political transition. We are fully guided by resolution
2254 (2015), the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and the ISSG statement, as well as the clear
agenda for intra-Syrian talks laid out in resolution 2254
(2015).

I have asked the Special Envoy to work intensively
towards convening formal negotiations as soon as
possible. I call on the Security Council to fully support
the Special Envoy as he proceeds in that manner, with
no ifs, ands or buts. We have to unequivocally move
ahead towards a credible political process. I expect all
to use their influence with the Syrian parties to make
sure they come to talks ready to genuinely negotiate the
core issues of political transition. No country's destiny
should rest on what happens with a single individual.
If one side continues to insist that the powers of the
Office of the President are not subject to negotiation,
by definition there cannot be a negotiated settlement.
If another side insists that the President simply depart
at the very outset of a transition, it is difficult to see a
genuine negotiation take place.

Transition is not an end in itself; it is a process by
which the Syrian people can achieve a new, peaceful and
democratic reality while protecting their sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence and uniting
against terrorism. The transition must ensure the
continuity and reform of State institutions and public
services in the country. That requires an inclusive set
of governance arrangements that ensure that power is
exercised differently and responsibly from the way it
has been until now.

There is also a profound need for accountability.
The Government has mercilessly trampled on human
rights. Opposition groups have done some of the same.
Terrorist groups parade images of their cruelty before
the global public with perverse glee. For the world
not to pursue the perpetrators of such brutality would
be a grave abdication of duty. It would deny Syrian
justice and healing. It would shred the credibility of an
international community that claims to be concerned
about upholding our common humanity.

I note that the Security Council itself has said that
those who use chemical weapons in Syria must be held
accountable. I repeat my call on the Security Council to
refer the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court. Members of the Government who gave orders or
were part of the chain of command must be brought to
account. Others on the battlefield must also be brought
into the halls ofjustice. And there can be no doubt that
any durable settlement will have to ensure a proper
framework for transitional justice and reconciliation if
Syria is to overcome the horrors of this war.

We are at a make-or-break moment. I challenge
everyone to use their influence now to restore
our cessation of hostilies, enable the delivery of
humanitarian assistance everywhere it is needed, and
support the United Nations in charting a political path
for the Syrians to negotiate a way out of the hell in
which they are trapped. In their service as members
of the Security Council, those present have no higher
responsibility now.

