The President: At the outset of this meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the members of the Security
Council, to express profound sorrow at the death of
Judge Lai'ty Kama, who served as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda from 1995
to 1999. At the time of his death, he was serving as the
Presiding Judge in one of the trial chambers of the
Tribunal. Judge Kama was highly respected by his
fellow judges and was regarded as a father figure and a
leader who played a crucial role in the formative years
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

On this sad occasion, I should like to convey to
the Government and the people of Senegal and to the
bereaved family the Council's profound condolences.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Guinea following recent attacks
along its borders with Liberia and Sierra Leone

The situation in Sierra Leone

Letter dated 30 April 2001 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2001/434)

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
invitations under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations; Mr.
Ibrahima Fall, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs; and Ms. Carolyn McAskie, Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

I invite Ms. McAskie to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 30 April 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
transmitting the report of the Inter-Agency Mission to
West Africa, document S/2001/434.

I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/2001/353, which contains
the text of a letter dated 11 April 2001 from the
Permanent Representative of Mali to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the final communique of the
Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States, held in Abuja on 11 April 2001.

Today the Security Council will hear briefings by
Mr. Guehenno, Ms. McAskie and Mr. Fall.

At the end of those briefings, I will give the floor
to Council members who wish to make comments or
ask questions. I should like to invite them to indicate to
the Secretariat if they wish to take the floor.

I now give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.


