Mr. Kittikhoun (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the States members of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand, Viet Nam and my own country, Laos.

ASEAN congratulates you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month and appreciates your initiative of convening this
very important meeting. We are honoured by your
presence as you, the Prime Minister of Romania,
preside over our deliberations.

(spoke in English)

Touching upon the topic of our discussion today,
we would like to share some of the views of ASEAN.

For several years, the Secretary-General has been
exploring modalities for cooperation between and
among the United Nations and regional organizations
through, inter alia, the regular convening of the high-
level meetings between the United Nations and
regional organizations. In that regard, we are pleased to
recall that the Secretary-General of ASEAN attended
the fourth high-level meeting between the United
Nations and regional organizations, held in February
2001. A delegation from the ASEAN secretariat also
attended the fifth high-level meeting, held in 2003,
which focused on new challenges to international peace
and security, including international terrorism.

The search for appropriate modalities for
cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations aims to promote a speedy response to
situations likely to disturb regional or international
peace and security. It hopes to optimize the
mobilization of the resources of concerned regional
organizations and the various components of the
United Nations system, based on their comparative
advantages, so as to lead to the complementarity of
efforts and the elimination of duplication. Moreover,
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations could strengthen or build institutional
capacity at the regional level for conflict prevention
and post-conflict peace-building.

In the field of peace-building, ASEAN notes that
the high-level meetings between the United Nations
and regional organizations have identified four main
areas for cooperation. The first is the identification of
situations where peace-building is required. That
involves monitoring all such potential situations, acting
as sources of early warning and determining at which
point a particular situation is ripe for peace-building
action.

The second area involves the definition of
political objectives, including the deployment of joint
preliminary assessment missions and ensuring a
realistic negotiated political settlement.

The third area entails the development of an
integrated operational response through mutual
consultations. Those could be promoted through
regular and systematic working group meetings on
specific peace-building issues between the United
Nations and regional organizations.

The last area pertains to joint monitoring of the
results of peace-building by keeping all parties
informed of the progress achieved or the obstacles
encountered, as well as by identifying remedial
measures.

Meanwhile, the General Assembly's significant
resolution 57/35, which was adopted on 21 November
2002 and dealt with the issue of cooperation between
the United Nations and ASEAN, has encouraged more
active cooperation between the two organizations. That
landmark resolution is expected to lead to activities
between ASEAN and the United Nations in various
areas as appropriate, including in the field of political
and security issues.

Since 2001, ASEAN and the United Nations have
held annual conferences on conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peace-building. I should also
like to recall that, following the ASEAN-United
Nations summit held in Bangkok on 12 February 2000,
where ASEAN leaders met with Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, the annual conference has been organized
jointly by the United Nations Secretariat, the ministries
for foreign affairs of ASEAN member countries, the
ASEAN Institutes of Strategic and International
Studies and the ASEAN secretariat.

Since 1999, through the Chairman of the ASEAN
Regional Forum, a multilateral security forum of 23
countries in the Asia-Pacific region plus the European
Union, ASEAN has maintained contacts with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Secretary-
General of the Organization of American States and the
Secretary-General of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. That continuing exercise aims
at exchanging experiences and best practices in
promoting regional security.

ASEAN foreign ministers also hold regular
consultations with their counterparts from other
regional organizations at the margins of the annual
sessions of the General Assembly in New York. Those
meetings serve a very useful purpose in promoting
mutual understanding of regional concerns. In recent
years, ASEAN foreign ministers have met their
counterparts from the Rio Group, the Gulf Cooperation
Council, the Economic Cooperation Organization and
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.

It should be noted that ASEAN foreign ministers,
at the thirty-seventh ASEAN Ministerial Meeting, held
in Jakarta from 29 to 30 June 2004, were encouraged
by the important progress in the development of the
ASEAN Security Community, which they believe will
lead to an ASEAN whose members are at peace with
each another and with the world at large. They also
agreed that the ASEAN Security Community would
strengthen ASEAN's capacity to deal with security
challenges, including those having to do with both
traditional and non-traditional security issues. The
ASEAN Security Community would strengthen
ASEAN relations with its dialogue partners and its
other friends and would enhance ASEAN's role as the
Regional Forum's primary driving force.

It is difficult, if not impossible, to generalize
about the comparative advantages of regional
organizations vis-a-vis the United Nations in various
fields. In that context, we believe that the inputs of the
present deliberations will generate a new impetus for
further enhancing the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, including ASEAN,
in the stabilization processes, on the basis of the
principle of consent and national sovereignty and in
accordance with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.

Last, but not least, we wish Romania's presidency
of the Security Council great success.

