The President (spoke in French): I wish to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General and the
ministers participating in today's meeting of the
Security Council. Their presence is an affirmation of
the importance of the subject matter under
consideration.

I should like to inform the Council that l have
received letters from the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Cape
Verde, Colombia, Cote d'lvoire, Egypt, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Italy, Luxembourg, Mali, Morocco,
Nigeria, Peru, Senegal, Sweden and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime.

It is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 4 December 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of Uganda to the United
Nations in which he requests that the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
His Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio, be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Antonio to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 7 December 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of Burkina Faso to the
United Nations in which he requests that the
Commissioner for Gender and Human Development of
the Economic Community of West African States
Commission, Ms. Adrienne Yande Diop, be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda in accordance with rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Ms. Diop to take the seat reserved for her
at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/2009/615, which contains a letter dated
30 November 2009 from the Permanent Representative
of Burkina Faso addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.

In accordance with the understanding reached
earlier among members, the Security Council will take
action on a statement by the President in connection
with today's meeting prior to hearing statements from
the Secretary-General and Council members.
Accordingly, after consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
09-6381]
peace and security in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.

"The Security Council notes with concern
the serious threats posed in some cases by drug
trafficking and related transnational organized
crime to international security in different regions
of the world, including in Africa. The increasing
link, in some cases, between drug trafficking and
the financing of terrorism is also a source of
growing concern.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of strengthening transregional and
international cooperation on the basis of a
common and shared responsibility to counter the
world drug problem and related criminal
activities, and in support of relevant national,
subregional and regional organizations and
mechanisms, including with the view to
strengthening the rule of law.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of the actions undertaken by the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the Commission on Narcotics Drugs, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) and other relevant United Nations
organs and agencies in facing numerous security
risks caused by drug trafficking in many
countries and regions, including in Africa. The
Council encourages them to undertake further
actions in this regard.

"The Security Council stresses the need to
reinforce the coordination of United Nations
actions, including cooperation with INTERPOL,
in order to enhance the effectiveness of
international efforts in the fight against drug
trafficking at the national, regional and
international levels to tackle this global challenge
in a more comprehensive manner in accordance
with the principle of common and shared
responsibility.

"The Security Council reaffirms and
commends in that regard the important work of
the UNODC in collaboration with the United
Nations relevant entities and emphasizes the need
for adequate capacities to support national
efforts.
09-63811
"The Security Council invites the Secretary-
General to consider mainstreaming the issue of
drug trafficking as a factor in conflict prevention
strategies, conflict analysis, integrated missions'
assessment and planning and peacebuilding
support.

"The Security Council encourages States to
comply with their obligations to combat drug
trafficking and other forms of transnational
organized crime, to consider acceding to relevant
international conventions, in particular the three
United Nations drug conventions, and to
investigate and prosecute, as appropriate, persons
and entities responsible for drug trafficking and
related crimes consistent with international
human rights and due process standards.

"The Security Council recognizes the
important contribution of States and regional and
subregional organizations in tackling drug
trafficking in all its aspects, and encourages them
to share best practices, as well as information
about illicit drug trafficking networks.

"The Security Council also recognizes the
important contribution of civil society and other
stakeholders in tackling drug trafficking in a
comprehensive manner.

"The Security Council calls on the
international community and the United Nations
system to strengthen their cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations in the
fight against drug trafficking, including in Africa.

"The Security Council calls on the
Secretary-General to provide, as appropriate,
more information on drug trafficking and related
issues where it risks threatening or exacerbating
an existing threat to international peace and
security."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/32.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso.

I should like to thank the ministers and members
of the Council for their presence at this debate and for
their support for the presidential statement proposed by
Burkina Faso, which the Council has just adopted.
3

Burkina Faso is pleased to organize this public
debate of the Security Council on the important topic
of the threat posed by drug trafficking to our collective
security. In choosing to debate the issue of drug
trafficking and international security, my delegation
sought not to add a new item to the already lengthy
agenda of the Security Council, but to invite the
members of this organ and the full membership of the
United Nations to consider how best to contain the
harmful effects of a scourge whose impact has
achieved alarming proportions.

We are particularly grateful to the Secretary-
General for attending this debate. We also express our
gratitude to Mr. Antonio Costa, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC). We commend the role that UNODC plays
in the interdiction of drug trafficking and its assistance
to our States in that field.

The current and future threat of drug trafficking
to international security is evident. The emergence of
extremely powerful drug cartels has had a growing
influence on policies and trade. Gang warfare in many
countries poses a true threat to the internal security of
States and to the stability of democratic institutions.
The lucrative black market in drugs supports a number
of terrorist groups, fuels the traffic in arms and money-
laundering, generates violence and corruption, and as a
result poses a serious threat to international peace and
security.

From Latin America to Asia, through Europe and
Africa, many countries and regions of the world have
witnessed first hand the chaos arising from this
scourge. Africa, and West Africa in particular, has
become an important zone for the transit of cocaine.
Drug laboratories built by traffickers bear out UNODC
statistics indicating that annual seizures of cocaine in
West Africa have grown exponentially in recent years.

Recent violations by drug traffickers of the
airspace of some States in the subregion and the
clandestine landing and unloading of drug cargoes
demonstrate the great vulnerability of those States in
the face of such criminal groups, who pose a real threat
to our countries. Having become the preferred route -
indeed, the new El Dorado - for drug traffickers, the
African continent, already facing numerous challenges,
merits particular attention as it is evident that the weak
rule of law in Africa, poverty, corruption and the clear
lack of resources are factors that encourage the
activities of drug traffickers. Special attention should
be paid to areas weakened by rebellions; these can
constitute real threats to peace and security in the West
African subregion through the rearming of such
rebellions, which could fuel new conflicts.

The expanding scourge demands an international
response through heightened vigilance and the firm
commitment of the international community, based on
universal adherence to the international conventions in
the fight against drug trafficking and on effective
cooperation and more active coordination of the efforts
to combat illicit drugs. That is why the States of the
West African subregion, in particular the members of
the Economic Community of West African States,
decided, under the chairmanship of Burkina Faso, to
address the problem head-on by organizing the
Ministerial Conference on Drug Trafficking as a
Security Threat to West Africa in Praia, Cape Verde, on
28 and 29 October 2008. On that occasion, President
Blaise Compaore delivered a very important message.

That Conference adopted an ambitious Action
Plan, the implementation of which needs the
international community's support. In our View, three
important areas of the Praia Action Plan deserve the
support of our development partners. They include:
undertaking major national and international joint
operations that target the trafficking networks
operating in the region; setting up drug trafficking
control and prevention units at international airports,
sea ports and land border posts; and support for the
establishment and strengthening of forensic
laboratories for the sharing and exchange of
information.

In addition to these operational and institutional
aspects of the fight, above all, conditions for the
sustainable development of developing countries must
be ensured, since as long as concerns such as
unemployment and extreme poverty persist, illicit drug
trafficking will continue to flourish.

The international community, including
international organizations, must make the fight against
drugs one of their priorities. That is why the Security
Council should include the issue in its integrated
strategies for prevention and for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The effects of drug trafficking on security are
devastating for the health and productivity of
individuals, for families and for the stability of States.

09-6381]

Its consequences are true obstacles to the development
of our countries. Thus, there is an increasingly urgent
need for us to find lasting solutions. That is why we
hope that this debate will help to prompt resolute
commitments and collective approaches on the part of
the international community as well as individual
States.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.


