The young have taken ownership and have become implementers of significant global agendas that touch on international peace and security. It is incumbent upon the international community to rally around these constructive contributions and the emerging leadership of the young. In that regard, my delegation commends the Dominican Republic for prioritizing the youth, peace and security agenda during its presidency. As we look to mark the agenda's fifth anniversary this December, Kenya stands behind the call to accelerate the implementation of the related resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). We congratulate the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan on the initiative to adopt resolution 2250 (2015) and for taking leadership of the youth agenda within the United Nations system. We also commend Peru and Sweden for spearheading resolution 2419 (2018), which is complementary to resolution 2250 (2015). My delegation would further like to highlight the presidential statement presented by South Africa in 2019 (S/PRST/2019/15), which focuses on the provisions of Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the role that African youth can play in silencing the guns in Africa by 2020, in particular, and peace and security, in general. In addition, we welcome the first-ever report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/167) on this agenda item, published in March. This report, read alongside the Secretary-General's Youth 2030: The United Nations Strategy on Youth, provides important action points and tools for communities seeking to empower the youth demographic. Kenya supports the localization of these resolutions and initiatives in order to make the recommendations relevant and accessible at the grass-roots level. As Member States, we need to develop contextual road maps that reflect measurable implementation benchmarks for the youth, peace and security agenda. The experiences and insights shared by the diverse group of youth representatives this morning not only were informative but also demonstrate that young people are indeed agents of positive change and need to be an integral part of peace processes and conflict resolution at the local, national, regional and international levels. This morning we heard the reiterated call from young people for the translation of policies pertaining to youth into practice, including access to sufficient funding for the effective operationalization of youth-led projects. The five pillars of action embodied in resolution 2250 (2015) - namely, participation, partnerships, prevention, protection and disengagement and reintegration - need to be put into practice and integrated into the work of the Security Council. The inclusive participation of youth in decision-making should be approached from a partnership perspective. Working with the youth is more beneficial than attempting to work for the youth. Our youth need to be protected during conflicts. Young men and young women need to be protected from all forms of sexual and gender-based violence. The reintegration of young men and women directly involved in conflict or those returning from refugee situations needs to be comprehensive and sustainable. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is further compounding pre-existing social and economic challenges, which has the potential of leading to further disenfranchisement of the youth. Our collective mitigation measures should prioritize ensuring that young people are not left behind. Investment in youth is a preventive measure. Preparing young people to positively focus their creativity and aspirations on resolving societal challenges in various fields, suchas the targets ofthe Sustainable Development Goals and information and communications technology, including innovation, cybersecurity and low-cost technologies, will contribute to sustainable peace and sustainable development. In Kenya, we have rolled out initiatives geared towards ensuring that the youth are part and parcel of the formulation of national strategies pertaining to sustainable peace. The Government has established a State Department of Youth under the auspices of the Ministry of Public Service Youth and Gender. This initiative ensures that the youth work alongside Government officials, community leaders, civil society, the private sector and international partners to contribute to the peace agenda. Currently, the Department of Youth is utilizing social media to disseminate important facts and guidelines with regard to COVID-19. We thank the United Nations Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, for her recognition of this Kenyan youth initiative this morning. In 2019, Kenya's National Youth Service, which has been in existence since 1964, was transformed into a fully fledged semi-autonomous State corporation that is aimed at training and mentoring our youth through technical and vocational programmes. Other related national initiatives that ensure strategic investments in young people include the Uwezo, or Ability, Fund, which finances businesses for young entrepreneurs. At the international level, resolution 2282 (2016), on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, reaffirms the important role that youth can play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and the success of peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. The Peacebuilding Commission, as an intergovernmental advisory body to the Security Council, has further engaged with youth peacebuilders in country-specific contexts. We encourage the Council to continue to seek the Commission's recommendations, including with regard to how young people's potential can be positively harnessed in fragile and conflict-affected countries. That was well articulated by Mr. Gatwal Gatkuoth, the youth representative from South Sudan, who reminded us that peacebuilding in such contexts is not just a process but a necessity. We welcome the reaffirmation by the Secretary-General of the 2018 progress study on youth, peace and security, entitled "The missing peace: independent progress study on youth and peace and security" (see S/2018/86), published by the Peacebuilding Support Office and the United Nations Population Fund. The study embodies the important principle that most young people are resilient and peaceful and are a positive force for building peaceful and just societies. In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda should not be in isolation from the women and peace and security agenda. Gender equality is an important tool for any peace and security initiative, not to mention that gender-equal societies have proved to have more resilience to the threat of conflict and violent extremism.
