Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his
briefing. We are also very glad to welcome Foreign
Minister Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia and Presidential
Counsellor Archila to the Council again today.

The 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace remains an
inspiration to all of us and is a reminder of the enduring
value of aspirational leadership. The United States will
continue to support the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia and we recognize the Colombian
Government's commitment to the Mission.

On the subject of aspirational leadership, we
are encouraged by the efforts of President Duque
Marquez to expand the Government's presence in
conflict-affected areas and to bring hope to vulnerable
populations through justice, security and opportunities
for legitimate economic activity. Those efforts
represent welcomed progress. President Duque and
his Administration have also shown admirable resolve
by expanding counter-narcotics efforts and working
towards our shared goal of halving coca cultivation and
cocaine production by the end of 2023.

That resolve has produced modest but noteworthy
results. Coca cultivation is estimated to have slightly
declined in 2018 and the United States welcomes
that news. However, while we understand that lasting
peace is the work of decades, not days or weeks,
several hurdles have slowed the implementation of the
peace accords to a worrying pace. We note that some
two thirds of former combatants still reside outside
territorial areas for training and reintegration. A
smooth transition period is needed, as the legal status
of those areas has expired.

We also remain deeply concerned about the reports
of violence against human rights defenders and social
leaders, as well as political candidates across the
ideological spectrum. Particularly in the light of the
upcoming elections, Colombia's first nationwide local
elections since the peace accord came into effect, we
reiterate our support for the Government's efforts
to protect leaders and ensure that they can safely
conduct their vital work. With security in mind, the
United States applauds the recent signing of a national
non-violence pact, with President Duque and Special
Representative Ruiz Massieu as witnesses. We urge
all parties to honour the principles of that pact. We
are also alarmed by the information in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/780) that participants in
crop-substitution programmes continue to be the
target of threats, attacks and killings. We call on the
Colombian Government to ensure their protection and
boost economic development in areas with significant
coca cultivation. The people of Colombia need viable
alternatives to that crop. They need visible paths to
dignity if they are to pull themselves out of an economic
cycle that ultimately funds violence and impunity.

The Colombian Government's commitment to the
equal dignity of all people is especially evident in its
response to the crisis in Venezuela. The Government is
currently hosting 1.4 million Venezuelan refugees and
other displaced Venezuelans, driven from their homes
by the chaos and violence sown by Maduro's illegitimate
former regime. It is even granting citizenship to
thousands of Venezuelan children born in Colombia.
Colombia has also shown leadership by supporting
interim President Juan Guaido as Venezuela's legitimate
leader. We are grateful for Colombia's leadership and
generosity, and we want to be clear today that the United
States is equally committed to peace in the country and
the region.

But we cannot merely endorse aspirational
leadership as we address these challenges. We must
practice it. That is why we have provided more than
$214 million in assistance to manage the effects
produced on Colombia by Venezuela's man-made crisis.
It is why yesterday in Washington our Secretary of State,
Mike Pompeo, welcomed Foreign Minister Trujillo and
High Commissioners Archila and Ceballos to a high-
level dialogue. It is also why Deputy Secretary of State
John Sullivan, United States Agency for International
Development Administrator Mark Green and
Presidential Adviser Ivanka Trump visited Colombia
in September for the launch of initiatives designed to
empower women and enhance economic development.

The United States is committed to envisioning and
realizing a better future for all Colombians, and we look
forward to continued partnership with Colombia and its
continued progress in implementing the peace accord.

