Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2499
(2019), renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) for
one year. France has actively worked to promote that
consensus, and I would like to thank all the members
of the Council for their spirit of compromise. This
resolution maintains the format and the proactive and
robust mandate of MINUSCA; that is a key element.
MINUSCA has repeatedly demonstrated that it can
act effectively and proportionately to protect civilian
populations from the threat of armed groups, including
those groups that signed the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. MINUSCA must also continue to support the
deployment ofthe Central African Armed Forces so that
it can also contribute to the security of the population.

Secondly, the resolution authorizes MINUSCA
to continue its support for the implementation of the
peace agreement of 6 February. That agreement is
indeed the only path towards a lasting peace in the
Central African Republic, and while progress has been
achieved, significant challenges remain. Armed groups
must stop violating their commitments. The guarantors
of the agreement must implement its measures,
including the sanctions provided for in article 35 of
the peace agreement. Justice must be rendered to
the victims. The international community, and in
particular the countries of the region, must continue
to support the implementation of that agreement in a
coordinated manner.

Finally, the resolution authorizes MINUSCA to
support preparations for and the holding of the 2020-
2021 presidential and legislative elections, with a
framework for providing adequate financial resources
to do so. It is essential that all Central African
stakeholders work constructively to ensure that the
elections are held in a peaceful and transparent manner
and in accordance with constitutional timelines, as no
transition can be otherwise envisaged. I would also like
to stress the importance of all partners of the Central
African Republic mobilizing in support ofthe elections.

France will continue to strongly support the work
of MINUSCA and its Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. We will also continue to lend our
full support to President Touadera and the people of the
Central African Republic to help them find a lasting
solution to the crisis.

