Mr. Ward (Jamaica): We also join others in
welcoming High Representative Wolfgang Petritsch
and Special Representative Jacques Paul Klein, who
are here with us today. We thank them for their useful
briefings on the latest developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We take note of the progress that has
been made since the last report of the Secretary-
General, including the consolidation of State
institutions, the passing of the Election Law, economic
progress and the return of refugees.

It is clear that, politically, there have been
advances in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The different
entities are working together in a spirit of compromise
for the benefit of their country. We commend the
consolidation of State institutions and the
strengthening of competencies, which have given the
people of this territory greater control over their
decision-making process. The passing of the Election
Law has been highlighted as one of the recent
successes and is evidence that the political structure
can be effective. There are problems that result from
nationalistic forces, which must still be overcome, and
that affect the smooth functioning of the Government
and the climate of stability. We hope that, with time,
the concept of an integrated Bosnia and Herzegovina
will be accepted by all, and that the way will be cleared
for even further progress.

We note that further economic growth and
economic reform are priority goals for the future. It is
important that every effort be made to encourage
industrial growth, foreign and domestic investment,
and a reduction of the extremely high unemployment
rate. We support efforts to expand regional trade, as the
economic benefits to be gained from such an expansion
could be significant.

With greater progress and stability comes greater
emphasis on the European integration process. This is
important to the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
to the region as a whole. We note that the pace of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's participation in the
European integration process remains disappointing.
We encourage the High Representative to continue to
lay the groundwork for the attainment of that long-term
goal.

The challenge now facing Bosnia and
Herzegovina is reconciliation - true reconciliation,
where all the people are of the view that the wrongs of
the past have been righted. There seems to be an
undercurrent of ethnic tension remaining in the
territory. Political rivalry among ethnic groups
continues despite attempts to promote integration. The
pace of progress is being hampered by the continued
promotion of national and ethnic differences. Every
effort to reduce tensions must be pursued. We welcome
the measures currently being undertaken.

We note that the prosecution of those responsible
for the atrocities committed in Srebrenica has begun.
We hope that justice will prevail and that this process
will help with reconciliation efforts and bring ethnic
groups closer together. We note the cooperation with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) by the political leadership in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the exception of the
Republika Srpska, and by other Governments in the
Balkans. We urge further cooperation as part of the
process of reconciliation. It would be useful to hear
from Mr. Petritsch about his perception of the political
and social impact of the recent ICTY decision finding
Radislav Krstic guilty of genocide in the Srebrenica
massacre.

The number of returns in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is very encouraging. We note the High Representative's
observation that the legal framework for property
possession and return in Croatia remains a key to
unlocking cross-border returns between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The establishment of an entity dedicated
to returns is something we fully support, as well as
regional initiatives. A coordinated approach to refugee
returns is something that perhaps should be pursued.
Could Mr. Petritsch provide a breakdown of the
numbers of returning refugees by ethnic grouping?

We are extremely concerned about the grim
pictured sketched out by Mr. Klein with respect to civil
policing and the rule of law. Undoubtedly, a credible
justice system and the rule of law are basic,
indispensable elements for laying the foundation for
stability in any civilized society. We are disturbed by
the seeming lack of cooperation by political leaders.
The efforts of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to reform the police and to fight
criminal activities are to be supported and encouraged.

Jamaica continues to support the work of the
High Representative, the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Stabilization Force
aimed at establishing a firm foundation for effective
and sustainable democracy.

