Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
I wish to welcome you back to New York. I join
other speakers in saying how welcome it is to have
representatives of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union (AU)
also with us today.

Yesterday, the Council discussed the complex
challenges of post-conflict reconstruction, and
President Ouattara reminded us of the immense human
and economic costs that civil war has imposed on his
country and the steps that Cote d'Ivoire has taken to
sustain peace and promote economic development
(see S/PV.8413). With the cost of conflict so clear, if
we are to prevent the worst atrocities and injustices, in
accordance with the aspirations of the Charter of the
United Nations, it is crucial that we learn the lessons
on what it takes to resolve conflict and sustain peace in
the long term.

Today, I should like to focus on the complementary
roles that States, subregional and regional organizations
and the United Nations can and should play in the
prevention and resolution of conflict. In that connection
I should like to make three specific points.

First, as other speakers have noted, the role of
States is paramount. Member States bear the primary
responsibility for protecting their inhabitants and
for refraining from acts of aggression. But that also
means refraining from persecuting their own people.
The best and most durable solutions are home-grown
and inclusive. But building resilient societies is not
an easy task. By addressing the structural drivers of
fragility and ensuring that people's legitimate demands
are met, including for justice, security and economic
opportunities, we can significantly reduce the risk of
conflict. That is why democracy and human rights have
a very important role to play in stability but also in
prosperity, and there is some very good evidence freely
available that explains the link between democracy and
human rights and prosperity and thriving societies.

Strong national capacities for conflict prevention
are also essential, and it is important that multilateral
organizations be willing and equipped to support
such national efforts. For that reason, the United
Kingdom supports the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP)-Department of Political Affairs
Joint Programme on Building National Capacities for
Conflict Prevention.

The deployment of United Nations peace and
development advisers has assisted Member States
in generating the analyses that allow for early
identification of conflict risks and the ability to devise
de-escalation strategies. One such risk-identification
system is now operational in Cameroon, where it
tracks emerging conflict trends and risks in a situation
that is of increasing concern for international peace
and security.

Secondly, regional organizations often have a
considerable comparative advantage over more distant
international institutions, including at times the United
Nations. Few regional organizations have been as
active on conflict prevention and resolution as the
African Union, a welcome development of the past two
decades. In the Lake Chad basin, the Central African
Republic, the Comoros and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the AU has often been in the driving seat.

In countries such as those in the Sahel region,
where a range of cross-border issues form fertile
ground for conflict, the work of ECOWAS has been
crucial. When it comes to sustainable and inclusive
economic development, regional cooperation can
ensure that limited resources are deployed effectively
and that economic isolation does not persist and
become another cause of conflict. In the Horn ofAfrica,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
supports countries in their efforts to achieve better
economic integration.

With regard to support for conflict prevention and
mediation, regional actors have a unique advantage
owing to their understanding of the local context and
conflict dynamics. In Guinea-Bissau, for example,
successful ECOWAS mediation delegations include
senior officials from Equatorial Guinea and Senegal.
With regard to peace-support operations, regional
groups play a crucial role, as we saw in the Gambia
in 2017. Quick mobilization by ECOWAS succeeded in
restoring stability to that country.

The United Kingdom is committed to ensuring
that regional entities are sufficiently resourced, so that
they can fulfil critical functions alongside the United
Nations, specifically on the financing of African Union
peace-support operations. That is why the United
Kingdom supports the principle of providing United
Nations assessed contributions up to a ceiling of 75 per
cent to AU-led peace-support operations authorized by
the Council. We continue to work constructively with
our partners to ensure that the necessary conditions
are fulfilled, particularly with regard to human rights
compliance, so that that can become a reality.

Thirdly, I would like to emphasize that coordinated
efforts between the United Nations, regional
organizations and Member States, based on comparative
advantages, increase the effectiveness of all our efforts
to prevent conflict and sustain long-term peace.

The Charter of the United Nations underscores the
important role played by regional organizations in the
pacific settlement ofdisputes, and the Secretary-General
was absolutely right to point to the farsightedness of
the Charter's framers in that respect. It is a positive
sign to see today the broad commitment of the Council
to strengthening its work with the AU and others. It
occurs to me that broader support in this forum for
the important roles of NATO and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe might have
provided for more effective responses to the challenges
faced in Armenia, Georgia and Ukraine.

Where national and regional efforts fail, the
Council has a responsibility, as the only legally
competent body, to surpass the State monopoly on
military intervention and to act to restore international
peace and security. That is a last-resort step that we can
better avoid by mobilizing all the tools at our collective
disposal for early peacebuilding and prevention so as to
avoid escalation.

