Mr. Gilmore: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
and all representatives for their words of support. Time
does not permit me to give a comprehensive reply to
all of the issues raised here today, but if the Council
will allow me to do so, I would like to briefly address a
number of those issues.

The philosophy of our chairmanship is one of
inclusion and involves a balanced approach across the
various dimensions. We intend to give concrete
expression to that philosophy in our actions throughout
the year. That applies equally to such issues as OSCE
reform, transnational threats, the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), and respect for commitments
across the board.

The Ambassador of the United Kingdom
reminded us of the importance of the Council of
Europe. I look forward to cooperating closely with
Foreign Secretary Hague in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee of Ministers.

Picking up on the theme of United Nations-OSCE
cooperation, I am more convinced than ever of the
importance of strong links between the two
organizations. I will work closely with Secretary
General Zannier to ensure that our practical
cooperation is enhanced.

12-2284]
Looking ahead, I hope that we will soon be able
to confirm the sequence of chairmanships of the OSCE
up to and including 2015, which marks the fortieth
anniversary of the Helsinki Final Act. I look forward to
early engagement with the future chairs to chart out our
common vision for the OSCE region.

As I outlined in my briefing, Ireland's approach
to the protracted conflicts in the OSCE region is
influenced by its own experience of successful conflict
resolution in Northern Ireland. We firmly believe that
even the most intractable conflicts can be settled with
the goodwill and meaningful engagement of all sides.
In that regard, I wish to re-emphasize my own
commitment as Chairperson-in-Office to work within
the existing structures and processes to contribute to
the resolution of those conflicts.

As I have made clear, during our chairmanship,
we will be giving prominence to the protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms in various
areas. In many parts of the world, threats to human
rights are multiplying. I note that Syria was mentioned
in our debate today. If I may speak for a moment as
Foreign Minister of Ireland, what we are currently
seeing in Syria is completely intolerable. My
Government condemns the appalling suffering of the
Syrian people at the hands of the Al-Assad regime.
Ireland is gravely concerned by that worsening crisis,
which threatens to affect the wider region, and by the
price that the people of Syria are being required to pay.
My Government strongly supports the plan of the
League of Arab States and all other efforts being made
to bring the violence to an end and begin the process of
political transition. While recognizing that, in recent
days, the Security Council has been unable to speak
with a single voice on Syria, Ireland fervently hopes
that it will soon be able to deliver a united response to
the challenge posed by that crisis.

Turning back to my role as OSCE Chairperson-
in-Office, I look forward to cooperating closely with
the United Nations on the programme of work on
which we are embarking. I look forward to working
closely with all other OSCE participating States during
our chairmanship.

