I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her important updates. This is a challenging time for all of us and for post-conflict recovery countries such as Iraq. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19), terrorism and violence, economic challenges, and tensions in the region are conditions capable of setting back the progress achieved thus far by Iraq. Nevertheless, with the positive attitude of the Government and the readiness of the people to pursue the reform agenda, current efforts will yield the progress desired by all Iraqis. Allow me to elaborate on these three points. First, implementing the reform agenda and elections are crucial for the future of Iraq. Indonesia welcomes the formation of the Cabinet under the leadership of Prime Minister Al-Khadimi, including the appointment of two women ministers. Women are an integral part of nation-building. We also support the priorities of the new Government, particularly in managing COVID-19, addressing economic crises, fighting corruption and promoting accountability. These are critical for restoring the trust of the people of Iraq and for fulfilling the demands of the peaceful protesters. Holding a free, fair and credible election in June 2021 will be an important next step towards building a democratic country and charting the path of prosperity and stability for which the international community has longed for so many years. Second is the importance of maintaining stability and security. The remnants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da'esh and other terrorist groups indeed pose a threat not only to Iraq but also to the region and the world. Indonesia supports the efforts of the Government of Iraq in combatting terrorism. We would also like to underscore that operations to combat terrorism should be conducted in coordination and with the cooperation of the Government. In a time of challenging geopolitics in the region, it is pertinent for us in the Council to support Iraq, not only in capacity-building and assistance but also in ensuring Iraq's independence, unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity. It is evident that instability in Iraq will be devastating not only to the country but also to the region and to the world, particularly in view of COVID-19, when resources are in limited availability. Thirdly, support from regional and international partners is key for Iraq. As Iraq confronts many challenges, support by regional and international partners is key for the successful implementation of the priorities set by the new Government. In this respect, we particularly applaud the Iraqi Government's efforts to reach out to the region, in pursuit of the good-neighbourliness principle. We also welcome the strengthening relations between Iraq and Kuwait, and hope that such efforts will continue and expand to other regional and international partners. This strengthening of Iraqi-Kuwaiti relations is reflected in the area of missing Kuwaiti persons and third-country nationals as well as the return of Kuwaiti property. It is encouraging that the new Cabinet is committed to resolving the outstanding issues, and we hope that once COVID-19 is under control, there will be greater progress on this front and the work of the Tripartite Commission will continue. The work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq is vital to the various priorities and efforts of the Government of Iraq and for the people of Iraq, and we offer our full support for its mandate and for Special Representative of the Secretary-General Hennis-Plasschaert and her staff. We wish her all the best in these times of pandemic. In conclusion, we believe that a stable and secure Iraq is part of the solution of the overall conflicts in the Middle East, and we believe that the Iraqi people know what is best for themselves. Indonesia firmly supports Iraq in its path towards peace and development.
