The Secretary-General: I thank President Cristina
Fernandez and the Government of Argentina for
scheduling today's important debate.

The architects of the United Nations Charter were
visionary in foreseeing a world where the United
Nations and regional organizations worked together
to prevent, manage and resolve crises. However, it is
hard to imagine that they could have anticipated the
interconnected nature of the threats we face today or
the range of cooperation between the United Nations
regional and subregional organizations.

Chapter VIII is as relevant today as ever. Many
regional and subregional organizations have long
histories of engagement in conflict prevention and
mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, Others
are becoming increasingly active in these fields.As
Secretary-General, I have seen first-hand the value of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations across the globe.

In Latin America and the Caribbean, we have a
long history of partnership, including deploying joint
missions with the Organization of American States.
Todayweworktogetherinarangeofareasfrommediation
and dialogue to combating illicit trafficking. I welcome
the emergence of thge Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States (CELAC) and the Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR), and their contributions
to both peace and security and sustainable development
on the continent. I was pleased to participate in the
seventh general meeting of the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) last month to
discuss ways to address climate change, sustainable
development and transnational organized crime.

In Africa, we cooperate closely with the African
Union (AU) and subregional economic communities.
Through our joint peacekeeping and mediation
efforts in Darfur, the AU and the United Nations
remain committed to facilitating a comprehensive
and inclusive settlement to the conflict. In Somalia,
we have worked hand-in-hand with the African Union
Mission in Somalia and have assisted Somali partners
in successfully concluding an eight-year political
transition.

Collaboration with the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the AU was
essential to our response in Cote d'Ivoire and is central
to our efforts in Mali. Here, the early deployment of
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali,
combined with ECOWAS-led mediation efforts in the
North, have laid the foundations for the peace process.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - supported
by 11 African leaders, the AU, the Southern
African Development Community, the International
Conference for the Great Lakes Region and the United
Nations - represents the best opportunity for years for
forging a durable peace.

In the Middle East and North Africa, the United
Nations and the League of Arab States are working to
support inclusive political processes in Tunisia, Libya,
and Yemen. And we continue to search for a political
solution to the crisis in Syria, including through the
deployment of our Joint Envoy, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi.

Regular joint consultations between the United
Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
continue to create important opportunities for mutual
cooperation, including promoting peacebuilding,
reconciliation and political reform in Myanmar, and
preventive diplomacy in Mindanao.

We also work closely with our European partners.
Cooperation with the European Union (EU) is
geographically and substantively wide-ranging. In
recent years, we have strengthened collaboration in the
Middle East, Somalia, Mali and elsewhere. The EU is
a champion of the United Nations work in mediation
and recently facilitated a historic agreement between
Pristina and Belgrade. With the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, we partner to
advance human rights, confidence-building, counter-
terrorism and disarmament in southeastern Europe, the
Caucasus and Central Asia.

Of course, we sometimes face challenges when
working together. Our organizations do not always have
the same approach to a given crisis. Our diverse mandates
and membership can lead to different perspectives.
This debate is a welcome opportunity to explore the
nature of these challenges and consider how to improve
cooperation. I strongly believe in the combined value
of our respective strengths. Regional and subregional
organizations have deep knowledge, unique insights
and strong local networks. These elements are critical
to mediation, planning a peacekeeping operation or
helping a country to build lasting peace.

To this equation, the United Nations adds its
universal membership and legitimacy, long experience
and operational capacity in the area of international
peace and security. Through concrete initiatives, we
are building on our collective strengths. In some cases,
we have established formal partnership agreements and
work plans that guide day-to-day collaboration. Staff
exchanges have created networks that help us respond
to evolving situations on the ground. Joint mediation
deployments, training and capacity-building have
enabled us to build common understanding and present
a united front.

However, there is always room for improvement.
We are better at sharing information and analysis on
brewing crises, but we have to work harder on swift
response and long-term prevention. We need to learn
from the lessons of our collaborations to build ever more
innovative and flexible partnership arrangements that
draw on our respective strengths. Let us also consider
how to expand cooperation and dialogue with a broader
range of organizations in the pursuit of international
peace and security. Only through cooperation will we
meet our shared aspirations for a more peaceful world.

