Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would first like to join my colleagues in
expressing our condolences to the Government and
the people of Indonesia in the wake of the civilian
plane crash.

It is really astonishing that some Western
delegations of permanent members of the Security
Council deliberately insist on mixing humanitarian
and political issues and continue to obstruct honest,
transparent and non-politicized humanitarian efforts.
Those delegations brag publicly that there will be no
humanitarian action in Syria without a response to their
countries' interventionist political agendas. In fact, we
have heard today those same delegations set a number
of political preconditions that try to strip humanitarian
action of its meaning and politically invest in the
suffering of the Syrian people.

I recall that today's meeting coincides with an
attack committed by the so-called coalition once
again against the Hajin region, in eastern Deir ez-
Zor, using white phosphorus, which is prohibited
worldwide. That attack caused the death of an entire
family - a mother, a father and their children. The
Council's meeting held on 24 October (see S/PV.8383)
coincided with a criminal terrorist attack carried out
by terrorist groups in Idlib against Aleppo, which
launched 40 missiles that killed dozens of civilians
and injured dozens more. The Council's meeting held
on 17 October (see S/PV.8373) coincided with an attack
by coalition aircraft on Al-Soussa and Albubadran, in
Deir ez-Zor, also killing dozens of civilians. All of that
is not seen by the Western States that have talked about
humanitarian needs in my country or by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the
United Nations humanitarian agency.

Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
through you your friendly country, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, for wisely conducting the work of the
Security Council during the month of October. Your
presidency has carried out the task entrusted to it by
genuinely seeking to maintain international peace and
security while respecting the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations. Many Member States of the
Organization are therefore quite proud of that Bolivian
high performance.

During the various meetings held recently between
Syrian officials and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock, the
need to coordinate joint actions between the two
parties for a better understanding and to remove
obstacles and develop the role of the United Nations
in the humanitarian realm in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 46/182, which governs OCHA, was
underscored - in spite of the difficulties caused by a
decrease in financing the United Nations humanitarian
action in Syria, which Mr. Lowcock mentioned today,
and due to unilateral coercive economic measures
undertaken by the United States and the States members
of the European Union and others against the Syrian
people. They claim that there are 10 million Syrians
in need of humanitarian assistance, while those States
impose unilateral coercive economic measures against
23 million Syrians.

The Syrian Government is convinced of the
importance of the role that Member States attach to
the United Nations. Damascus continues to count on
that role to help Syrians who have suffered from the
terrorist war imposed against my country, Syria, a
role that preserves the credibility and effectiveness
of the Organization and respects the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic. All 28 of the Council's political and
humanitarian resolutions reaffirm the need to safeguard
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria and its people. Such a neutral, independent and
non-politicized role that does not yield to blackmailing
by certain States is of course based on the Charter and
United Nations resolutions.
We listened carefully to the briefing by
Mr. Lowcock, and we read with interest the report under
consideration (S/2018/947). Allow me to make some
comments that will no doubt respond to the questions
from some colleagues.

First, there is a crucial need to carry out a
transparent, objective and professional dialogue to
modify the reporting mechanism concerning the
humanitarian situation in Syria so that the goal of the
reports can truly be to provide assistance to the Syrians
in need of it. Continuing to submit these reports on a
monthly basis is a waste of time, money and human
resources. We stress that they should be replaced by
quarterly reports, because much of the information in
the current monthly reports is outdated. For example,
in the report before us we are told of what took place a
month or two ago, whereas we should really be looking
at what is taking place in the current month.

Secondly, there is an urgent need for a transparent,
objective and professional discussion on the content of
the reports so that they are not used by some to exert
political pressure and blackmail. It is unreasonable
when everyone has understood that a terrible terrorist
war has been taking place in Syria for the past seven
years, and after the confessions made by senior
officials of certain States that their Governments
financed and sponsored terrorism - not to mention
those who spoke before the Congress and the Senate, or
the previous Chief of Staff and the previous Minister of
Defence - and yet the authors of the reports continue
to draft them in a negative, politicized way against the
Syrian Arab Republic and its institutions, especially
given that everyone knows by now that the terrorist
groups continue to use civilians as human shields and
hospitals and schools as military bases from which to
launch their terrorist operations, and that the source of
lies targeting the Syrian Government are the terrorist
groups and their supporters.

That is all the more so given that the reports
include many errors and their authors deviate from
their mandated task, while also deliberately ignoring
the observations and comments provided to the
Secretariat by the Syrian Arab Republic. In fact, we
have submitted 56 formal responses to OCHA's reports,
including clear answers to all of the questions, but those
comments were never reflected in subsequent reports.
We have been trying to establish cooperative links with
OCHA for years, and we provide OCHA with all the
necessary information. Nevertheless, our comments do
not arouse the interest of OCHA officials. The remarks
from witnesses and White Helmets - and yellow
helmets and red helmets - are taken by them, but not
the information provided by the Syrian Government.

Thirdly, it is surprising that the report claims
that the Syrian Government did not authorize the
humanitarian convoy plan for September and October.
What he heard today from Mr. Lowcock confirmed that.
But the truth is that my country's Government asked
the United Nations to include the liberated areas in the
plan, which were already included in the assistance
plan for besieged and hard-to-reach areas. We have
requested that those areas be included in the periodic
programme plan for aid delivery. However, the United
Nations has not included those liberated areas in the aid
plan. Why? I do not know. Mr. Lowcock has the answer.

Fourthly, with regard to the aid delivery to the
Rukban camp, which, according to my geographic
information, is a camp in Syria, because certain
delegations have spoken as though it were a camp in
Somalia or the Maldives, I underscore that the Syrian
Government has given its approval to United Nations
agencies to send a humanitarian assistance convoy to
the camp. That would be done in cooperation with the
Syrian Red Crescent and the International Committee of
the Red Cross, directly from the Syrian Arab Republic.
However, having reached the 55-kilometre mark on
26 October, the United Nations convoy returned swiftly
to Damascus due to the deterioration of the security
situation and reports of an imminent Da'esh attack that
was going to be carried out against the convoy from the
American-controlled zone, in spite of the assurances
provided by the United States to the United Nations
on the safety of the convoy. That is clear evidence that
the United States is basically impeding the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the Rukban camp and is the
main cause of the suffering of its civilian inhabitants.
We recall that Da'esh terrorists moved some time ago
from the Rukban area, which is under the control of
American troops, and towards Al-Suwayda, attacking
it and killing 300 civilians at dawn. Those terrorists
then went back from Al-Suwayda to Al-Tanf, in the
area of Rukban - that is apparently not in Somalia.

Fifthly, my country regrets that the authors of the
report promote cross-border assistance in conformity
with the directives of certain Western States, even
though it has proven to be ineffective and not guaranteed
to reach its intended civilians. That assistance is
indirectly helping terrorists who seize it and use it for
the continuation of their terrorist activities in Syria.
For months, the Government of my country has been
sending inquiries about the feasibility ofthat assistance,
even if it is monitored by the so-called third party. We
are still yet to receive answers in that regard.

Thanks to the safer and more stable situation on
the ground due to the victory over terrorism and the
Government's continuous rehabilitation of the areas
that were destroyed by terrorists and a subsequent
return to normal life, the conditions are now in place
for the voluntary return of Syrian refugees who had
left their homeland due to terrorism and unilateral
coercive economic measures that deprived them of
their livelihoods. In fact, we are seeing the return of
thousands of Syrian refugees from abroad to Syria,
in spite of the attempts of certain Western States to
prevent them from doing so by intimidating them
with flimsy pretexts and politicizing an exclusively
humanitarian issue. Those States use this issue to
implement their political agenda by linking the return
of refugees to the political process. That is confirmed
by what we have heard today from the delegations of
certain Western States.

In conclusion, as we write the final chapter in the
Syrian crisis, Syrians - those who have remained in the
country and those who were forced to flee the country
due to terrorism - are determined to work together
to rid their country of the remnants of the terrorist
war and rebuild it with their own hands, capabilities
and expertise.
Pertaining to what certain delegations said about
the situation in the city of Idlib, I would like to remind
everyone in the Council that Idlib is a Syrian city. No
one has greater concern than the Syrian Government
for that city and its inhabitants, who have been used as
human shields by terrorist groups.

My country reaffirms its commitment to the
Sochi agreement of 17 September and welcomes
any initiative to stop the bloodshed of Syrians. We
welcome any initiative to bring safety and security to
all of the Syrian territories that have been struck by
terrorism. My Government also underscores that it will
continue to combat terrorism until we liberate the last
inch of Syrian territory from the clutches of terrorists
and terrorism and from any foreign military force
illegitimately present on Syrian soil.

