Mr. Moutari (Niger) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, I should like to pay a warm
tribute to the Republic of Guinea, your country, for the
excellent work that it has accomplished in the
presidency of the Security Council during this period,
so critical for international peace and security.

Niger is pleased to see members of the Council
devote today to a debate on the illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and the use of
mercenaries in West Africa. Her Excellency
Ms. Ai'chatou Mindaoudou, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Niger, had wished to be present and to
discuss with Council members this issue, whose
importance led our heads of State and Government to
proclaim, in 1998, a Moratorium on these types of
weapons in West Africa. Unfortunately, having been
unable to make the trip to New York for scheduling
reasons, she asked me to convey to you her friendly
greetings and her best wishes for success.

Because of its geographical location and its
recent national experience, Niger feels not only that it
is an integral part of all initiatives taken in this area but
also that the path we have followed, with the
benevolent help of countries and friendly institutions,
can provide some useful examples within the
framework of preventing and resolving conflicts, as
well as the consolidation of peace and reconstruction in
the post-conflict period.

As the Council knows, Niger is familiar with
armed rebellion. It began as early as the 1990s and has
affected a substantial portion of our territory, including
the northern areas of Air and Azawak, and, in the
eastern part of the country, Manga.

Our national experience teaches us that, whatever
one might say about the illicit proliferation of arms and
the use of mercenaries, the pivotal point in the quest
for solutions is, first of all, a genuine will on the part of
the national protagonists to deal peacefully with the
deep-seated reasons for the conflicts they face. Foreign
assistance in this way is certainly very useful, even
essential, but it is still just assistance. Thanks to an
understanding on the part of the different national
actors in Niger, peace agreements were signed between
April 1995 and August 1998 between the Government
and 17 fronts and self-defence movements, with the
help of friendly countries, including Algeria, Burkina
Faso, France and Chad. These agreements have
allowed us to begin the procedure to collect and
destroy small arms and light weapons. This procedure
finally led to the organization on 15 September 2000 in
Agadez of a peace torch, with the presence of United
Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan, to whom I
once again would like to convey my deep gratitude.

Then there was the design and implementation of
the project to collect small arms and light weapons in
the Gigme area in Manga. This was done thanks to help
from the United Nations and the group of interested
States - Germany, France, Norway and Japan - who
were trying to breathe hope into that part of Niger.
From its outset, this project was designed and
perceived as a pilot project, the success of which would
enable us to progress and the experience of which was
to be replicated in other parts of the country. It was
concerned with places such as Air and Azawak, but as
it spread out in concentric circles, it was also meant to
link with other projects going on in the rest of West
Africa so as to ensure that similar initiatives would be
eventually implemented in other member countries of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Along these lines, a new project to
consolidate peace has just been crafted by Niger, in
partnership with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), with the United Nations
Volunteers and with French cooperation, in order to
reintegrate 3,160 ex-combatants to promote a culture of
peace and development in areas affected by conflict.

Our national experience in Niger has thus brought
us to a full implementation of peace agreements and to
make it a major priority. From this perspective, the
socio-economic reintegration of the ex-combatants was
a priority for us, without which the peace process could
not be successfully concluded, because the feeling of
abandonment, due to the fact that financial promises
had not been kept, made people impatient, and even fed
up. They did not really wish to progress; rather, this led
to armed banditry situations. This project, valued at
about 1,400 million CFA francs (about $2 million), has
been submitted to the donors for their consideration.

In addition, it seems to us that one of the
shortcomings that has to be corrected as soon as
possible is the weakness of the national structures
responsible for follow-up of the collection of small
arms and light weapons, as well as the reintegration of
ex-combatants and the reconstruction of the affected
areas.

Our national commission to collect these
weapons, and our high commission for peacekeeping,
are cruelly short of human, logistical and financial
resources that are essential for them just to carry out
the everyday work of their mission. Strengthening
national institutions is necessary. It is a basic need for
us. The same can be said for the regional level, as Mr.
Chambas reminded us this morning.

ECOWAS has an urgent need to establish a small
arms unit to provide for the effective implementation
of the Moratorium. As was also pointed out by
Ambassador Said Djinnit, of the African Union, a
Moratorium on the importation, exportation and
manufacture of weapons can only function if there is a
follow-up oversight mechanism adequately resourced
and truly independent; this would allow them to point
out and name the violators, as well as impose a
sanctions regime against the parties in default.

We truly hope that recommendations will emerge
from this workshop that will strengthen the national
capacity-building of the national, regional and
continental institutions that are to work against the
scourges of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and the use of mercenaries.

Finally, the Regional Director of the Programme
for Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED) told us this morning how
small the number of resources are that they have to
work with, in spite of the ever more urgent needs of the
States in the region. It is important, therefore, that one
of our recommendations speak specifically to the need
for strengthening our financial wherewithal to do our
work.

