Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the presence
of the Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Aristides
Gomes, and are grateful for the information provided
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jose Viegas Filho; Ambassador Anatolio
Ndong Mba, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012)
concerning Guinea-Bissau; and Ambassador Mauro
Vieira of Brazil, in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-
Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
We offer special thanks to the representative of civil
society, Ms. Elisa Maria Tavares Pinto.

Guinea-Bissau continues to face a range of
challenges that must be addressed in the framework of
the political process and inclusive dialogue that should
enable members of the Government, political parties
represented in the National Assembly and civil society
in general to continue working towards consensus with
a View to constructively implementing the agreements
that have been reached. Genuine commitment will be
required to reach a lasting social and political solution
solely in the best interests of the people of Guinea-
Bissau and in strict respect for the country's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.

We believe that one of the main structural factors
of the crisis, the political impasse, has improved
significantly in recent months with the consensus
appointment of the Prime Minister and the formation
of the Government, demonstrating the crucial role
that political will plays in resolving conflicts. In this
regard, we believe that the elections to be held this year
and next cill be critical. To that end, the commitment
of the international community over the short term
will therefore be essential as the primary condition
with a View to providing relevant and timely financial
and technical support to the updating of the registry
of voters and strengthening of electoral mechanisms so
as to ensure the holding of transparent, inclusive and
ultimately peaceful elections.
At the same time, in the context of State stability
and security issues, the fight against drug trafficking,
transnational crime and impunity must also be
priorities. To that end, the United Nations has a key role
to play in promoting development, strengthening and
upgrading State capacities, and reducing vulnerability
to drugs and crime by strengthening the justice sector
and police. The international community must provide
Guinea-Bissau with the assistance it needs to enhance
its control over its coastline and airspace and to train
members of the relevant State institutions.

We commend all efforts of the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
its Mission in Guinea-Bissau, and the contributions
of the European Union, the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries and the important work
ofthe United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) to bring the parties to the
conflict together and promotie dialogue. We welcome
the work carried out by former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo Toure, as well
as that of the current Special Representative and head
of UNIOGBIS, Mr. Jose Viegas Filho, who has made
continuous coordination with all levels of the State
a priority. In this regard, we believe that the work of
UNIOGBIS mustbe strengthened and focus on initiatives
to continue creating opportunities for dialogue and
providing technical cooperation in the security sector.
We believe that such efforts will contribute to the
consolidation of an inclusive Government.

We also commend the work carried out by the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, led by Brazil. We underscore the
importance of entrenching the configuration's links
with the Security Council in terms of coordination,
information exchange and active participation. At the
same time, we welcome the initiative of the National
Forum of Women and Girls for Peace in Bissau. We
believe it essential to incorporate a gender perspective
and women's participation into mediation and dialogue.

In conclusion, we reiterate that there can be
no development without peace or peace without
development. We therefore believe it imperative to
redouble our joint efforts for the stabilization of
Guinea-Bissau. We have also reiterated that sustainable
peace must be attained through political tools to find
negotiated political solutions. In this regard, in order
to achieve stability and sustainable peace and Guinea-
Bissau, we must ensure the well-being of the population
and of the most vulnerable sectors.
