Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of the United
States for having facilitated the process of consultation
on resolution 2395 (2017), which we just adopted.

Egypt has chaired the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) for the past two years, which has
convinced us of the important and sensitive role
played by the Committee and its Executive Directorate
(CTED). In that regard, Egypt keenly and actively
engaged in the consultations on the draft resolution and
worked to integrate the lessons we learned as Chair of
the Committee.

The delegation of Egypt endeavoured to ensure
the draft resolution included a clear reference to the
established legal principle regarding extradition and
persecution. As a compromise, that principle is referred
to implicitly in the resolution since it was rejected by
some Member States despite the fact that it is important
on the ground, especially in the field of counter-
terrorism and that the CTC has taken it into account in
its assessments in various countries.

Furthermore, throughout the consultations, Egypt
stressed the need for CTED to continue its key function,
which is to assess States' compliance with their
obligations under resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005)
and 2178 (2014) and other relevant Security Council
resolutions. CTED should also facilitate technical
assistance processes designed to help countries to
honour their commitments in this area. Resolution 2395
(2017) includes paragraphs that stress the importance of
this issue. In that context, Egypt endeavoured to stress
the importance of providing financial resources and
technical assistance to States so that they can honour
their commitments under Security Council resolutions,
and the resolution already contains language on that. We
also endeavoured to ensure that the resolution included
language on providing financial and human resources,
pursuant to the relevant Council resolutions, both to
CTED, so that it can fulfil its key functions in the area
of assessment, and to entities under CTED. However,
that did not succeed because some States have refused
to provide CTED with additional resources at this
stage, something we deplore because it has the potential
to affect CTED's work. We hope that this situation will
be remedied in future.
Resolution 2395 (2017) also includes a number of
paragraphs on the need to address terrorist rhetoric,
in accordance with Security Council resolution 2354
(2017). This is one of the most important aspects of
counter-terrorism efforts because it is linked to the
issue of addressing ideologies and discourse used
by terrorist groups to attract recruits and influence
young people and individuals in general. Accordingly,
we urge the CTC and CTED to continue to pay close
attention to this matter and to effectively implement
the comprehensive international framework to counter
terrorist narratives (S/20l7/375, annex).

Last but not least, we stress the imperative of
promoting coordination between CTED and the CTC,
on the one hand, and CTED and the Office of Counter-
Terrorism, on the other, especially with regard to
implementing the recommendations to be made after
the assessment visits. That requires States to supply
relevant information to United Nations entities engaged
in providing counter-terrorism technical assistance. In
that regard, we stress the importance of respecting the
sovereignty and will of States, and that such information
should not be provided if there is a relevant objection by
a concerned State.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank all the parties involved, in particular Member
States, the Security Council, CTED and all its
members, and the Secretariat for the support they
have given Egypt's chairship of the CTC over the
past two years. We stress that Egypt will continue to
honour its commitment to being at the forefront of the
international community's efforts to counter terrorism.
We will respect international law, the rule of law and
human rights.

