Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for joining us here today, for the
briefing he gave us today and, above all, for his active
engagement on Myanmar as well as for that of his
Special Adviser, Mr. Ibrahim Gambari. Allow me to
also acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar and let me assure him that
we have listened to his statement very attentively.

It was a courageous decision, on the part of the
Secretary-General, to visit Myanmar and to seek a
dialogue with both the Myanmar Government and the
opposition. It has my country's full support. Austria
strongly welcomes his leadership in conveying the
concerns and messages of the international community
to the Government and in particular to Senior General
Than Shwe. Austria will continue to firmly support the
United Nations good offices mission and his personal
engagement.

Austria notes with great concern that, in the
course of the past year, the human rights situation in
Myanmar has deteriorated significantly. Daw Aung San
Suu Kyi has been detained as a consequence of an
alleged breach of her house arrest - an arrest that,
according to the Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention, was in violation not only of international
law but also of national Myanmar law. Moreover, in
recent weeks, intensified fighting in the East of the
country has forced thousands of civilians to flee to
neighbouring States.

All of these developments do not bode well for
Myanmar's plans for a peaceful transition to
democracy. We therefore believe that the visit by the
Secretary-General was indeed very timely and
important. All the areas that he covered during his
visit - the release of all political prisoners, including
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the resumption of a
substantive dialogue with a clear time frame, the
criteria for free and fair elections, national
development and humanitarian assistance, especially
the swift issuance of visas - are of great relevance to
Myanmar and, as the Secretary-General highlighted in
his speech in Yangon, they are also interconnected. As
has been pointed out by the Secretary-General, neither
peace nor development can thrive without democracy
and respect for human rights.

Like others, Austria is clearly disappointed by the
Government's decision to deny the Secretary-General a
meeting with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. We share his
view that the Government missed an important
opportunity.

The fate of the political prisoners, including Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, will evidently be of great relevance
to the credibility of the elections in 2010 and their
national and international perception of being free and
fair. We urge the Government of Myanmar to
immediately and unconditionally release Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi and all political prisoners and detainees.

We share the Secretary-General's concern about
the high level of poverty in Myanmar and the suffering
of its people. The effective cooperation among the
Government of Myanmar, the United Nations and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, undertaken in
the framework of the Tripartite Core Group in response
to Cyclone Nargis, has clearly demonstrated the value
of engagement over isolation. We strongly commend
these efforts and hope that this spirit of openness will
also be applied in the future to practical issues related
to humanitarian assistance - namely, full and
unimpeded humanitarian access - development
cooperation and the proposed establishment of a
national economic forum.

Given the fact that opium production in the
territory of Myanmar is still the second highest in the
world, the active promotion of alternative development
activities, pursued by the Government of Myanmar
with the support of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime country office, could help redress this
situation.

In its Council conclusions of 27 April, the
European Union recalled its important and growing
role as a donor to the country and its readiness to
further increase its assistance to the people of
Myanmar. However, genuine positive steps on the basis
of the Secretary-General's proposals will be necessary
in order to enable the European Union and other
donors to unleash the full potential of their cooperation
with the country.

In conclusion, allow me to stress that Austria now
hopes that the Myanmar Government will act on the
Secretary-General's requests and proposals. We are
convinced that this would be in the best interests of the
country and its people. We wish to encourage the
Myanmar authorities to cooperate closely and
constructively with the Secretary-General and Special
Adviser Ibrahim Gambari in the follow-up to his visit.

