Mr. Mayr-Harting: As this is the first time that
I speak in the Council under your presidency, Sir, let
me begin by congratulating you on having assumed this
high office.

In the interest of time, I will read out a slightly
abridged version of what we had prepared. The full text
will be circulated to delegations.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The candidate countries
Iceland, the former Yugoslav Republic of the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro;
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
country Liechtenstein, member of the European
Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, align themselves
with this statement.

The European Union fully supports the peace
conference on Syria that will take place on 22 January
in Switzerland. The second Geneva Conference on
Syria should be the first step in a process that leads to
a political solution to the conflict. The only solution
to the conflict is a genuine political transition based
on the full implementation of the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and on preserving the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
We commend the efforts of Joint Special Representative
Brahimi and his team.

The objective of the Conference is the formation
by mutual consent of a transitional governing body
with full executive powers, including over security, the
military and intelligence. Any elections in Syria should
take place only within the framework of the Geneva
communique. The regime as well as the opposition must
commit themselves to the full implementation of the
communique as a matter of urgency and demonstrate
that commitment through their actions. The European
Union calls on all parties to engage constructively in a
genuine negotiation.

The European Union welcomes the invitation sent
by the Secretary-General to the National Coalition of
Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces. The EU
stands ready to assist the opposition delegation, led by
the National Coalition, in needs that might arise as part
of the negotiation.

The European Union considers it important
throughoutthe Genevaprocess to alsoworkonpromoting
confidence-building measures that directly benefit the
local population. We remain gravely concerned about
the continuing and indiscriminate bloodshed among
the civilian population and call for the cessation of all
violence to allow urgent humanitarian access on the
ground. We strongly condemn the regime's escalating
indiscriminate attacks, notably in Aleppo. The
European Union shares the growing concern about the
spread of extremism and extremist groups, including
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Jabhat
Al-Nusra. Their involvement in the conflict poses
a threat to the peace process, the territorial integrity
of Syria and to regional and international security.
The European Union welcomes the Syrian opposition
coalition's condemnation of all forms of terrorism and
extremism, and the fact that the moderate opposition is
opposing extremist groups.
All efforts must be channelled towards the common
goal of rebuilding the country, rid it of its authoritarian
past, preserve its traditions of interreligious,
inter-ethnic and cultural coexistence, and ensure full
respect for all human rights. The European Union is
concerned about the plight of all vulnerable groups and
ethnic and religious minorities, including Christians.

The European Union has consistently supported
civil society groups. Member States have also provided
assistance and capacity-building, including through
recent events such as the Cordoba conference, and will
continue to do so throughout the Geneva process.

The European Union stresses the importance of an
inclusive Syrian peace process and supports the active
and meaningful participation of women and civil society
in the overall political transition process. We encourage
both parties to appoint women to their delegations to
the second Geneva Conference on Syria. We also call
upon the United Nations to facilitate the participation
of women's groups and civil society organizations in
Geneva. In that context, we also welcome the meeting
on the theme "Promoting women's engagement in the
Syrian political process," convened by UN-Women and
the Netherlands on 12 and 13 January.

The European Union will continue to defend human
rights and will remain active in ensuring accountability
for the widespread and systematic violations and abuses
of human rights and international humanitarian law
perpetrated in Syria. The European Union reiterates its
call to the Council to urgently address the situation in
Syria in those aspects, including on a possible referral
to the International Criminal Court, as requested in the
letter from the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to
the Secretary-General of 14 January 2013 (S/2013/19, annex). We recall that all those responsible for
crimes against humanity and war crimes must be
held accountable, and reaffirm our support to the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, established by the Human
Rights Council.

Following the second Kuwait donors conference,
on 15 January, where the European Union and its
member States pledged €550 million, the Union will
continue to urge progress and engage its partners in
the framework of the United Nations-led high-level
group on humanitarian challenges. We call on all the
parties to the Syrian conflict, in particular the Syrian
Government, to immediately implement in full the
provisions of the presidential statement of 2 October
2013 (S/PRST/2013/15). Considering the unprecedented
scale and nature ofthe crisis, we call for a humanitarian
resolution by the Security Council.

The European Union urges all parties to the
conflict, in particular the Syrian Government, which
has the greatest responsibility in enabling humanitarian
access, to take decisive steps to facilitate safe,
unhindered and immediate access to all people in need,
including those in besieged areas, through the most
effective ways, including across conflict lines and
borders, and to protect aid and medical workers and
health facilities. We will continue the ongoing efforts
to support Syrians affected by the conflict inside and
outside Syria, as well as the hosting communities and
governmental institutions of Syria's neighbours that
have courageously welcomed refugees.

We welcome the start of the transfer of chemicals
from Syria for destruction outside the country, but much
remains to be done, including the actual destruction of
the chemicals. Therefore, that step must be followed
by swift and decisive action by the Government of
Syria to meet all its obligations and commitments
under resolution 2118 (2013) and Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Executive
Council decisions. We have provided assistance
to the joint mission and to the OPCW trust fund.
We will continue to give financial, political and
logistical support. We would also like to emphasize
the responsibility of the Syrian authorities to cover
the costs associated with the destruction of the Syrian
chemical weapons stockpile.

The European Union calls on all foreign fighters in
Syria, including Hizbullah, to withdraw immediately.

With regard to the Middle East peace process, the
European Union commends the leadership shown by
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu and
fully supports the tireless efforts by United States
Secretary of State John Kerry. The European Union
recalls previous European Union Council conclusions
that laid forth its vision for a two-State solution resulting
in an agreement on all final-status issues, ending all
claims and fulfilling the legitimate aspirations of both
parties. The European Union stands ready to contribute
substantially to post-conflict arrangements for ensuring
the sustainability of a peace agreement.

We have decided that we will provide an
unprecedented package of European political, economic
and security support to both parties in the context of
a final status agreement. In the event of a final peace
agreement, the European Union will offer Israel and the
future State of Palestine a special privileged partnership,
including increased access to European markets, closer
cultural and scientific links, the facilitation of trade
and investments, as well as the promotion of business-
to-business relations. Enhanced political dialogue
and security cooperation will also be offered to both
States. In case of peace, the European Union envisions
a future relationship between itself and the two parties
that will not only deepen the bilateral ties between the
Union and the two States; it will also help develop a
positive interdependence and a new mutually beneficial
peaceful relationship between Israel and Palestine.

The European Union is convinced of the positive
role that countries in the region can play in advancing
the peace process, and remains committed to its
ongoing dialogue with the Arab States, including with
regard to achieving peace in the Middle East. The
European Union reiterates the strategic importance
of the Arab Peace Initiative for all parties and for the
entire region. The current negotiations represent a
unique opportunity that must be seized for both parties
to implement a two-State solution. A one-State reality
would not be compatible with the legitimate, sovereign
and democratic aspirations of any of the parties.

It is important to increase mutual trust between the
two parties. Actions that undermine the negotiations
and diminish the trust between the negotiation partners
should be avoided at any cost. In that regard, the
European Union deplores Israel's continuous expansion
of settlements, which are illegal under international law
and constitute an obstacle to peace. The European Union
also expresses its grave concern regarding incitement,
incidents of violence in the occupied territory, house
demolitions and the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Gaza. The European Union expresses its
serious concern about actions that undermine the
status quo of the holy sites, including in Jerusalem.
The European Union will continue to closely monitor
the situation and its broader implications, and will act
accordingly.

